**PUBLICATION REGISTRATION NUMBER**

11-1290000-000446-11


-----

-----

##### Message from the Minister of National Defense

The core mission of the ROK Armed Forces remains the same for more than seven decades: to protect our

nation from all threats. However, the ROK Armed Forces have today reached a critical turning point where they
must embrace radical innovation in order to effectively respond to the rapidly changing security environment.

The security environment has become more complex and severe with the inclusion of non-traditional threats,

as well as endless “competition” and proliferation of gray zone conflicts. The intensifying strategic competition
between the U.S. and China and the war in Ukraine have given rise to a more fluid international order. Amidst
growing arms race amongst major powers, strategic engagement by the international community towards the
Indo-Pacific region is on the rise as well. Against such an international backdrop, North Korea is continuously
strengthening its nuclear and missile capabilities, while relentlessly carrying out strategic and tactical
provocations.

Meanwhile, non-traditional security threats, such as natural disasters, terrorism, and new types of infectious

diseases, have grown in prominence. Competition to gain advantage in the new domains including space,
cyberspace, and the electromagnetic spectrum is also gaining pace. Advances in cutting-edge technologies is
serving as a key catalyst for the shift in defense paradigm.

Domestically, despite the declining military manpower and growing difficulties in securing an adequate

defense budget, the public expectation towards the Armed Forces continues to rise. To overcome challenges
presented by such a security environment, the ROK Armed Forces are striving to make most of “opportunity
factors” by selecting and focusing on those that are most closely aligned with our strategic priorities.

First, we are maintaining “an all-around defense posture” to counter complex security threats in a way

that is both “comprehensive and proactive.” Under the firm belief that sustainable peace cannot be founded on
the goodwill of the other side and can only be achieved through an superiority of overwhelming force, we will
further bolster the nation’s military readiness posture so that our Armed Forces are able to respond to evolving
North Korean threats effectively and in a timely manner.

Second, to build “elite forces harnessing advanced technologies,” armed with competitive military

capabilities, the Ministry of National Defense is pressing ahead with the “Defense Innovation 4.0” initiative.
Our goal is to formulate forward-looking military strategies and operations concepts that are in line with the
future security environment and develop AI-aided cutting-edge forces. To optimize our military in the face of
the changing security landscape, we will upgrade its force structure and improve training and education, at the
same time as creating a defense environment that is open to technology-enabled innovation by redesigning the
defense R&D system and the system for the enhancement of combat power.


-----

Third, under the goal of “fostering the defense industry into a national strategic industry,” we are

providing active support to Korean defense firms to help boost their global competitiveness. By shaping an
innovation-driven defense R&D environment and leading the government-wide initiative to promote and
facilitate defense exports, we will nurture a virtuous cycle between the effort to build cutting-edge forces and
growth in defense exports.

Fourth, we are shaping a favorable external environment for Korea’s national defense by forging a “strong tie

with our ally.” We will seek a “leap into a new phase in the ROK-U.S. Alliance” with partners that share our
values. We will participate in international peacekeeping operations and step-up efforts to protect our citizens
abroad.

Fifth, as a military that respects its people, we are increasing our efforts towards “defense management

**focused on safety, transparency and civil-military cooperation”. While playing a leading role in the**
government’s efforts to better guarantee the safety of our citizens, we will redouble our efforts to ensure a
positive development in the civil-military relationship through regulatory easing and enhanced transparency.

Finally, to “foster a defense culture that can resonate with the future generation,” we are making

dramatic improvements in living standards and healthcare for military personnel, as well as strengthening the
protection of their human rights, in a way that meets the Korean public’s expectations. Our goal is to create an
environment in which members of our Armed Forces can serve with pride by providing proper recognition and
compensation for their service and sacrifice.

In Defense White Paper 2022, the Ministry of National Defense describes in detail the efforts of the

ROK Armed Forces to achieve peace through strength by building a “robust defense” and “strong forces
**harnessing science and technology” in a manner that is easy for the general public to understand. I hope that**
this publication will help broaden the understanding and appreciation of defense policy, while serving as the
foundation for an active discussion on issues and challenges facing national defense. I ask our citizens for their
continued support and interest in our Armed Forces.

February 2023

Lee Jong-sup

Minister of National Defense


-----

##### Contents

#### 01

 02

 03

 04


**Changes and Challenges in the Security Environment**

Section 1. Global Security Environment 010

Section 2. Security Environment in the Indo-Pacific 013

Section 3. North Korean Situation and Military Threats 021

**National Security Strategy and Defense Strategy**

Section 1. National Security Strategy 036

Section 2. National Defense Strategy 039

**Establish an All-around Defense Posture and Expand Response**
**Capabilities**

Section 1. Maintaining a Robust Military Readiness Posture 046

Section 2. Acquiring ROK 3K Defense Capabilities 057

Section 3. Reinforcing the Capabilities to Respond to Comprehensive 063

Security Threats

Section 4. Establishing a United Defense Posture composed 078

of Civil–Government–Military–Police–Fire Department

Section 5. Education and Training Focused on Combat Missions 082

and Reinforcing Esprit de Corps

Section 6. Military Assurance for Establishing Peace on the Korean Peninsula 097

**Defense Innovation 4.0: Developing a Powerful Modern Military Based**
**on Advanced Science and Technology**

Section 1. Base Plan for Defense Innovation 4.0 106

Section 2. Phased Transition to an AI-based MUM-T Combat System 111

Section 3. Defense AI and Digital Transformation 115

Section 4. Development of Spacepower Based on Jointness 120

Section 5. Reorganization of the Military Structure Based on Advanced Science 127

and Technology

Section 6. Development of Elite Reserve Forces 133

Section 7. Fostering the Defense Industry into a National Strategic Industry 138


-----

#### 05

 06

 07


**A Leap Forward in the ROK-U.S. Alliance and Deeper and Broader**
**Defense Cooperation**

Section 1. Developing the ROK-U.S. Alliance into a Global Comprehensive 150

Strategic Alliance

Section 2. Strengthening the Alliance's Deterrence and Response 158

Capabilities against North Korean Nuclear and Missile Threats

Section 3. Establishing a Robust ROK-U.S. Combined Defense Posture 164

Section 4. Conditions-based Wartime OPCON Transition 168

Section 5. Deeper and Broader Defense Cooperation and Exchange 172

Section 6. Participation in International Peacekeeping Operations 196

and Protection of Overseas Citizens

**Safe and Transparent Civil-Military Cooperative Defense Management**

Section 1. Improving the Service Environment with Emphasis on Safety 214

Section 2. Transparent and Efficient Management of National Defense 220

Section 3. Civil-Military Cooperation; together with the people 239

Section 4. Securing an Adequate Defense Budget and Rational Allocation of 252

Budget Resources

**Development of a Military Culture that meets the Needs of the Future**
**Generation**

Section 1. Improved Food, Clothing, and Living Conditions to meet the Expectation 264

of Service Members

Section 2. Remuneration that Respects and is Commensurate with the Sacrifices 269

made by Service Members

Section 3. Improved Service Environment that is Reflective of Changes in Society 281

Section 4. Emphasis on the Human Rights of Service Members 290


-----

##### Contents

**Appendix**


**Special Appendix**

Section 1. The Past, Present, and Future of the ROK-U.S. Alliance 300

Section 2. The History and Future of the ROK Armed Forces’ Peace Operations 309

Section 3. Status of USFK Base Relocation 319

Section 4. **Status of Defense Export and Development of Weapons System �** 323

and Military Technology

**Appendix**

Section 1. **Force Posture of Neighboring Countries �** 330

Section 2. **Comparing Defense Budgets Around the World** 332

Section 3. Annual Defense Budget 333

Section 4. **Force Posture of the Two Koreas** 334

Section 5. **Comparing the Economic Indicators of the Two Koreas** 335

Section 6. **UN Security Council Resolutions on Sanctions against North Korea** 336

Section 7. Key Denuclearization Agreements Regarding the 337

North Korean Nuclear Issues

Section 8. Progress and Assessment of North Korean Nuclear 338

and Missile Development

Section 9. Chronology of Test Launches of Ballistic Missiles by North Korea 341

Section 10. Chronicle of Inter-Korean Military Relations 342

Section 11. Chronicle of North Korea’s Incursions and Local Provocations 352

against the ROK

Section 12. Examples of North Korean Violations of the 9.19 Comprehensive 353

Military Agreement (CMA)

Section 13. Combined and Joint Exercises and Training 354

Section 14. Joint Communiqué of the 53rd ROK-U.S. Security Consultative 355

Meeting (SCM)

Section 15. Joint Communiqué of the 54th ROK-U.S. Security Consultative 361

Meeting (SCM)

Section 16. Direct and Indirect Financial Support for the Stationing of USFK 367

Section 17. Status of International Defense Industry Cooperation 369

Agreements with ROK

Section 18. Status of International Defense Cooperation Agreements with ROK 370

Section 19. International Disarmament and Non-Proliferation Agreements 371

and Organizations


-----

Section 20. Status of Overseas Deployment of ROK Armed Forces 373

Section 21. Changes in Salary of Conscripted Service Members 374

Section 22. Changes in the Mandatory Military Service Period 375

Section 23. ROK National Defense Organization Chart 376

Section 24. Amendment of the Laws and Regulations under the Jurisdiction 378

of the MND

Section 25. Composition and Major Activities of the National Assembly Defense 398

Committee


-----

-----

**Chapter**
# 1

**Changes and Challenges in the**
**Security Environment**

**Section 1. Global Security Environment**

**Section 2. Security Environment in the Indo-Pacific**

**Section 3. North Korean Situation and Military Threats**


dd h UN G l A bl (S b 2022) / W ld E i F A l M i (J 2023) / ASEAN K C i S i (N b 2022)


-----

**Section**


###### Global Security Environment

Recent developments such as intensified U.S.-China strategic competition and the war in
Ukraine have heightened uncertainty in the global security environment. Regional security
threats persist due to territorial disputes and conflicting national interests, while transnational
security threats, such as infectious diseases, climate change, cyberattacks, and terrorism,
continue to pose serious challenges that urgently require joint international responses.

**1. Growing Security Uncertainty in the International Community**

Uncertainty in our international security environment continues to increase due to rivalry and
competition, such as the escalating strategic competition between the United States and the
People’s Republic of China, in addition to the war in Ukraine.

The U.S., in its 2022 National Security Strategy (NSS) and National Defense Strategy

(NDS), named China “the only competitor” that is also its “most consequential strategic
competitor,” and is redoubling its effort in all directions to keep China in check. Moreover,
vowing to increase solidarity among democratic nations, the U.S. declared the Indo-Pacific
region its top foreign policy priority, expressing its intentions to cooperate closely with
regional allies such as the Republic of Korea, Japan, and the Commonwealth of Australia.
Furthermore, the U.S. is building a cooperative partnership across the semiconductor
supply chain in order to ensure the stability of semiconductor production and supply
amongst its allies.

Meanwhile, China is using its rapidly growing economic and military power to strengthen

its influence in the Taiwan Strait, in addition to the East and South China Seas. While keeping
its existing policies such as the Belt and Road Initiative, China is expanding its geopolitical
influence and maintain a firm stance that it will not hesitate to defend its “core interests.”
Furthermore, China is expanding its international influence and promoting the growth of
its national economy by forging closer ties with members of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO)[1)] including Russia, and bolstering pro-China sentiment abroad through
economic support as well as expanded infrastructure investments in the Middle East, Africa
and Central and South America.

The protracted war in Ukraine, which began with the Russian invasion in February 2022,

has brought about much civilian casualties in addition to a severe global food and energy crisis.

As the U.S. and European countries respond to the Russian threat by rallying around

the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Russia, in turn, is bolstering its defense
cooperation through the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)[2)] and the SCO,
resulting in increased tensions between the two blocs.


**1)**
A multilateral security
cooperation organization
established on June 15,
2001, between China, Russia,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan to
promote mutual cooperation
and regional security

**2)**
A collective security treaty
signed in 2002 between
Russia and five former Soviet
republics: Belarus, Armenia,
Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and
Kyrgyzstan


-----

**2. Persistence of Regional Traditional Security Threats**

Amidst growing uncertainty in the international community, regional security threats caused
by issues such as territorial disputes and conflicting national interests continue to persist.

A renewed awareness of the strategic value of the Indo-Pacific has prompted European

countries to increase their involvements in the region, with many establishing their own IndoPacific strategies.[3)] Moreover, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is motivating European countries
to strengthen and reorganize their militaries with NATO at the center. While emphasizing
post-World War II norms and principles such as a rule-based international order, universal
values, and the freedom of navigation, European nations are actively seeking cooperation
with the Republic of Korea, Japan, Australia, India, and ASEAN countries.

Security threats continue to propagate within Southeast Asia and Southwest Asia. Tensions

between India and Pakistan over the Kashmir region continue unabated, and regional unrest
has been further stoked by the Myanmar military junta’s state of emergency declaration in
February 2021 and Taliban’s return to power in Afghanistan in August 2021.

Against this backdrop, countries in the region are putting their own interests first as they

attempt to grapple with the economic crisis and its impact on the daily lives of their citizens,
while pursuing a pragmatic diplomacy amidst the U.S.-China strategic competition.

In the Middle East, although talks have resumed on restoring the Joint Comprehensive

Plan of Action (JCPOA)[4)], a nuclear deal between Iran and the five permanent members
of the UN Security Council and Germany, little progress has been made. The progressive
decrease in U.S. involvement in the Middle East, growing influence of China and Russia,
continuous unrest in Yemen and Syria, and economic crisis resulting from the protracted
COVID-19 pandemic have stoked insecurity in the region; moreover, existing competing and
cooperative relationships between the region’s religious sects and countries also appear to be
going through a rearrangement as well.

In Africa, geopolitical instability continues due to civil wars and terrorist attacks by

violent extremist groups against the backdrop of the prolonged COVID-19 pandemic,
power struggle between political factions, stunted economic growth, and ethnic conflicts. In
particular, whereas the Ethiopia-Tigray peace agreement in November 2022 brought an end
to the Tigray War, which began in November 2020 and experienced repeated ceasefires and
resumptions of conflict, bloody conflicts, including attacks by violent armed extremist groups
are persisting in Mali, Burkina Faso, and other areas of the Sahel Province. Piracy continues
off the Gulf of Guinea, even though the activity has recently tapered off to some extent.


**3)**
France (May 2019), Germany
(September 2020), Netherlands
(January 2020), United
Kingdom (March 2021),
European Union (September
2021), Czech Republic
(September 2022)

**4)**
An accord reached in Vienna,
on July 14, 2015, by Iran and
P5+1(U.S., China, Russia,
UK, France, Germany), lifting
sanctions on Iran in exchange
for agreeing to curb its nuclear
program.


**3. Rise of Non-Traditional Security Threats and Coordinated Effort by the**

**International Community**

In addition to traditional threats, such as political and military conflicts, the security
landscape today is marked by the rise of non-traditional security threats including infectious
diseases, climate change, cyberattacks, and terrorism. The outbreak of the COVID-19 virus
in late 2019 has since then evolved into a protracted pandemic, tipping the world into an


-----

unprecedented economic and social crisis. Meanwhile, climate change, resulting in rising sea
levels, changes in topographic features, and extreme weather events, is having a variety of
adverse impacts on human societies and is also negatively affecting military operations. Fiji
and other low-lying island nations in the Pacific Oceanview climate change as an existential
threat to their national security and are actively deploying military assets in response. Cyber
threats, such as attacks on cryptocurrency markets by North Korea, as well as distribution of
ransomware and DDoS (distributed denial of service) attacks by international hacker groups
are also incurring increasingly disruptive effects on society.

With the understanding that such non-traditional security threats cannot be resolved by the

efforts of any one country or select regions, the international community is strengthening
mutual cooperation and cross-border coordination.

During the G20, ASEAN+3, and APEC (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation) summits

held in November 2022, countries from across the international community agreed to
make joint efforts with international organizations to tackle climate change, response
against infections disease such as COVID-19 and stabilize the food and energy markets.
The 27th Conference of the Parties of the UNFCCC (COP27), convened during the same
month, ended with a joint final declaration containing measures for immediate, quick, and
sustainable reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.

During its summit in June 2022, NATO adopted a New Strategic Concept, in which

it identified cyber threats as a key challenge to its core security interests. In November
of the same year, the ADMM-Plus (ASEAN Defense Ministers Meeting Plus) Experts’
Working Group on Cyber Security conducted its first cybersecurity table-top exercise to
develop a coordinated response to cyber threats. In addition, the international community is
continuously cooperating to counter cyber threats through platforms such as the Conference
on Cyberspace, the UN Group of Governmental Experts (GGE), and the Seoul Defense
Dialogue (SDD) Cyber Working Group.

Members of the international community are also holding discussions on coordination

measures for disaster relief and recovery support through multilateral consultative groups
such as the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), the Regional Humanitarian Assistance and
Disaster Relief Coordination Center (RHCC), and UNOCHA (United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs) Regional Consultative Group. In November 2022,
during the ADMM-Plus Working Group on Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief,
member states discussed an upcoming table-top exercise (TTX) and field training exercise
(FTX) on this topic, in addition to methods to coordinate responses to regional disasters.


-----

**Section**

**2** **Security Environment in the Indo-Pacific**

The Indo-Pacific is emerging as a critical region in terms of global security, geopolitics,
and economy. Strategic competition between the U.S. and China and regional arms race
are resulting in a rise of complex security threats in the region. Taking note of the strategic
importance of the Indo-Pacific region, major actors such as the U.S. and Europe have
increased their involvement in the region, such as establishing their own Indo-Pacific
strategies. The Republic of Korea government also unveiled its own Indo-Pacific Strategy to
go beyond Northeast Asia and deepening strategic cooperation with key nations in the IndoPacific.

**1. Growing Strategic Importance of the Indo-Pacific**


The Indo-Pacific is rising as a critical region for global security, geopolitics, and economy.
The Indo-Pacific region accounts for 65% of the global population, 62% of global GDP, 46%
of world trade, and half of maritime transportation.[5)] As home to major military powers and
countries that are leaders in cutting-edge technologies such as the semiconductor industry,
the Indo-Pacific is a highly dynamic region in terms of politics, economy, and technology.
Moreover, the region has numerous shipping lanes of strategic importance, such as the sea
lines of communication linking the Strait of Hormuz with the Indian Ocean, the Strait of
Malacca and the South China Sea.

Recently, complex security challenges in the Indo-Pacific have significantly increased

due to the strategic competition between the U.S. and China spreading into the political,
economic, and military domains. North Korean development of nuclear and missile
capabilities pose a serious threat to peace and stability beyond Northeast Asia and have
become a security concern for the Indo-Pacific as a whole. Countries both in and outside of
the Indo-Pacific have announced their own Indo-Pacific strategies and are actively seeking
engagement on issues of national interest.

The U.S. has intensified efforts to maintain stability in the Indo-Pacific and gain initiative

in the region. Washington has adopted several strategies for the Indo-Pacific including “The
U.S. Strategic Framework for the Indo-Pacific” (SFIP), a National Security Council product
adopted in 2018, and the White House’s Indo-Pacific Strategy, embedded in the strategic
objective of a “free and open Indo-Pacific” (FOIP). Highlights of this strategy include
advancing a free and open Indo-Pacific, building connections within and beyond the region,
maintaining U.S. prosperity, bolstering security for allies and partner countries, and building
resilience against transnational threats.

European countries, recognizing the strategic value of this region, are increasing their

engagement; France announced its own Indo-Pacific strategy in 2019, followed by Germany
and Netherlands in 2020, UK and EU in 2021, and Czech Republic in 2022. The EU, in
particular, plans to expand its involvement in Indo-Pacific in a diversity of areas, ranging
across economic, maritime, and security affairs, among others.

Japan, in its 2022 National Security Strategy (NSS), stated its decision to actively pursue


**5)**
As of July 2020
Source: Journal of Economic
Structures


-----

its vision for a “free and open Indo-Pacific,” through which it pledged to generate a stable
and predictable international order and lead efforts to ensure peace, stability, and prosperity
in the international community.

In 2019, ASEAN issued the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP), which

underscored its role in guaranteeing stability in the region. Based on their core principles,
including ASEAN centrality, inclusiveness, transparency, and a rules-based framework,
ASEAN countries are increasing their cooperation with the Republic of Korea, the U.S.,
Japan, Russia, Australia, New Zealand, and India through the East Asia Summit (EAS) and
the ADMM-Plus.

With the goal of strengthening strategic ties with countries in the Indo-Pacific region, the

Republic of Korea government, in December 2022, announced its “Strategy for a Free,
Peaceful, and Prosperous Indo-Pacific Region.” By strengthening cooperation with countries
in Southeast Asia, South Asia, Oceania, and African states bordering the Indian Ocean, the
Republic of Korea plans to broaden its foreign policy horizons beyond the Korean peninsula
and Northeast Asia, building and consolidating strategic cooperation networks that are
tailored to each region.

**[Figure 1-1]** **Military Power of Major Indo-Pacific Countries**

**Russia** **Japan**

Defense budget: USD 45.8 billion Defense budgets: USD 49.3 billion
No. of Troops: 900,000 No. of Troops: 247,000
Submarines: 49, Aircraft carrier: 1 Submarines: 22, Surface combatants: 49
Combat aircraft: 1,391 Combat aircraft: 587

**Capability enhancement** **Capability enhancement**
Nuclear capability enhancement, development Acquisition of additional F-35 aircraft,
of stealth aircraft and strategic missiles, AEW&C, Aegis destroyers, and submarines;
modernization of conventional weapons strengthening of cyber warfare, space and EW

forces

**China** **U.S.**

Defense budget: USD 207.3 billion Defense budget: 754.0 billion
No. of Troops: 2,035,000 No. of Troops: 1,395,000
Submarines: 59, Aircraft carriers: 2 Submarines: 67, Aircraft carriers: 11
Combat aircraft: 2,921 Combat aircraft: 2,894

**Capability enhancement** **Capability enhancement**
Acquisition of new strategic missiles, stealth Nuclear capability enhancement and
fighters, and aircraft carriers; strengthening of modernization, development of long-distance
cyber warfare and space forces strategic bombers, strengthening of missile

defense, cyber warfare and space

**India** **Austrailia**

Defense budget: USD 65.0 billion Defense budget: USD 34.3 billion
No. of Troops: 1,460,000 No. of Troops: 60,000
Submarines: 17, Surface combatants: 28 Submarines: 6, Surface combatants: 11
Combat aircraft: 853 Combat aircraft: 124

**Capability enhancement** **Capability enhancement**
Aircraft carriers, development of nuclear Planned introduction of new-submarines
submarines, acquisition of additional and development of nuclear submarines,
submarines and maritime patrol aircraft strengthening of cyber warfare and space

forces.


-  Source: The Military Balance 2022 (International Institute for Strategic Studies, February 2022)


-----

**2. Military Trends in Key Indo-Pacific Countries**

Whereas the U.S. retains strategic and military advantage in the Indo-Pacific, other countries
including China, Russia, and Japan are building competitive militaries, especially in terms of
naval and air capabilities. [Figure 1-1] compares the military strength of six regional powers
demonstrating considerable ties with security on the Korean peninsula.


**United States** The U.S., in its 2022 National Security Strategy (NSS) and National

Defense Strategy (NDS), stressed its intention to maintain and

strengthen deterrence against China, framing the country as its most consequential strategic
competitor and a medium- to long-term challenge. Furthermore, the U.S. is partnering with
its NATO allies to respond and strengthen deterrence against the Russian military threat.

In terms of military capabilities, the U.S. is developing its Joint Warfighting Concept

(JWC) based on Joint All Domain Operations (JADO), with a use of cutting-edge technology
such as AI, making efforts to systematize joint operational concept by incorporating new
operational requirements. The goal is to enable distributed deployment of U.S. forces,
while employing a modernized battlefield network in order to link the different branches’
capabilities, including the Army’s Multi-Domain Operations (MDO), the Air Forces’ Agile
Combat Employment (ACE), the Navy’s Distributed Maritime Operations (DMO), and the
Marine Corps’ Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO). Moreover, the U.S. is
modernizing its nuclear triad, namely, intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM), submarinelaunched ballistic missiles (SLBM), and long-range strategic bombers, as well as maintaining
efforts to build a multi-layered missile defense system. Furthermore, the U.S. is deploying
key air and naval assets in the Indo-Pacific, including stealth aircraft such as F-22s and the
F-35s, P-8 Poseidon maritime patrol and reconnaissance aircraft, Virginia-class nuclear
submarines, aircraft carriers, and strategic bombers.

Meanwhile, the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for FY ’23 was signed

into law, raising the defense budget by 857.9 billion USD, with an increase of 11.7% (89.7
billion USD). This increase in defense expenditures reflects U.S. prioritization of its strategic
competition with China and Russia, in addition to intensified efforts to modernize its forces
to secure U.S. superiority in the strategic competition with China and Russia. The number of
active-duty personnel in the U.S. armed forces decreased by 31,096 from the previous year
to 1,316,944, respectively reflecting a decrease in the active-duty members of the Army, the
Marine Corps, and the Air Force by 33,000, 1,500, and 3,876, and an increase for the Navy
and the Space Force by 7,080 and 200.

The 2023 NDAA explicitly states that the U.S. will maintain 28,500 troops in the Republic

of Korea and provide extended deterrence using all U.S. military forces to bolster the
ROK-U.S. Alliance and support the mutually held vision of a “peaceful and stable Korean
peninsula.” The NDAA, furthermore, states that in light of accelerating strategic competition
with China, the U.S. will strengthen its relationships with allies and partners, establish the
All Domain Operation Joint Force Headquarters, and conduct a Global Force Posture (GFP)
review. In particular, the NDAA increases the budget for the Pacific Deterrence Initiative
to 11.5 billion USD, with the objective of enhancing the readiness posture, capabilities, and


-----

operational activities of U.S. forces in the Indo-Pacific.

The United States Congress approved the six priorities related to the modernization of the

Army[6)] and allocated 23.1 billion USD for the acquisition of helicopters, long-range strike
munitions, and air defense weapons. 52 billion USD was allocated for Naval acquisition of
11 vessels and 77 aircraft, and 21.1 billion USD for Air Force acquisition of F-35 and EC37B aircraft.

4.1 billion USD was allocated to Space Force acquisitions in terms of space threat response

systems, the space launch program, the Defense Satellite Communications System, and
special space activities, as well as 60 million USD Cyber Command operations and the
construction of an Air Force cyber response system. Finally, 290 million USD was allocated
for the development of a missile defense system against hypersonic missiles and the purchase
of additional THAAD missiles.


**The People’s Republic of China** The PRC is undertaking a massive-scale defense

reform to modernize and streamline its forces in

pursuit of building military strength with global competitiveness. After Chinese President
Xi Jinping pledged in 2015 to cut the number of PRC troops by 300,000, a Joint Operations
Command Center was newly established and the People’s Liberation Army (PLA)
restructured into six branches (ground force, navy, air force, rocket force, strategic support
force, joint logistics support force[7)]), with its seven military districts reorganized into five
theater commands. Defense policy reform and institutional reform, furthermore, are currently
in progress.

The PLA ground force’s operational command system has been streamlined to meet

strategic requirements for hastening the PLA’s “transformation from a regional defense
model to an all-domain operations model” by replacing armies, divisions, regiments, and
battalions with armies, brigades, and battalions. The PLA is also enhancing its expeditionary
operational capabilities by introducing wheeled self-propelled artillery and other light
weapons systems, in addition to operationally deploying mid-sized helicopters.

China is modernizing its Navy, capable of both “Defending the coastal waters and

protecting the national interest in the waters.” To improve capabilities for far seas operations,
the PLA is building large vessels such as aircraft carriers, cruisers, destroyers, strategic
nuclear submarines and amphibious assault ships, while bolstering the PLA Navy Marine
Corps air power for expeditious power projection.

The PLA Air Force is enhancing its early warning, air strike, and air defense capacities

under the strategic goal of “integrated air and space capabilities, capability to attack and
defend”,[8)] while making steady efforts to field airborne early warning and control systems
and aerial refueling aircraft.

The PLA Rocket Force is improving its counter strike capacity and intermediate and long
range precision strike ability to attain its objective: “maintain both nuclear and conventional
missile capabilities for all-domain deterrence.” The Rocket Force is in the process of fielding
next-generation medium- and long-range ballistic missiles and new types of intercontinental
ballistic missiles, at the same time as working on the development of new weapons systems
to counter the U.S. missile defense system, including a new type of medium-range ballistic


**6)**
U.S. Army’s six material
modernization priorities
① Long-range precision fires,
② Next-generation combat

vehicles,

③ Future vertical lift,
④ Modernization of Army

network,

⑤ Air and missile defense

capabilities,

⑥ Soldier lethality (U.S.

Department of the Army,
“Total Army” vision, 2018)

**7)**
A branch directly reporting
to the Central Military
Commission (CMC), in charge
of providing combat support for
all armed forces as well as by
theatre of operations.

**8)**
The goal is to digitalize and
integrate air and space forces
and build a modern air force
that combines offensive and
defensive capabilities.


-----

missile (MRBM) that can be fitted with a hypersonic glide vehicle (HGV).

The Strategic Support Force is primarily responsible for aerospace and cyber warfare

operations, intelligence gathering, and electronic and psychological warfare. For innovation
and advancement in defense science and technology, the Strategic Support Force harnesses
various private-sector technologies at the intersection of the military and civil domains, such
as artificial intelligence (AI), unmanned aerial vehicles and systems, information technology,
and network security, and is striving to achieve a greater degree of civil-military convergence
through the acquisition of cutting-edge foreign technologies.

The Joint Logistics Support Force is carrying out the integration of rear-area logistics

support capabilities and is improving its rapid transportation capacity to better support the
operations and training of the overall forces of the People’s Liberation Army. Meanwhile,
to strengthen national defense mobilization capabilities, the Joint Logistics Support Force is
constructing reserve capabilities that can serve as paramilitary units in emergency situations
and at war times by focusing especially on increasing the size of forces available for
mobilization and improving the mobilization process. The maritime militia, in particular, is
considered to have the size and capacity necessary to carry out military operations, including
reconnaissance, camouflage, diversionary, and logistics support operations.

China has recently increased its level of military activity. Even during the height of the

COVID-19 pandemic, the PRC patrolled the South China Sea and carried out far seas
exercises in the Pacific, while also undertaking a combined exercise with key partners, such
as Pakistan, Thailand, and Cambodia. After China elevated its bilateral ties with Russia to a
“comprehensive strategic partnership for the new era” in 2019, the two countries increased
military cooperation as well as engaged in technological exchanges with each other. After the
beginning of the war in Ukraine in 2022, although China officially proclaimed a “neutral”
stance, it has since treaded a cautious diplomatic line, for example, by abstaining from
voting on UN resolutions on denouncing Russian actions against Ukraine, and strengthening
strategic coordination with Russia against the U.S. pressure.

In August 2022, the PRC conducted a joint military training and fired test missiles (during

a training surrounding Taiwan), alarming Taiwan as well as other neighbors including Japan
and intensifying security tensions in the region. In October 2022, during the 20th National
Congress of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), Beijing’s Taiwan policy was elucidated
into written form for the first time. Position statements such as “one country, two systems”
and “resolute opposition to Taiwan’s independence” were added to the Party Charter, as
CCP leadership reiterated its hardline stance, saying that it would not hesitate to use force
if necessary. The 20th Congress solidified a leadership structure centered around President
Xi by reelecting him as its General Secretary for the third term; as such, it is expected that
China’s existing domestic and external policies will gain further momentum.


**Russia** Following the oil boom in the 2000’s, Russia has regained economic confidence

and is striving to regain the international status of the former Soviet Union.

The Russian Army is currently attempting to modernize its forces mainly by improving the

performance of existing weapons systems, rather than introducing new combat platforms.
Its armored vehicles and artillery pieces are in the process of being replaced by enhanced


-----

equipment with improved range and accuracy. In particular, Russia is deploying the
Iskander-M, a short-range ballistic missile system which can be fitted with a tactical nuclear
weapon, into combat.

Russia’s Navy is fielding strategic nuclear submarines and efficiently enhancing its combat

power through a next-generation Kilo-class submarine project and a project to improve its
destroyers. The Russian Navy completed a test launch of a hypersonic missile in 2021 and is
currently in the process of developing cutting-edge asymmetric strategic weapons, including
supersonic cruise missiles that can be fitted with nuclear warheads and nuclear-powered
unmanned underwater vehicles. The Russian Navy is also building its combined operational
capabilities through regular combined exercises with the Chinese Navy, conducted since 2012.

The Russian Aerospace Forces are focusing their efforts on modernizing equipment and

developing advanced aircraft. Fighter planes with stealth features have been deployed;
moreover, a project to improve the performance of long-range strategic bombers is
underway. The Aerospace Forces are strengthening their combined operations capabilities
through regular combined air exercises with the Chinese Air Force.

Russia’s Strategic Rocket Forces are retiring obsolete ICBMs by replacing them with next
generation ICBMS with enhanced capacities for countering ballistic missile defense systems,
while undertaking a comprehensive military modernization project.

The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)[9)] has traditionally been accorded high

priority in Russian foreign policy, and as Russia sees stability in the CIS, particularly
contiguous Central Asian states, as a key to its own national security, Moscow has made
consistent efforts to ensure regional peace, while maintaining and solidifying its political and
economic influence.

After the start of the war in Ukraine in February 2022, Russia intensified efforts to

strengthen strategic ties to Central Asian countries, China, and India through multilateral
consultative groups, such as the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), the
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO), and the BRICS,[10)] and increase the cohesion of
the pro-Russian bloc.


**9)**
A regional intergovernmental
organization formed following
the dissolution of the Soviet
Union in 1991 by its former
constituent republics, including
Russia, Moldova, Belarus,
Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan,
Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, and
Tajikistan.

**10)**
Five emerging market
economies including Brazil,
Russia, India, China, and South
Africa

**11)**
A passive defense stance in
accordance with the Japanese
Constitution in which defensive
force is used only in the event
of an attack and the extent of
the use of defensive force is
kept to the minimum necessary
for self-defense.

**12)**
The Self-Defense Forces Act,
the Ship Inspection Operations
Act, and the International
Peace Cooperation Act,
the Armed Attack Situation
Response Act, and the
Important Impact Situation
Act were amended, and
the International Peace
Cooperation Support Act was
newly passed into law.


**Japan** Japan has officially abandoned its traditional “exclusively defense-oriented”

policy[11)] under its Peace Constitution via constitutional reinterpretation in July

2014 and by amending the Guidelines for U.S.-Japan Defense Cooperation in April 2015.
Japan also amended its defense-related laws in September of the same year[12)] to legalize
the exercise of the right of collective self-defense in situations that are deemed to pose an
existential threat, even when no direct armed attack has taken place. In December 2022,
Japan revised three security documents, including its National Security Strategy (NSS),
National Defense Strategy, and Defense Force Development Plan. Evoking the need to
bolster Japan’s defense capabilities amid an increasingly unstable security environment,
these documents elaborated a plan to increase Japan's defense budget to up to 2% of GDP
by 2027, and officially declared for the first time that the country will possess “counterstrike
capabilities” even as it continues to abide by the Peace Constitution and the basic principle of
exclusive defense.

These three security documents laid out key goals and directions to guide Japanese effort


-----

in fundamentally strengthening its defense capabilities, and additionally, set forth plans to
strengthen its defense forces in seven areas,[13)] including standoff defense capabilities.[14)]

The Japanese Self-Defense Forces (SDF), based on the above mentioned three security

documents, plans to enhance the effectiveness of integrated ground/sea/air operations by
setting up an Integrated Command and strengthen standoff defense capabilities by creating
long-range guided missile units within the Ground SDF with supersonic glide bomb and
hypersonic missiles to defend its islands. Under this plan, Japan will also add anti-air
and electronic warfare units, in addition to multi-purpose unmanned aircraft units with
intelligence collection and strike capability to improve cross-domain operational capabilities.

The Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force plans to improve the capabilities of its maritime

patrol aircraft and submarine units to allow routine and continuous ISR (intelligence,
surveillance, reconnaissance) operations and better defend Japan’s surrounding maritime
areas and sea routes. The Maritime SDF is also endeavoring to enhance its surface combat
power by remodeling its “Izumo-class,” into aircraft carriers and constructing additional
Aegis destroyers. Moreover, its warships will be fitted with standoff missiles and a variety
of UAVs (unmanned aerial vehicles), USVs (unmanned surface vehicles), and UUVs
(unmanned underwater vehicles), designed for surface and underwater maritime superiority,
in addition to minimizing the loss of life.

The Japan Air Self-Defense Force plans to improve its standoff missile capabilities to more

effectively defend wide-areas, introduce UAVs capable of persistent gathering of intelligence
in contested areas and create operational information units to strengthen intelligence
capabilities required for operations. To guarantee stable use of the space domain, the Space
Operations Squadron, established in 2020 was expanded to Space Operations Group in
2022. Furthermore, a space situational awareness (SSA) system was established to enhance
intelligence gathering, communications, and positioning capabilities.[15)]


**13)**
① Acquiring standoff defense

capabilities,

② building integrated air and

missile defense (IAMD)
capabilities,

③ developing unmanned asset

defense capabilities,

④ enhancing cross-domain

operations capabilities,

⑤ bolstering command and

control functions,

⑥ strengthening maneuver

and deployment capabilities
and the ability to protect
Japanese citizens,

⑦ Promoting continuity and

strength

**14)**
Capacity to respond to enemy
attacks from outside the threat
range of enemy ships or combat
craft

**15)**
The act of calculating a position
or obtaining information about
a location using satellites

**16)**
Including the Northeastern
Indian Ocean, and maritime and
land areas in Southeast Asia,
Papua New Guinea and the
Southwestern Pacific


**Australia** Australia’s government, in assessing the strategic competition between the

U.S. and China unfolding in the Indo-Pacific as a serious security threat, is

building up military forces at the same time as strengthening its alliance with the U.S. and
more closely cooperating with friendly countries in the region, including Japan.

In its 2020 Defence Strategic Update, Australia stressed that strategic competition within

the region represents the single biggest security threat since World War II, stating its intention
to concentrate defense forces in the Australian national territory and adjacent areas.[16) ]

The Australian government announced a plan to spend an additional 270 billion AUD
(approximately 190 billion USD) over the next 10 years toward this goal, which corresponds
to an increase of 40% compared to the budget reported in its 2016 Defense White Paper.
Further, the Australian government is preparing a Defence Strategic Review for release
in March 2023. This review will examine Australia’s overall capability to respond to the
dynamic regional security environment including its force structure and posture, readiness
capabilities, as well as investment priorities.

Moreover, to create an advantageous strategic environment, Australia is continuously

reinforcing the U.S.-Australia alliance, which constitutes the central axis of its national
defense. In accordance with U.S. Force Posture Initiatives (USFPI), signed in 2011, some


-----

2,000 U.S. Marines have been stationed at Darwin Port since 2012, following a rotational
deployment cycle. In December 2022, a plan to increase the deployment of U.S. troops in
Australia was announced through the “Force Posture Initiatives.” Australia is also actively
leveraging the AUKUS agreement, a trilateral security pact signed with the UK and the U.S.
in September 2021, to expand influence in the Indo-Pacific region. Under AUKUS, whereby
the U.S. and the UK agree to assist Australia in acquiring nuclear-powered submarines, the
three countries are also expected to cooperate in areas including AI, quantum technology,
cyber security technology, as well as hypersonic weapons, hypersonic weapons defense
systems, and electronic warfare capabilities.

Among its regional partners, Australia is increasing security cooperation particularly with

Japan. In January 2022, the two countries signed the Australia-Japan Reciprocal Access
Agreement (RAA), simplifying legal procedures for conducting bilateral exercises, which
is the first time for Japan to enter into an agreement related to joint exercises with another
country since its SOFA (Status of Forces Agreement) with the U.S. to authorize long-term
stationing of U.S. troops in Japan. In October 2022, the Australia-Japan Joint Declaration on
Security Cooperation, signed in 2007, was amended to add that Australia will consult with
Japan regarding contingency response measures and that Australia will broaden trilateral
cooperation with the U.S. and Japan.


**India** India borders Pakistan in the west, China in the northeast, and Bangladesh in the

east. The country has a tense relationship with Pakistan, with which it fought

three wars over Kashmir.[17)] There are also lingering tensions with China due to unresolved
territorial disputes over formerly Indian-controlled areas that have been occupied by the latter
since the Sino-Indian War of 1962,[18)] despite efforts made for a peaceful settlement through
talks between the defense ministers of the two countries.

India has shifted away from its past foreign policy of nonalignment and neutrality in favor

of a more proactive and pragmatic external policy based on a fine balance between the U.S.Japan bloc and the China-Russia bloc. With the objective of maintaining equilibrium of
military power with neighboring countries, deterrence and developing defense capabilities
that befit India’s growing international status as a rising power, India is actively acquiring
new weapons system such as aircraft carriers, nuclear-powered submarines, ballistic missiles
and missile defense systems. To end its exclusive reliance on imports, in January 2016, India
established policy directions for indigenous weapons systems development and is supporting
the growth of its domestic defense industry through import substitution, at the same time as
reducing reliance on Russia, which has until recently been the source of nearly 70% of all its
weapons imports, by diversifying its supply chain to include the Republic of Korea, the U.S.,
Israel, and France.

Moreover, India is conducting combined naval exercises with various countries in the

region, including the Milan exercise and the Malabar exercise with the U.S. and Japan,
as part of an effort to further its Indo-Pacific Oceans’ Initiatives on the front of maritime
security.


**17)**
Ever since its partition in
1947, India has been locked
in a territorial dispute with
Pakistan over the Kashmir
region (a mountainous area
straddling India and Pakistan
and bordering China).

**18)**
A territorial conflict between
China and India over the
Himalayan region that broke
out in 1962. China, which won
this war, re-annexed Tibet and
a tacit agreement was reached
to leave Nepal and Bhutan for
India to manage.


-----

**Section**

**3** **North Korean Situation and Military Threats**

After declaring the completion of state nuclear power in 2017, North Korea engaged in talks
with the U.S. However, amid a prolonged deadlock that followed the failure of the Hanoi
Summit in February 2019, North Korea announced the “frontal breakthrough” policy as its
new strategic line in January 2020. Later, during the 8th Party Congress of the Workers’ Party
convened in 2021, amid mounting international sanctions and the deepening COVID-19 induced
economic crisis, the North Korean leadership presented a series of new strategic tasks in
defense. In September, 2022, during the Supreme People’s Assembly, North Korea legislated
the ‘Nuclear Arms policy Law’, as a solid declaration of its commitment against forfeiting
nuclear capabilities. North Korea is focusing efforts on advancing its nuclear and missile
capabilities, while seeking to enhance its operational posture by improving a select range of
conventional forces.

**1. Situation in North Korea**


**Internal Situation** After Kim Jong-un’s succession to power in 2011, North Korea has

concentrated national resources on the advancement of its nuclear

and missile capabilities. In 2017, after its 6th nuclear test and the launch of an ICBM and a
variety of other ballistic missiles, North Korea declared the completion of its “State Nuclear
Capability”. North Korea subsequently held talks with the U.S. in the hopes of easing its
economic sanctions imposed by the international community. However, when the failure of
the Hanoi Summit in February 2019 led to a prolonged stalemate in the U.S.-North Korean
dialogue, it proposed a new strategic line, dubbed “frontal breakthrough,”[19)] during the
5th Plenary Session of the 7th Central Committee of the Workers’ Party in late December,
2019, which focused on strengthening defense and economic capabilities while maintaining
“Nuclear Deterrence Mobilization Posture”.

During the 8th Party Congress of the Workers’ Party, in January 2021, North Korea

unveiled its “Five-year Plan to Develop Defense and Weapons Systems” to help achieve
strategic national tasks in the defense domain for the advancement of nuclear and missile
capabilities. In March 2022, North Korea fired ICBM-class missiles, essentially ceding
the declaration made during the 3rd Plenary Session of the 7th Central Committee in April
2018, to discontinue nuclear tests and ICBM launches. On April 25, 2022, in an address
during a military parade on the anniversary of the Korean People’s Revolutionary Army,
Kim Jong-un stated that North Korea will develop its nuclear force as speedily as possible.
This was followed by the legislation of its nuclear weapons policy during the Supreme
People’s Assembly in September of the same year. In a policy speech, Kim reiterated his
determination to upgrade North Korea’s nuclear and missile capabilities by pledging to
make “qualitative and quantitative improvements to nuclear weapons” and expressing a firm
stance against denuclearization. During the 6th Enlarged Plenary Session of the 8th Central
Committee in December 2022, the North Korean leader declared the so-called “revolutionary
strategy for the development of nuclear force and national defense,” presenting the mass


**19)**
During the 5th Plenary Session
of the 7th Central Committee
of the Workers’ Party
(December 28-December 31,
2019), North Korea declared
“frontal breakthrough” as its
new policy stance for building
military strength and achieving
economic self-reliance and
presented the slogan “Let us
confront all challenges in our
progress through a head-on
breakthrough battle.”


-----

production of tactical nuclear weapons against the Republic of Korea, based on an offensive
nuclear strategy, as the key direction in the defense domain, and proposing the development
of new types of ICBMs and military reconnaissance satellites as its core tasks.

Meanwhile, North Korea is endeavoring to solidify a party-centered regime. In May

2016, a Congress of the Workers’ Party was held for the first time in 35 years to overhaul
the organization and operation of the party. In January 2021, during the 8th Party Congress,
where Kim Jong-un claimed the title “General Secretary of the Workers’ Party,” the party
charter was amended to require the Congress of the Workers’ Party to be he held every
five years.

Years of sanctions and the COVID-19 pandemic have ravaged the North Korean economy.

Meanwhile, the hardship among North Korean people citizens was made worse by a series
of natural disasters. During the 8th Congress of the Workers’ Party in 2021, all the while
maintaining the stance of “self-reliance,” the North Korean leadership put forth a new
“Five-year National Economic Development Plan,” which updates the previous “Five-year
National Economic Development Strategy.” However, despite the massive-scale mobilization
of manpower and on-site visits by senior officials, the plan has resulted in no measurable
improvement in the North Korean economy due problems such as its structural issue. In
December 2020, to prevent the flow of outside information and tighten the ideological
control over its people, North Korea passed a new law called the “Reactionary Ideas and
Culture Rejection Act.” In January 2021, to tighten public discipline and increase internal
control of the North Korean society, new party organs including the Rules and Inspection
Bureau and the Justice Bureau were created. Efforts are also being made to promote social
cohesion by holding military parades and other public events on important national holidays.

North Korea has long denied the existence of COVID-19 cases within its borders even

as the pandemic swept most parts of the world from early 2020. However, in May 2022, its
authorities officially admitted a case of COVID-19 for the first time. Since then, COVID-19
has been labeled as a “great disaster.” All cities and provinces were placed under lockdown
and massive numbers of civilian and military medical professionals were mobilized to stop
its infection. Even though the war against COVID-19 was declared over and won in August,
the emergency response system is still in place and vigilance is maintained against a new
wave of infections.

Going forward, while remaining on alert for a new surge of COVID-19, North Korea

is likely to focus its energy on overcoming the economic crisis facing the country, made
particularly severe by the prolonged sanctions and pandemic, while seeking to consolidate
its regime. All available manpower and resources are expected to be mobilized for this effort
under the slogan of self-reliance. This will be coupled with efforts to ideologically arm its
people and tighten internal control in order to achieve the level of social cohesion necessary
to guarantee regime continuity. Citing the need to enhance its capability for self defense as
pretext, North Korean leadership is also expected to push ahead with the project to bolster
nuclear and missile capabilities, all the while endeavoring to complete the strategic defense
tasks proposed during the 8th Party Congress.[20) ]


**20)**
The strategic tasks in the
defense domain proposed
during the 8th Party Congress in
2021 included five top priority
strategic weapons tasks to
strengthen nuclear and missile
capabilities, namely,
ⓛ production of super-large

hydrogen bombs,

② ability to destroy targets

within a range of 15,000 km,

③ development of a hypersonic

gliding flight warheads,

④ development of underwater

and ground based solidpropellant ICBMs,

⑤ acquisition of nuclear

submarines and underwaterlaunched strategic nuclear
weapons.


-----

**North Korean Policy toward** North Korea’s decision to send its athletes to the 2018

**the Republic of Korea** Winter Olympic Games in Pyeongchang provided an

opening for the resumption of inter-Korean dialogue. In

April 2018, an inter-Korean summit was held and the Panmunjom Declaration was adopted
by the leaders of the two Koreas. In September of the same year, another summit was held,
resulting in the adoption of the Pyongyang Joint Declaration of September 2018 (hereafter,
the “Pyongyang Joint Declaration”) and the Military Agreement on the Implementation of
the Historic Panmunjom Declaration (hereafter, the “Comprehensive Military Agreement”).

However, following the failure of the U.S.-North Korea summit in Hanoi of February

2019, North Korea ceased to make any and all mentions about the inter-Korean relationship
in the decision statement from the Plenary Session of the Workers’ Party, which was in
lieu of the 2020 New Year’s address, and have since maintained an attitude of indifference
toward any dialogue nor exchange with the Republic of Korea. Since then, North Korea has
no longer responded to the Republic of Korea government’s suggestion for dialogue and
cooperation. In June 2020, blasting the Republic of Korea for leaflets sent across the DMZ
by civil activists, North Korea blew up the Joint Inter-Korean Liaison Office. In September,
it brutally shot and killed a ROK citizen who drifted into North Korean waters in the West
Sea and burned his body. North Korea is yet to respond to the demand by the Republic
of Korea government to hold joint investigation over the killing of the ROK citizen. In
2021, during the 8th Congress of the Workers’ Party, North Korea blamed the Republic
of Korea for deteriorations in the inter-Korean relationship. In March 2021, in a statement
issued in the name of Kim Yo-jong, the North mentioned the possibility of pulling out of
the Comprehensive Military Agreement. Afterwards, North Korea continued to express
its discontent to the Republic of Korea government by repeatedly cutting and restoring the
Pyongyang-Seoul hotline depending on the status of the inter-Korean relationship.[21)]

North Korea also lashed out at the Yoon administration that came into office in May 2022

for its defense policy, which included plans to strengthen the “ROK 3K Defense.” In June
2022, during the 5th Enlarged Plenary Session of the 8th Central Committee, North Korea
started to refer to its policy towards ROK as the “Fight Against Enemy.” North Korea
rejected the “Audacious Initiative,” proposed by the Republic of Korea government in
August 2022, through a statement by Kim Yo-jong, calling it a carbon copy of the “Vision
3000 ; Denuclearization, Openness.”[22)] Later condemning the renewed U.S. commitment to
extended deterrence over the ROK, North Korea ramped up military tensions by engaging
in actions that were in defiance of both the Comprehensive Military Agreement and the
Armistice Agreement, including firing a missile into a maritime buffer zone south of the
NLL (Northern Limit Line) for the first time and flying multiple small unmanned aerial
vehicles into the Republic of Korea. Furthermore, North Korea reconfirmed its principle
towards ROK of “Head on Fight Against the Enemy” and labled the Republic of Korea
as an “Unquestionable enemy” during the 6th Enlarged Plenary Session of the 8th Central
Committee.

Moreover, in a statement issued in April 2022, Kim Yo-jong mentioned the “mobilization

of nuclear combat force.” Meanwhile, during a speech before the Supreme People’s
Assembly in September, Kim Jong-un announced a decision to “expand the operational


**21)**
In July 2021 when the interKorean hotline, which had
been cut for 13 months, was
restored, North Korea stated
that this will have a positive
impact on the future of interKorean relationship and
expressed the willingness
to resume talks. However,
in August, North Korea
unilaterally severed the hotline
again, demanding that the
ROK-U.S. combine exercise be
called off.

**22)**
“Vision 3000 ;
Denuclearization, Openness”
is an initiative proposed in
2006 by the ROK government
to encourage the decision
by the North to give up its
nuclear program. The initiative
is based on the notion that
“denuclearization” of North
Korea is a pre-requisite for
coexistence, opening of the
“North Korean economy and
society” and increase in its per
capita GDP is required for interKorean prosperity and that the
basis to discuss unification will
be established when North
Korea attaints “USD 3,000 in
GDP per capita”.


-----

space for tactical nuclear weapons and diversify the means for their application.” In
December, during a ceremony donating a 600mm super-sized multiple launch rocket system,
the North Korean leader doubled down on his threats to use tactical nuclear weapons, and
has continued to state how the entire Republic of Korea is within range and how its weapons
can be fitted with tactical nuclear warheads.


**Foreign Policy** In response to high-level international sanctions and human rights

violation issues raised by the international community, North Korea is

making efforts to create a more favorable external environment for itself by solidifying ties
with socialist countries such as China and Russia under the banners of independence, peace,
and friendship, its three principles in foreign policy.

Although North Korea tried to establish a new relationship with the U.S. through the

historic bilateral summit in Singapore on June 2018, relationship between the two sides
have been in a deadlock since the failure of the Hanoi summit in February 2019. In early
2020, Kim Jong-un declared the new “frontal breakthrough” strategy during the 5th Plenary
Session of the 7th Central Committee. In 2021, during the 8th Congress of the Workers’
Party, the North Korean leader made clear that there will be no resumption of talks without
concessions on the part of the U.S., citing the principle of “responding to power with power
and goodwill with goodwill.”

Even after the new Biden administration came to power, North Korea continued to refuse

offers for talk with the U.S. In March 2022, it broke its self-imposed missile moratorium
by firing an ICBM-class missile. Meanwhile, the Adit number 3 of the Punggye-ri Test
Site, destroyed in 2018 through a public demolition, was recently restored. In November,
North Korea carried out another test launch of the Hwasong-17 ICBM in a belligerent
display of force.

There has been no meaningful improvement in North Korea’s relationship with Japan

in spite of the Stockholm Agreement,[23)] signed in May 2014 between the two sides. North
Korea repeatedly refused suggestions by Japan for a summit, stating pre-requisites such
as settlement of historical issues and shift in Japan’s policy towards North Korea. More
recently, North Korea lambasted Japan for revising its defense strategy to give itself the socalled “Enemy Base Attack Capability.”

Sino-North Korean relations soured somewhat following China’s participation in

international sanctions on North Korea after the 3rd nuclear test in 2013 and Xi Jinping’s
decision to visit the Republic of Korea before North Korea in July 2014. However, their
traditional friendly ties were later restored through the five successive bilateral summits that
took place between 2018 and 2019. After January 2020, despite the border lockdown amid
the COVID-19 pandemic, the two leaders continued to exchange letters and congratulatory
telegrams to each other in an effort to maintain their friendship. In 2022, border freight
railways resumed services as a sign of expanding exchange between the two sides. North
Korea has expressed its support for the Chinese position on the Taiwan issue and is closely
aligning itself with China on the global stage. North Korea has also maintained an amicable
relationship with Russia. In March 2015, after the North Korea-Russia Joint Economic
Commission in 2014, the two sides declared 2015 a “year of friendship” and adopted a joint


**23)**
At the director general-level
talks held in Stockholm (May
26-May 28, 2014), North Korea
pledged to cooperate with
investigations into the fate of
abducted Japanese citizens and
Japan agreed to lift sanctions
on North Korea (excluding
sanctions imposed under the
UN resolution).


-----

resolution. In April 2019, Kim Jong-un held a summit with Russian President Putin.

In 2020, even under the COVID-19 induced restrictive environment, limiting in-person

exchange, the North Korean and Russian leaders sent congratulatory messages to each
other on major anniversaries. The two sides have also been strengthening their ties through
a successive series of meetings between key officials. After the start of the war in Ukraine,
North Korea has shown support for the Russian position that the fundamental cause of this
war is the U.S. and the Western pursuit of hegemony.

**2. North Korea’s Military Strategy and Military Command Structure**


**Military Strategy** In 1962, North Korea adopted four military lines in accordance with

its principle of “self-reliance in defense”[24)] and has since continued

to build up its forces. In 2015, after Kim Jong-un’s succession to power, four new strategic
lines to strengthen the KPA(Korean People’s Army) were announced, including “creating a
politically and ideologically stronger KPA,” “creating a morally stronger KPA,” “developing
the KPA into an army of sophisticated tactics,” and “strengthening the various branches
of the KPA.” North Korea is exploring a military strategy focused on surprise attacks,
combination warfare, blitzkriegs and is pursuing various strategies and tactics with based on
its nuclear weapons strategy. While strengthening nuclear weapons and WMD (Weapons of
Mass Destruction), missiles, long-range artillery, submarines, and asymmetric forces such as
special warfare units and cyber and electronic warfare units, North Korea is also improving
the performance of a select conventional weapons. Under the goal of advancing nuclear
and missile capabilities, North Korea is continuing to conduct test launches. Meanwhile, a
6,800 strong cyber warfare personnel are carrying out R&D to develop new technologies to
reinforce North Korean cyber forces.

The North Korean military is likely to attempt a surprise attack when the opportunity arises,

primarily employing asymmetric forces, to create favorable conditions for itself, and seek a
quick end to war. In January 2021, during the 8th Congress of the Workers’ Party, the North
Korean leadership emphasized a unification strategy based on the use of force by adding
“achieving a timely Korean unification through strong national defense capabilities” to the
party charter. In September 2022, North Korea doubled down on its threats to use nuclear
weapons by legislating its “nuclear weapons policy”, which contained concrete conditions
for the use of nuclear weapons. Going forward, North Korea is expected to continuously
adjust its military strategy according to the changing external and internal conditions such as
the strategic environment and economic hardship.


**24)**
Article 60 of the Constitution
of North Korea states: “The
State shall implement the line
of self-reliant defense, whose
basic principle is to arm the
entire people, fortify the entire
country train the entire military
into cadres and modernize the
entire military on the basis
of equipping the military and
people both politically and
ideologically.”


**Military Command Structure** Kim Jong-un, who concurrently holds the title of the

Chairman of the State Affairs Commission, the Supreme

Commander of the KPA and the Chairman of the Central Military Commission, wields full
command and control over the North Korean military.

The State Affairs Commission, as the supreme policy decision-making agency in North

Korea, carries out decision-making activities on key policies such as the national defense


-----

force build up project. The General Political Bureau under the Supreme Leader supervises
party organs within the military and is responsible for matters related to political ideology.
The General Staff Department has command over military operations. A unified command
system is in place to control all five branches including the Ground Force, Special Operations
Force, the Naval Force, the Air Force, and the Strategic Force. The Ministry of Defence
represents the armed forces abroad and has authority over military administration including
military diplomacy, logistics, and budget. The Defense Security Bureau is responsible for the
internal surveillance and control of the armed forces and the investigation of military crimes.
The Supreme Guard Command provides security to the North Korean leader and his family,
guards and manages their residences as well as suppressing any coups attempt against the
regime. The Central Military Commission deliberates and decides on measures to advance
the Workers’ Party’s military line and policy, in accordance with the party charter and provide
party guidance to the overall national defense projects.

[Figure 1-2] shows the military command structure of North Korea:

**[Figure 1-2]** **Military Command Structure of North Korea**

**Supreme Commander**

Defense Security Bureau Supreme Guard Command

General Political Bureau General Staff Department Ministry of Defence

xxx xxx xxx xx xx xx

Regular (10) 91Capital Anti-aircraft Armored Mechanized Mechanized Special Operations Navy Air Force Strategic

Artillery Infantry (5) Artillery Force Force

XI Corps, etc.

**Ground Force**


✽ xxx : corps xx : division

**3. Military Capabilities**


**Ground Force** The Korean People’s Army Ground Force consists of 10 regular

forward and rear-deployed corps, 91 Capital Defense Corps, 1

Anti-Aircraft Artillery Corps, 1 Armored Division, 5 Mechanized Infantry Divisions,
and 1 Mechanized Artillery Division, which are under the command of the General Staff
Department.[25)] Furthermore, it also includes the Road Construction Corps under Ministry of
Defence and Engineering Corps under the General Political Bureau.

North Korea maintains a readiness posture capable of carrying out a surprise attack at

any given time by positioning 70% of its Ground Force south of the Pyongyang-Wonsan
line. The forward-deployed 170mm self-propelled guns and 240mm Multiple Rocket
Launchers (MRLs), for instance, provide North Korea with the capability for a large-scale
and concentrated surprise fire targeted at the Greater Seoul Metropolitan Area. North Korea
is bolstering its fires capability centered around recent development of a precision-guided


**25)**
The Mechanized Artillery
Division was created by
consolidating a Mechanized
Infantry Division and an
Artillery Division.


-----

300mm multiple rocket launcher with an extended range[26)] and a 600mm-class short-range
ballistic missile that North Korea claims as a super-sized multiple rocket launcher[27)] that are
capable of striking any parts of the Korean peninsula. The armored and mechanized units
have more than 6,900 tanks and armored vehicles. New-generation tanks with enhanced
maneuverability and survivability as well as variety of armored vehicles fitted with antitank missiles and mobile guns have been recently developed to replace some of the ageing
platforms. Major equipment of the KPA Ground Force and new equipment that have recently
been identified are shown in [Figure 1-3] and [Figure 1-4] below:

**[Figure 1-3]** **Major Ground Force Equipment of the Korean People's Army**


Tanks

Approx. 4,300


Armored vehicles

Approx. 2,600


Field artillery

Approx. 8,800


Multiple rocket launchers

Approx. 5,500



**[Figure 1-4] New Equipment Spotted during the Military Parade on the 90th Anniversary of the Korean**

**People's Army (April 25, 2022)**

Armored vehicles fitted
Tanks Self-propelled artillery Multiple rocket launchers

with anti-tank missiles


**26)**
It was test-launched several
times since 2012 and was
publicly shown for the first
time in October 2015, during a
military parade on the Workers’
Party’s 70th anniversary.
During the military parade on
the 75th anniversary of the
Workers’ Party in October
2020, an updated version of this
equipment was unveiled.

**27)**
After its test-launch in August
2019, this missile was referred
to as the “super-sized multiple
rocket launcher.” It was first
showcased during the military
parade on the 75th anniversary
of the Workers’ Party in
October 2020.

**28)**
The XI Corps, naval and air
sniper brigades, and special
operations battalions have
been classified as the Special
Operations Force; separate
command has not been
established, Commander
unknown

**29)**
A strategic special warfare
unit, also known as the “Storm
Corps.”


**Special Operations Force** To elevate the status of special operations units, North

Korea categorized them into a separate branch of its armed

forces naming them “Special Operations Force.”[28)] There are various different types of
special operations units, including the XI Corps,[29)] the Special Operations Battalion, light
infantry divisions, brigades and sniper brigades of the forward-deployed corps, Navy and
Air Force sniper brigades, and light infantry regiments of forward-deployed divisions. An
estimated 200,000 personnel are assigned to special operations units. In wartime, special
operations units are expected to infiltrate the ROK from both front and rear lines, using a
variety of means, including underground tunnels, submarines, air-cushion vehicles, fast
landing craft, AN-2 aircraft, or helicopters, to carry out operations such as the destruction of
critical military installations, assassination of key personnel, and disturbance in the rear area..
They are conducting infiltration exercises by air, sea, and land as well as strike exercises
using models of strategic ROK facilities, while continually reinforcing its forces as seen
through the modernization of armaments. [Figure 1-5] provides highlights of select activities
of North Korean special operations units:


-----

**[Figure 1-5]** **Activities of North Korean Special Operations Force**

Special operations Island occupation

Ground strike (attack) exercise Air infiltration exercise
unit flag exercise


**Naval Force** The Korean People’s Army Naval Force (KPANF) is comprised of 2

fleet commands for the East and West Coast Fleets, 13 squadrons, and 2

naval sniper brigades that are under the North Korean Naval Command. With 60% of its forces
positioned south of the Pyongyang-Wonsan line, the North Korean Naval Force possesses the
capability to carry out a surprise attack anytime.

However, its capacity for deep-sea operations is limited because its force is primarily consisted

of small, high-speed vessels. Surface forces consist of 470 vessels, including guided-missile
attack craft, torpedo boats, small-sized patrol vessels, and fire support boats. As most of the
vessels are small high-speed craft, surface operations are generally conducted in tandem with
ground operations to assist the advance of ground forces or defense of coastal waters. More
recently, the North Korean Navy has been building and deploying new ships to replace some
of its aging vessels, while also improving the long-range attack capabilities of their vessels by
fitting them with a new type of anti-ship missiles.[30)]

North Korea’s submarine forces consist of 70 vessels, including Romeo-class submarines

and midget submarines. In wartime, submarine forces will carry out missions such as blocking
maritime routes, laying mines, attacking surface vessels and assisting infiltration of its special
operations forces. In recent years, the KPANF has retrofitted SLBMs (submarine-launched
ballistic missiles) into their Romeo-class submarines in a continuing effort to improve its forces.

North Korea’s landing forces consist of approximately 250 vessels, including air cushion

vehicles and fast landing craft. These forces, mainly made up of small-sized high-speed
vessels, are expected to land special operations forces in the rear areas to destroy military and
strategic facilities as well as secure key beachheads under the escort of surface forces. North
Korea’s coastal defense forces deploy large numbers of coastal artillery and surface-to-ship
missiles along the eastern and western coastlines to attack approaching surface vessels and
provide defense against amphibious operations. North Korea is continuously improving the
performance and range of its surface-to-ship missiles[31)]. Major vessels and surface-to-ship
missiles owned by the North Korean Navy are listed in [Figure 1-6]:

**[Figure 1-6]** **Naval Vessels and Surface-to-Ship Missiles of the North Korean Navy**


**30)**
On February 6, 2015, North
Korea conducted a public testlaunch of this missile, which has
an estimated range of close to
100km, in a sea near Wonsan.

**31)**
During a celebration event
on the 70th anniversary of
the regime (September 9,
2018), North Korea unveiled a
new surface-to-ship missile.
During the 75th Workers’ Party
anniversary event, surfaceto-ship missiles mounted on
an updated TEL (transporter
erector launcher) with four
additional launcher tubes (4→8
tubes) were put on display. The
estimated range of the new
surface-to-ship missile is about
200㎞.


Surface combatants

Approx. 420


Support craft

Approx. 40


Submarines

Approx. 70


Landing craft

Approx. 250


Surface-to-ship

missiles


-----

**Air Force** North Korea’s Air Force[32)] consists of five air divisions, a tactical trans
portation brigade, two air force sniper brigades, and air defense unit under

the Air Force Command.

Its forces are deployed by dividing North Korea into four regions. The Air Force has 1,570

total aircraft. About 40% of its some 810 combat aircraft are deployed in areas south of
the Pyongyang-Wonsan line, the Korean People’s Army Air Force (KPAAF) is at all times
prepared to launch a surprise attack on the Republic of Korea and possesses the ability to
support air infiltrations by special operations forces, using AN-2 aircraft or helicopters.

Furthermore, North Korea is making steady efforts to enhance the efficiency of its air force

and modernize the fleet by retiring obsolete trainers, producing and deploying additional
AN-2 and other light aircraft, as well as developing a variety of unmanned aircraft with
reconnaissance and attack capabilities. Because introduction of new combat aircraft is
limited, North Korea is attempting to fill this gap by bolstering its air defense capability
through development and deployment of new surface to air missiles. An integrated air
defense system, made up of aircraft, surface-to-air missiles, anti-aircraft artillery, and radar
units is in place with the Air Force Command at the center. The SA-2[33)] and SA-5[34)] surfaceto-air missiles are deployed in forward positions. SA-2 and SA-3[35)] surface-to-air missiles
coupled with a concentrated ring of anti-aircraft artillery form a multi-layered air defense
networkin and around Pyongyang. Moreover, North Korea is believed to be developing and
using a variety of electronic jamming devices, including GPS jammers, for air defense. A
large number of GCI and EW radar bases are dispered throughout North Korea, giving its
military the ability to detect targets across the Korean peninsula.

To increase the accuracy of its air defense radars and reduce operational response time, an

automated air defense command and control system has been put into place. Some examples
of aircraft and surface-to-air missiles operated by the North Korean Air Force are shown in

[Figure 1-7] below:


**32)**
The Air and Anti-Air Command
was renamed the Air Force
Command (April 2022)

**33)**
A guided missile system with a
maximum range of 56㎞ for the
interception of medium-to-high
altitude targets (SA-2: Surface
to Air-2)

**34)**
A guided missile system
with a range up to 250km
for the interception of highaltitude targets, developed
to complement SA-2 (SA-5:
Surface to Air-5)



**[Figure 1-7]** **Aircraft and Ground-to-Air Missile of the North Korean Air Force**


Transport aircraft

Approx. 350, including

AN-2


Helicopters

Approx. 290, including

Navy helicopters


Combat aircraft

Approx. 810


Reconnaissance aircraft

Approx. 30


Surface-to-air missiles


**Strategic Force** North Korea has an independent command for its Strategic Force,

which consists of 13 missile brigades, including the Scud, Rodong,

and Musudan Missile Brigades. In recent years, it is estimated that North Korea is developing
new ICBMs and a range of solid propelled ballistic missiles with operational advantages and
enhanced accuracy that are better at evading interception.

In order to buttress its strategic attack capabilities, North Korea is continuously developing

nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles, as well as chemical and biological weapons. Nuclear
material for its nuclear weapons program have been produced in Yongbyon and other


**35)**
A guided missile system with
a maximum range of 25㎞ for
the interception of mediumdistance, low-to-medium
altitude targets (SA-3: Surface
to Air-3)


-----

nuclear facilities since the 1980s. Until very recently, North Korea has been known to
possess about 70kg of plutonium, obtained from reprocessing its fuel rods and a substantial
amount of highly enriched uranium (HEU) from its uranium enrichment program. Moreover,
judging from the six successive tests carried out between October 2006 and September 2017,
North Korea’s ability to produce miniaturized nuclear warheads appears to have reached a
significant level.

Although North Korea conducted a public demolition of the three tunnels at the Punggye-ri

test site on May 24, 2018, they restored the Adit number 3 in 2022. The ROK Armed Forces
have stepped up surveillance in the face of an increased likelihood of another nuclear test by
North Korea to further develop its nuclear capability.

North Korea has operationally deployed liquid propellant ballistic missiles, including

Scud, Rodong, and Musudan, which gives them the ability to carry out a direct strike in
the Korean peninsula as well as against other neighboring countries. North Korea, which
started developing ballistic missiles in the 1970’s, operationally deployed the 300km-range
Scud-B and the 500km-range Scud-C by the mid-1980s and Rodong missiles with a range of
1,300km by the late 1990s. Afterwards, they also operationally deployed the Scud-ER with
an extended range. In 2007, North Korea operationally deployed Musudan missiles with a range
of over 3,000km without a test launch, which subsequently failed its performance test in 2016.

Since 2012, North Korea has been conducting research to develop new types of liquid and

solid propellant ballistic missiles. It test-launched the Hwasong-12, a new liquid propellant
ballistic missile with an intermediate range, based on the Baekdusan Engine, developed in
2016, over Japan three times since 2017, at a normal angle. In 2017, it fired two ICBMs,
Hwasong-14 and Hwasong-15, both capable of reaching anywhere in the U.S. mainland.
Starting in February 2022, North Korea made several attempts at launching the Hwasong-17,
over the East Sea at a lofted angle. All ICBM tests by North Korea were lofted-angle
launches. Although this successfully demonstrated that the range of the missiles are sufficient
to threaten the U.S. mainland, whether North Korea possesses all critical components of
an ICBM, including perfecting the re-entry technology needs further confirmation as the
missiles were not launched in a normal trajectory. North Korea is also in the process of
developing a new type of missile it describes as a “hypersonic missile,” which was testlaunched three times since 2021.

Since 2019, North Korea is continuously test-firing solid propelled ballistic missiles

which have significant operational advantages over the liquid fuel ones. North Korea has
also developed a variety of short-range ballistic missiles based on its indigenously produced
Iskander-style TBM, whose reliability it claims has been proven, including ones similar
to ATACMS, ones with a heavier payload and ones with shorter distance. Meanwhile, to
diversify methods of launch, North Korea is experimenting with different types of launch
platforms, including wheeled and tracked TELs, as well as trains and submarines. North
Korea also recently announced that it delivered a short-range ballistic missile, which it claims
to be a super-sized multiple rocket launcher (600mm), to the military in December 2022.
This missile was test-fired several times since 2019. North Korea has developed various
types of solid propelled ballistic missiles over a short period of time and is expected to use
them to replace the ageing Scud and Rodong missiles of the Strategic Force.


-----

Moreover, North Korea conducted a large-scale combustion test of a solid fuel rocket

engine in December 2022, at the Seohae Satellite Launch Site at Dongchang-ri in
Pyeonganbuk-do, which could be a preparatory step toward developing solid propellant
IRBMs (intermediate range ballistic missiles)[36) ]and ICBMs.

Concerning submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs), although North Korea has

test-fired Pukguksung-family missiles and submarine-launched tactical guided missiles (a
North Korean derivative of the Iskander), a SLBM-capable submarine appears to be still in
the development stage.

Meanwhile, after officially announcing the possibility of a preemptive use of nuclear

weapons by legislating its “nuclear weapons policy” on September 8, 2022, North Korea
launched a series of ballistic missiles, which, according to the North, can be fitted with
tactical nuclear warheads, over the East and West Seas. On November 2, 2022, North Korea
intentionally fired a missile so that it landed in international waters 26km south of the NLL,
in direct violation of the CMA.

Furthermore, North Korea, which has been developing cruise missiles, focused on surface
to-ship missiles, since the early 2000s, is now using the technology acquired through this
process to pressing ahead with the development of long-range surface to surface cruise
missiles. If North Korea successfully completes its development of long-range surface-tosurface cruise missiles, this will increase the missile threat faced by the Republic of Korea.

It is expected that North Korea will continue to develop and test launch its missiles in

accordance with the plan to enhance its nuclear weapons systems and defense capabilities.
North Korea is likely to focus its effort on completing the strategic weapons development
tasks proposed during the 8th Party Congress.

The types of ballistic missiles currently owned or under development by North Korea and

their ranges are as shown in [Figure 1-8] and [Figure 1-9]:


**36)**
Intermediate range ballistic
missile



**[Figure 1-8]** **Ballistic Missiles of North Korea**

Length (m)

30


Taepodong

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|(claimed by North Korea) Hwasong-15 Hwasong-17 Tactical guided Hypersonic missiles Hwasong-14|||||
|Hwasong-12 Rodong Cone-shaped Gliding-shaped|||||
|Scud-ER He wav ay rhw ee ai dght Scud-B/C Pukguksung-2P ukguksung-3 S uper-sized P ukguksung-4 Pukguksung-5 Musudan multiple rocket Pukguksung Iskander-type launcher|||||
|ATACMS-class Near range|||||
||||||


multiple rocket Pukguksung

Iskander-type launcher

ATACMS-class
Near range


**ICBM**

**(intercontinental)**

(over 5,500km)


25

20


15

10


ATACMS-class
Near range

5

**CRBM**

**(close range)**

(up to 300km)


**SRBM**

**(short range)**
(300-1,000km)


**MRBM**

**(medium range)**

(1,000~3,000km)


**IRBM**

**(intermediate range)**

(3,000~5,500km)


-----

**[Figure 1-9]** **Ranges of North Korean Ballistic Missiles**

**Scud-C** 500km

**Rodong** 1,300km

**Musudan** Over 3,000km

**Hwasong-12** 5,000km

**Hwasong-15** Over 10,000km

**Hwasong-17** Over 13,000km


North Korea began producing chemical weapons during the 1980s. It is believed to

currently own approximately 2,500-5,000 tons of chemical weapons. It is also believed to
possess the ability to independently cultivate and produce biological weapons, including
anthrax, smallpox, and the bubonic plague.


**Reserve Forces and** North Korea’s reserve forces consist of the Gyododae,

**War Sustainment Capabilities** a reserve military training unit subject to combat

mobilization, the workplace and region based Worker
Peasant Red Guards, the Red Youth Guards, a military organization of students in high
school and paramilitary units. The size of the reserve forces, made up of men and women
between 14 and 60 years of age, is an estimated 7.62 million, representing nearly 30%
of total population. Gyododae, which receives training comparable to that of the regular
armed forces, numbers around 620,000 personnel and is believed to be capable of quickly
supplementing the combat power of regular forces during contingencies. The types and
strength of North Korean reserves forces are listed in [Figure 1-10] below:

**[Figure 1-10]** **Reserve Forces of North Korea**


|Type|Strength 7.62 million 620,000 Mob Regi 5.72 million 940,000 340,000|Description|
|---|---|---|
|Total|||
|yododae (Reserve Military Training Unit)||ilization reserve forces (men of ages 17-50, unmarried women of a|
|orker-Peasant Red Guards||onal reserve forces (men of ages 17-60, women of ages 17-30, not the Gyododae)|
|Red Youth Guards||Military organization of high school students (boys and girls of ages|
|Paramilitary units||Supreme Guard Command, Ministry of Social Security, etc.|


North Korea is believed to have a stockpile of reserve material sufficient for one to three

months in the event of a war. There are approximately 300 munition factories in North


-----

Korea, including 100 civilian factories that can be quickly converted to produce munitions
in wartime. Munitions production and storage facilities are fortified in underground facilities
to ensure their wartime survivability. Except for combat aircraft, North Korea is believed to
have the capability to domestically produce major weapons system and munitions. However,
it is expected that North Korea will be limited from continuously expanding its munitions
industry as the prolonged international sanctions worsen the energy crisis and shortage of
raw materials. North Korea’s war sustainment capability will not only be affected by the
military environment, but wide-range of factors including politics, economy, society and
social infrastructure.


-----

-----

**Chapter**
# 2

**National Security Strategy and**
**Defense Strategy**

**Section 1. National Security Strategy�**

**Section 2. National Defense Strategy**


ROK A d F S i L d S i (J l 2022)


-----

**Section**


###### National Security Strategy

The Yoon administration has set out a national vision for a “global pivotal state contributing to
freedom, peace, and prosperity” and established a new national security strategy to support
this vision. The government of the Republic of Korea will strive to normalize inter-Korean
relations and achieve peace on the Korean peninsula on the foundation of robust security,
while promoting prosperity in the international community through a pragmatic foreign policy
that is embedded in universal values.

**1. National Vision and National Security Objectives**

The Yoon administration has articulated a new vision for a “global pivotal state contributing
to freedom, peace, and prosperity” which both reflects the Republic of Korea’s mission as
a nation and encapsulates the fundamental values and aspirations of its people. Under this
vision, the administration has proposed three national security objectives.


**Safeguarding ROK Sovereignty,** The basic goal of national security is to

**Territorial Integrity and** defend the nation and protect its people from

any group that poses a threat. While firmly

**Ensuring the Safety of the Korean People**

responding to North Korean provocations,

the ROK government is to place utmost effort to safeguard the nation’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity, as well as the lives and property of its people from complex security threats,
including asymmetrical threats posed by nuclear/WMDs, conventional threats, potential
threats we may face in the future and non-traditional threats such as natural disasters and
infectious diseases.


**Achieving Peace on the Korean Peninsula and** The government will endeavor to

**Laying the Groundwork for Future Unification** achieve sustainable peace on the

Korean peninsula and lay the

groundwork for future unification of the two Koreas. In order to peacefully resolve the
North Korean nuclear issue, it will closely work with friendly nations and international
organizations to induce change in North Korea’s attitude and pursue a principled and
consistent denuclearization policy. The government will seek to normalize and promote the
stable development of inter-Korean relations and lead the national effort to lay groundworks
for a unified future by consolidating the will and capacity from within and abroad.


**Establishing the Framework for Prosperity in** Republic of Korea’s growing economic
**East Asia and Expanding Korea’s Global Role** power and global standing have led to

increasing domestic and international

expectations for it to play a greater role in achieving peace and prosperity in the world. The
ROK government will defend and promote universal values of freedom, democracy, and


-----

human rights through the ROK-U.S. Alliance, linchpin of peace and prosperity in the Korean
peninsula and its surrounding region. In tandem, Republic of Korea will expand cooperation
based on democratic values and mutual interests in East Asia, while actively contributing to
resolving challenges facing the world, including new security threats, and participating in
international development efforts as a responsible member of the global community.

**2. Tenets of the National Security Strategy**


The government’s tenets of the national security strategy consists of five key elements:
“Pursuit of a pragmatic and value-based foreign policy that puts national interests first,”
“achieving robust security through strong defense capabilities,” “establishing principled interKorean relations based on reciprocity,” “actively defending economic security interests,” and
“proactively responding to new security threats.”


**A Pragmatic and Value-based Foreign** The ROK government will cooperate with

**Policy that Puts National Interests First** its key partners based on common values

and mutual interests and create a favorable

environment for peace and prosperity in the Korean peninsula through this process.
Moreover, in order to play a larger role as a global pivotal state, the government will broaden
its foreign policy horizons by conducting region-and nation-specific cooperation programs
that promote shared prosperity and increase its involvement in international affairs and
contribution to the global agenda.


**Achieving Robust Security through** Strong defense capabilities are essential for

**Strong Defense Capabilities** the survival of the ROK as a nation as well as

a fundamental pre-condition for peace on the

Korean peninsula. Through the Defense Innovation 4.0 initiative that harnesses advanced
Fourth Industrial Revolution technologies, the government will build powerful armed forces
capable of meeting future defense requirements. Meanwhile, based on the ironclad ROK-U.
S. Alliance, the ROK military will maintain an all-around defense posture to deter and
decisively respond to North Korean provocations. Moreover, ROK 3K Defense, which will
fend off advancing North Korean nuclear and WMD threats with overwhelming force will
be refined and implemented in an expeditious manner, at the same time as improving the
combat readiness of troops through realistic training and ideological armament to clearly
identify the enemy they face.


**Inter-Korean Relations Based on** In its efforts toward normalization of inter-Korean

**Principles and Reciprocity** relations, the government of the Republic of Korea

will combine openness to dialogue and a principled

approach with pragmatism and flexibility. Jointly with the international community, it will
carry out an audacious initiative for the complete denuclearization of North Korea and
sustainable peace and prosperity in the Korean peninsula. Moreover, continuous efforts will


-----

be made for the improvement of human rights and humanitarian conditions in North Korea
and progress on issues derived from the division of two Koreas, such as the unification
of divided families. At the same time, the government will strive with the citizens and the
international community to establish a denuclearized, peaceful, and prosperous Korean
Peninsula.


**Actively Defending Economic** In partnership with the private sec-tor, the government

**Security Interests** will construct a multi-layered economic security

response system to defend ROK’s interests in areas

related to supply chain, critical technologies and energy. Republic of Korea will work with
leading nations around the world to take the initiative in establishing international rules
and protocols. Furthermore, ROK will also take an active part in international economic
cooperative bodies to shape the agenda and contribute solutions to issues of common interest.


**Proactively Responding to** To respond to non-traditional security challenges, the

**Emerging Security Threats** gover-nment will operate a crisis prevention system, make

special efforts to set up an early warning mechanism

and build a public-private collaboration system. In areas requiring transnational responses,
such as climate change and infectious diseases, ROK government will continue to closely
cooperate with the international community.


-----

**Section**


###### National Defense Strategy

To prepare against a rapidly changing strategic environment, the Ministry of National Defense
establishes and implements a medium and long-term defense strategy that is aligned with
the government’s national security strategy and national defense goals. The national defense
strategy sets forth general strategic and policy directions as well as specific strategic
objectives that represent top priorities for our military. To support the implementation of the
national defense strategy, the Ministry of National Defense also identifies critical focus areas
to direct short-term efforts.

**1. National Defense Objectives**


The objectives of national defense are to “defend the nation from external military threats,
attacks and invasions”, “support the peaceful unification of the two Koreas”, and “contribute
to regional stability and world peace”.


**Defending the Nation from** In addition to preparing against existing

**External Military Threats and Invasions** military threats and possible invasion by

North Korea, the ROK Armed Forces must

safeguard the nation’s sovereignty and territorial integrity from all actors that threatening its
national interests and protect the lives and property of the Korean people from non-traditional
threats such as natural disasters and infectious diseases.

North Korea, which possess a large scale conventional force, is advancing its WMD

technology, including nuclear weapons and missiles while engaging in frequent cyberattacks
and armed provocations. North Korea’s recent legislation of its nuclear weapons policy,
which hints at the possibility of a preemptive use of nuclear weapons, has increased the
severity of North Korean threats to our security. Recently, North Korea also fired a missile in
the East Sea, for the first time into an area lying south of the NLL. Meanwhile, the Charter
of the Workers’ Party was amended in 2021 to explicitly state the goal of unifying the
entire Korean peninsula under Communist rule. During the Plenary Session of the Central
Committee, held in December 2022, the North Korean leadership declared Republic of
Korea as an “Unquestionable enemy.” North Korea’s refusal to abandon its nuclear program
and relentless military threats make both its regime and military an enemy of the Republic of
Korea.


**Support for Peaceful Unification** The ROK Armed Forces will contribute to the

peaceful unification of the two Koreas by prevent
ing war on the Korean peninsula through a strong military force and conditional upon
progress being made on North Korean denuclearization, take gradual steps to lower interKorean military tensions and build trust.


-----

**Contribution to Regional Stability** The ROK Armed Forces will strengthen the

**and World Peace** ROK-U.S. Alliance, at the same as forging a

relationship of trust with neighboring countries in

the military domain, and actively participate in international peacekeeping operations and
global exchanges in the defense field to contribute to regional stability and world peace.

**2. National Defense Strategy**

In order to effectively respond to the rapidly changing external and domestic defense
environment, characterized by an increasingly fluid international order, decline in population
available for conscription and rapid technological advances, defense strategies need to
be developed with a medium and long-term horizon in mind. The Ministry of National
Defense will identify defense strategy objectives which are medium and long-term priorities
to support the government’s national security strategy and national defense goals and
concentrate its resources and efforts in achieving them.


**Defense Strategy Objectives** Based on the core values of the National Security

Strategy and the National Defense Objectives set by

the government, such as the defense of territorial integrety, guaranteeing national security,
peaceful Korean unification, and world peace, four strategic defense goals have been
selected, including “integrated, proactive defense,” “innovation and capability building,”
“alliance and partnership,” and “safety and co-prosperity.”

[Figure 2-1] **Defense Strategy Objectives**



-  Establishing a defense posture capable of delivering both

integrated and proactive response to complex security threats

-  Developing a strong, technology driven force with capabilities to

gain asymmetric advantages through selection and focus



-  Elevating the ROK-U.S. Alliance to a global comprehensive

strategic alliance, expanding and strengthening the global
defense cooperation network

-  Defense management prioritizing safety of the Korean people,

citizen’s trust and civil-military relations


**Integrated, proactive**
**defense**

**Innovation,**
**capability building**

**Alliance and**
**partnership**

**Safety and**
**co-prosperity**


-----

① Establishing a defense posture capable of delivering both integrated and proactive

**response to complex security threats**

Amid the intensifying U.S.-China strategic competition, North Korea’s advancing nuclear and
WMD capabilities, and the rise of non-traditional threats such as climate change and terrorism,
the security environment is increasingly redefined by simultaneous and complex threats that
is becoming more diverse. In order to effectively respond to such complex security threats,
all elements of national defense must be integrated organically and capabilities throughout
all domain including ground, sea, space, cyber space, and electromagnetic spectrum need to
be interconnected. Furthermore, Republic of Korea needs to bolster its defense capabilities
through partnership and alignment with countries that share our value. Moreover, using
integrated capabilities, active effort must be made to shape a favorable environment before
a security crisis occurs. In the event of a crisis, an environment which allows rapid decisionmaking and a proactive self-defensive response can minimize casualties and quickly lead
to a decisive and favorable end to hostilities. In order to achieve an integrated and proactive
defense, the Ministry of National Defense will build an all-around defense posture.

② Developing a strong, technology driven force with capabilities to gain asymmetric

**advantages through selection and focus**

Slowing global economic growth, declining size of productive populations, and worsening
government fiscal conditions are expected to present a significant challenge to securing a
sufficient level of defense budgets. In order to overcome this challenge, available resources
must be allocated more efficiently, through a selection and focus-based approach. Meanwhile,
through an accelerated integration of cutting-edge technologies, the armed forces must be
realigned into a smaller and fiscally responsible, yet highly capable, efficient and professional
entity. To counter asymmetric threats, including nuclear and missile threats from North
Korea, overwhelming response capabilities must be built by bolstering the strength and
posture of the ROK 3K Defense and increasing operational capacities in new domains such as
cyber, electromagnetic, and space, while accelerating the development of a hybrid mannedunmanned combat system and bolstering the capability to responsd against UAS.


③ Elevating the ROK-U.S. Alliance to a global comprehensive strategic alliance,

**expanding and strengthening the global defense cooperation network**

The ROK-U.S. Alliance has been the linchpin of peace and stability in the Korean peninsula
as well as Northeast Asia for the past seven decades. In recent years, however, there has been
a sharp increase in security uncertainty, caused by the geopolitical competition within the
region in diplomatic, security, economic, and technological domains, as well as concerning
issues related to common values and international rules and norms. Arms race between
major countries and advances in North Korea’s nuclear and WMD capabilities are also major
factors that need to be taken into account. Such a development has raised the need to further
strengthen the ROK-U.S. Alliance by elevating it to a global comprehensive strategic alliance.
Meanwhile, in keeping with ROK’s enhanced international standing and in consistency with
the government’s external strategy to play the role of a global pivotal state, the Ministry of
National Defense will expand its defense cooperation network with allies and partners in


-----

wide-ranging areas, including defense exports, joint disaster response, the protection of sea
lanes, personnel exchange and more.

④ Defense management prioritizing safety of the Korean people, citizen’s trust and civil
**military relations**

Amid growing societal demand for a higher degree of transparency and rationality in defense
management, the ROK public’s expectations about the role of the military have also increased,
making the civil-military relationship more important than ever. Protecting the citizens of the
Republic of Korea, from non-traditional security threats, including natural disasters, terrorism,
and infectious diseases, is an important role of the military, which it must continuously strive
to better perform. In the ROK where universal conscription system is in place and most
people have friends and family members serving in the military, there is keen public interest
in military culture. To continue to enjoy the trust and support of the ROK public, the military
must keep improving the service environment to meet the standards expected of them.
Moreover, to build a positive and cooperative civil-military relationship, when implementing
and pursuing defense policies, efforts must be made to seek the understanding of the public
and earn the support of local communities.


**Defense Policy Focuses** The Ministry of National Defense has selected “robust national

defense, strong forces harnessing science and technology”

as its short-term policy goal. A “robust national defense” means a military response posture
that is capable of deterring enemy provocations based on the ROK-U.S. combined defense
posture and firmly responding to provocations, using the full independent capabilities of the
ROK Armed Forces and those of the ROK-U.S. Alliance. “Strong forces harnessing science
and technology” are competitive forces with AI and robotic-augmented capabilities, achieved
through the integration of Fourth Industrial Revolution technologies for defense applications in
a timely manner. The six key points to achieve the national defense objectives are as follows:

① �Establish an all-around defense posture and expand response capabilities
While maintaining a strong military posture against North Korean threats based on the
ROK-U.S. combined defense posture, the ROK Armed Forces have also built an all-around
defense posture to account for potential security threats. To decisively deter and respond to
advancing North Korean nuclear and military threats, the response capabilities of our Armed
Forces will be dramatically upgraded. The training and education of troops will be improved
by placing emphasis on realistic training with emphasis on combat missions. The intangible
readiness posture of troops will also be reinforced through education and ideological
armament to clearly identify the enemy they face.

② �Developing a powerful modern military based on advanced science and technology

**through Defense Innovation 4.0**

The accelerated pace of technological advances and declining military manpower have
caused a paradigm shift in the future of warfare. To keep abreast with the fast-changing
defense environment, the Ministry of National Defense has undertaken Defense Innovation


-----

4.0, an novel initiative to integrate Fourth Industrial Revolution technologies across all areas
of national defense. The goal is to fundamentally transform our forces through technologydriven innovation to reinvent them as competitive cutting-edge military forces.

③ �A leap forward in the ROK-U.S. Alliance and deeper and broader defense cooperation
In order to more effectively respond to North Korean nuclear and missile threats and other
potential security threats, the ROK-U.S. Alliance, the linchpin of Korea’s national defense,
will be promoted to a new and higher level of partnership. Amid a stable management of
alliance issues, its cohesion will be strengthened and the credibility of the U.S. extended
deterrence commitment reinforced through more frequent regular and ad-hoc consultations
and increased policy coordination between the two countries’ defense authorities. In tandem,
defense cooperation with Korea’s allies will be deepened and expanded to protect national
interests and contribute to the establishment of peace in the region.


④ �Safe and transparent civil-military cooperative defense management
To keep pace with evolving requirements of society and align with the expectations of the
ROK public, the Ministry of National Defense will strive to achieve a higher standard of
safety and transparency and promote civil-military cooperation and partnership in defense
management. The military healthcare system will be improved to better meet the needs of
the service members and a comprehensive safety management system will be put into place.
Meanwhile, by ensuring the fairness of the military justice system and through a rational
and efficient allocation of the defense budget, we will enhance the transparency of defense
management. To protect and respect the rights of Korean people, the ministry will ease
regulation where possible and as much as possible.

⑤ �Development of a military culture that meets the needs of the future generation
The Ministry of National Defense will create a service environment that is better attuned to
today’s society by dramatically enhancing the standard of living for members of the armed
forces and strengthening the human rights protection system within the military. Moreover,
we will ensure that the sacrifices of personnel killed in combat or on duty are suitably
recognized and honored and duly compensated to create an environment in which members
of our Armed Forces can serve with pride.


⑥ �Fostering the defense industry into a national strategic industry
The Ministry of National Defense will provide active support for the improvement of the
global competitiveness of the Republic of Korea’s defense industry so that it will not only lead
the way for the development of a strong, technology-intensive armed forces, but also propel
the growth of the national economy. To help strengthen the technological competitiveness of
the defense industry, the ministry will create a progressive and ambitious R&D environment,
while also establishing mechanisms and processes to support defense exports. A positive
feedback loop between efforts to build cutting-edge forces and defense exports will help this
industry emerge as a new strategic industry that contribute to the nation’s defense capabilities,
at the same time as driving the sustainable growth of its economy.


-----

-----

**Chapter**
# 3

**Establish an All-around Defense**
**Posture and Expand Response**
**Capabilities**

**Section 1. Maintaining a Robust Military Readiness �**

Posture

**Section 2. Acquiring ROK 3K Defense Capabilities**

**Section 3. Reinforcing the Capabilities to Respond to**

Comprehensive Security Threats

**Section 4. Establishing a United Defense Posture**

composed of Civil–Government–Military–
Police–Fire Department

**Section 5. Education and Training Focused on Combat**

Missions and Reinforcing Esprit de Corps

**Section** **6. Military Assurance for Establishing Peace**

on the Korean Peninsula


di f E h Mili


-----

**Section**


###### Maintaining a Robust Military Readiness Posture

Based on the steadfast ROK-U.S. Alliance, the ROK Armed Forces are maintaining a robust
combined defense posture that is capable of responding to local provocations as well as allout war from North Korea. The ROK Armed Forces have already established surveillance
and early warning posture as well as military readiness posture to counter North Korea
local provocation and is developing a crisis management system to effectively respond
to provocations. ROK Armed Forces are bolstering their wartime operational capabilities
by continuously developing the combined ROK-U.S. OPLAN and strengthening combined
exercise and training.

**1. Military Organization and Forces**


**Organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff** The Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) assists the

Minister of National Defense with respect to

operational command authority and, on order from the Minister, conducts joint and combined
operations by operationally commanding and supervising combat-ready operational units in
each service[1)]; commanding and supervising joint units[2)]. In addition, other duties of the JCS
include civil-government-military-police-fire department integrated defense operations and
tasks associated with martial law.

The JCS was initially set up as a non-permanent organization within the MND[3)] until it

was officially established in 1963 under its current name. It is composed of Chairman, ViceChairman, five offices, and five chief directorates. Chart 3-1 below shows the organizational
structure of the JCS.

**[Figure 3-1] Key Organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff**


**1)**
The Chairman of the JCS is
invested with the authority to
command the combat operation
units of each service (Combined
Manual 0 Basic Military
Doctrines, August 2022).

**2)**
Formation of units to carry out
joint operations

**3)**

-  Combined Chiefs of Staff

Council in 1948.

-  Joint Chiefs of Staff Council in

1954.

-  Combined Chiefs of Staff

Bureau in 1961.


|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Chairman Combat Readiness Inspection Offcie Vice-Chairman|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||||||
|||||ff Judge e|Office of Public Affairs||||
|ectorate of Chief Dire||ctorate of||Chief Dire|ctorate of Chief Dire||ctorate of|Chief Direc|


Intelligence


Office of the Staff Judge Office of Analysis and

Office of Public Affairs
Advocate Experimentation


Chief Directorate of

Operations


Chief Directorate of

Strategic Planning


Chief Directorate of

Military Support


Chief Directorate of

CWMD


The ROK Armed Forces plan to establish the Strategic Command to respond to North

Korea’s advancing nuclear and missile threats. On January 2023, the JCS reorganized the
CWMD Center into the Chief Directorate of CWMD, which will be utilized to create a
Strategic Command optimized for ROK’s strategic environment.


-----

The JCS is reinforcing the theater operational command system across the full spectrum

of battle space, including space and cyber domain, and its operational execution capabilities
based on the concept of joint operations. Furthermore, the ROK Armed Forces will
strengthen the ROK-led warfighting capabilities by systematically developing formations
and military capabilities that are optimized to achieve joint effects in future battlefields.


**Army** The ROK Army consists of the Army Headquarters, two Operations

Commands, Capital Defense Command, Special Warfare Command, Army

Aviation Command, Strategic Missile Command, Mobilization Forces Command, and other
support units. Chart 3-2 below shows the key organizations and assets of the ROK Army.



**[Figure 3-2] Key Organizations and Assets of the ROK Army**



**Army Headquarters**

Ground Second

Capital Defense Special Warfare Army Aviation Strategic Missile

Operations Operations

Command Command Command Command Forces Command

Command Command

Personnel Logistics Training and
Command Command Doctrine Command

Corps (7)


ROK Armed Forces
promotional
video

Army promotional
video


Approx. 365,000 Approx. 2,200


**Armored vehicles**

Approx. 3,100


**Field**

**artillery/MLRS**

Approx. 5,900


**Guided weapons**

Approx. 60


**Personnel**

Approx. 365,000


**Helicopters**
Approx. 620



-  Tanks, armored vehicles, and field artillery/MLRS include Marine Corps assets

-  Aviation Operations Command→ Aviation Command[4)] (02.12.2021), Missile Command → Strategic Missile Command[5)] (01.04.2022)

Ground Operations Command integrates all operational elements within its area of

operations to conduct diverse ground operations. The Second Operations Command’s
mission is to maintain stability and war sustainability of the joint rear area through civilgovernment-military-police-fire department integrated defense operations. The Capital
Defense Command protects key facilities and urban infrastructure of Seoul to ensure that the
city maintains its functions as the capital.

The Special Warfare Command is responsible for special operations in wartime and also

carries out peacetime support operations, while the Army Aviation Command is in charge
of aviation operations. Strategic Missile Command performs strategic and operational target
strike missions. Mobilization Forces Command ensures the combat readiness of the Army’s
mobilization divisions and mobilization support groups. Other commands are responsible for
personnel and logistics support as well as education and training.

While efficiently utilizing its existing forces to the fullest extent, the ROK Army is

restructuring its units to ensure that they can conduct operations based on rapid decisions
in order to realize the concept of future joint operations, and is steadily acquiring maneuver


**4)**
Renamed as the Army Aviation
Operations Command to ensure
uniformity in the names of
units that perform operations
in specific fields, such as the
Naval Submarine Command.

**5)**
The Army Missile Command,
which previously performed
limited missions, was
reorganized into a unit that
performs strategic and
operational missions in order to
strengthen strategic deterrence
and response capabilities.
Following termination of the
Revised Missile Guideline,
which placed restrictions on the
range and payload of ballistic
missiles, the Command was
transformed to suit its elevated
status and role.


-----

and strike capabilities, such as K2 battle tanks, Korean utility helicopters (KUH), and multiple
launch rocket system (MLRS). In particular, the Army will develop the troop and force structure
in connection with Army TIGER 4.0 (Army Transformative Innovation of Ground Forces
Enhanced by Industry 4.0 Technology) based on MUM-T combat systems, drone-bot combat
systems utilizing ISR, attack, and EW drones[6)], and integration of the warrior platform.


**Navy** Navy consists of the Navy Headquarters, ROK Fleet (COMROKFLT), Marine

Corps Headquarters, Northwest Islands Defense Command, and other support

units. Chart 3-3 below shows the key organizations and assets of the ROK Navy.

**[Figure 3-3] Key Organizations and Assets of the ROK Navy**

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|


**Navy**

**Headquarters**

COMROKFLT Marine Corps Headquarters/ Logistics Command Training and

Northwest Islands Defense Command, Doctrine Command

Submarine Force Naval Aviation Divisions (2),
Fleet Commands (3)

Command Command brigades (2)


**Surface** **Amphibious** **Mine warfare** **Auxiliary**

**Personnel**

Approx. 70,000

**Surface**

**combatants**

Approx. 90

**Amphibious**

**vessels**

Approx. 10

**Mine warfare**

**vessels**

Approx. 10

**Auxiliary**

**vessels**

Approx. 20

**Submarines**

Approx. 10


-  Includes around 29,000 troops of the Marine Crops.

-  Air Wing → Naval Aviation Command (15.07.2022)


Navy promotional
video

Marine Corps
promotional video

**6)**
A new concept of combat
system that performs optimal
operations by integrating an
AI-based C4I system linked in
real time with all the sensors
of each of the systems that
perform ISR, attack, and
support functions. It is one of
the MUM-T combat systems
used in aerial and ground
combat.

**7)**
Operations aimed at securing
and maintaining maritime
control and destroying or
neutralizing the enemy’s
surface forces using surface
combatants, submarines, and
aircraft.

**8)**
Operations to destroy or
neutralize the enemy’s
submarines in order to defend
freedom of navigation in the
maritime zone.

**9)**
Operations aimed at
interdicting or neutralizing the
enemy’s naval forces with the
use of mines, or denying the
enemy’s use of mines


COMROKFLT has command authority over naval operations as a whole and orchestrates

anti-surface[7)], anti-submarine[8)], mine and countermine[9)], and amphibious operations. Fleet
Commands defend their assigned areas by deploying surface combatants such as destroyers,
frigates, patrol vessels, and patrol killer mediums (PKMs). Submarine Command executes
submarine operations, while the Naval Aviation Command performs maritime aviation
operations using its aviation assets. Marine Corps Headquarters executes amphibious
operations and defense operations in its assigned areas and strategic islands, and also operates
a Quick Maneuver Force. Northwest Islands Defense Command is responsible for security
and defense of the northwest islands. Other commands are responsible for providing logistics
support as well as education and training programs.

Navy operates multidimensional forces-composed of next-generation submarines,

destroyers, frigates and patrol killer mediums, Aegis destroyers, maritime patrol aircraft, and
helicopters-in an integrated manner to rapidly and effectively respond to various types of
surface, sub-surface, and airborne threats. Marine Corps will further develop its capability to
carry out a diverse range of missions including multidimensional and high-speed amphibious
operations, multi-purpose rapid response operations, and the defense of strategic islands.


-----

**Air Force** Air Force consists of Air Force Headquarters, Air Force Operations

Command, and other operational and support units. Chart 3-4 below shows

the key organizations and assets of the ROK Air Force.



**[Figure 3-4] Key Organizations and Assets of the ROK Air Force**


Air Combat Command

|Col1|Air Force Headquarters|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Air F Operations|orce Training and Logistics Command Command Doctrine Command|||
|||||


Reconnaissance Command


Air Defense

Missile Command


Air Defense

Control Command


**Personnel**

Approx. 65,000

**Fighter aircraft**

Approx. 410

**Transport aircraft**

Approx. 50

**ISR & C2 aircraft**

Approx. 50

**Training aircraft**

Approx. 190

**Helicopters**

Approx. 40

**Cheongung/**

**Patriot**

Approx. 150


-  Air Defense Artillery Command → Air Defense Missile Command[10)] (01.04.2022)

Air Force Operations Command controls overall air operations and conducts counter
air (CA) operations[11)], air interdiction (AI) operations[12)], and close air support (CAS)
operations[13)], as well as operations to effectively counter nuclear, missile, and long-range
artillery threats. Air Combat Command executes assigned combat missions under the control
of the Air Force Operations Command and ensures that all combat mission aircraft exercise
their full combat power. Air Mobility and Reconnaissance Command is responsible for air
mobility and aerial refueling, surveillance and reconnaissance, early warning and air control,
special missions, and search-and-rescue (SAR) missions, and ensures that the air mobility
forces exert their combat power. Air Defense Missile Command carries out complex,
wide-area, and multi-layered missile defense and regional air defense missions through the
strategic and operational surveillance of air threats, while Air Defense Control Command
is responsible for air control, aerial surveillance, aircraft identification, and air operation
support within the Korean peninsula theater. Air Force aims to achieve overwhelming air
superiority by continuing to acquire highly advanced fighter jets, expand its air surveillance
and reconnaissance capabilities by introducing Medium-Altitude Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
(MUAV), and deploy complex, wide-area, and multi-layered missile defense systems.


Air Force promotional
video

**10)**
The MDC was renamed to suit
its upgraded status and role
in projecting greater power
by introducing advanced
weapons systems, such as the
recent additional deployment
of early warning radars for
ballistic missiles following its
reorganization into a Korean
missile defense operation unit
that defends the country's
entire airspace from enemy air
threats in multiple layers at
different altitudes via multiple
interceptor systems.

**11)**
Operations aimed at
neutralizing or destroying the
enemy’s aerospace forces and
anti-air systems to secure air
superiority (CA: Counter Air).

**12)**
Operations aimed at preventing
an enemy from increasing
or reinforcing its forces,
and at restricting its forces’
mobility before their military
capabilities can be used, by
stopping, disrupting, delaying,
or destroying them (AI: Air
Interdiction).

**13)**
Operations to support the
attack, counterattacks, or
defense operations
of friendly ground forces by
targeting enemy forces in
close proximity (CAS: Close Air
Support).


**United States Forces Korea** The United States Forces Korea (USFK) consists of the

**and Augmentees** U.S. Eighth Army, U.S. Seventh Air Force (Air Forces

Korea), U.S. Naval Forces Korea, U.S. Marine Corps

Forces Korea, Special Operations Command Korea, and U.S. Space Forces Korea. The
USFK commander concurrently serves as the commander of the UN Command and the
commander of the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command. Chart 3-5 below shows the key
organizations and assets of the USFK.

The U.S. Augmentation Forces that can be deployed to the Korean Peninsula during crisis

to support the defense of the ROK consist of 690,000 troops, 160 vessels, and 2,000 aircraft


-----

**[Figure 3-5] Key Organizations and Assets of the USFK**

|antry 501st|Military|Col3|1st S|ignal 19|
|---|---|---|---|---|


**USFK**

U.S. Eighth U.S. Seventh Air U.S. Naval U.S. Marine Corps Special Operations U.S. Space

Army Force Forces Korea Forces Korea Command Korea Forces Korea

(Air Forces Korea)

2nd Infantry 501st Military 35th Air Defense 65th Medical 1st Signal 19th 8th Fighter Wing 51st Fighter Wing

Division Intelligence Artillery Brigade Brigade Brigade Expeditionary

Brigade Sustainment

Command


**Personnel** **Combat aircraft** **Helicopters** **Armored vehicles** **MLRS** **Patriots**

Approx. 28,500 Approx. 90 Approx. 40 Approx. 280 Approx. 10/40 Approx. 60

**Combat aircraft**

Approx. 90

**Helicopters**

Approx. 40

**Field artillery/**

**MLRS**

Approx. 10/40

**Personnel**

Approx. 28,500

**Patriots**

Approx. 60


from the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps. Depending on how a crisis develops,
these forces can be deployed incrementally according to two different modes, the Flexible
Deterrence Option (FDO)[14)] and the Time Phased Force Deployment Data (TPFDD),[15) ]

pursuant to Article 2 of the Mutual Defense Treaty between the ROK and the U.S. When
a crisis occurs on the Korean Peninsula, the FDO, which aims to deter war and mitigate
the crisis, is executed to deploy the designated forces. Should the war begin, combat and
support units will be reinforced in accordance with the TPFDD to ensure the execution
of the ROK-U.S. combined OPLAN, and war materials will be provided through Army
Prepositioned Stocks (APS).[16)]

To maintain the steadfast combined defense posture to defend the Republic of Korea, the

ROK Armed Forces will engage in close consultation with the U.S. on developing plans for
the deployment of the U.S. Augmentation Forces.

**2. Maintaining Readiness Posture against Local Provocations** **14)A series of political, economic,**

diplomatic, and military options
that are part of the CFC Crisis

**Establishing Surveillance** Based on close coordination between the ROK and the Action Standard Operating

**and Early Warning Posture** U.S., the ROK Armed Forces are maintaining a constant Procedures that have to be promptly executed to deter war.

combined intelligence surveillance posture and warning

**15)**

dissemination system to deter and respond to complex security threats. Furthermore, in Force deployment list and data
addition to the ROK-U.S. combined intelligence assets, the ROK Armed Forces collect and of the U.S. augmentation forces

for execution of the ROK–U.S.

analyze intelligence gathered from relevant agencies at home and abroad, then leverages combined OPLAN.
them for operational uses. ROK Armed Forces are also striving to bolster indigenous

**16)**

surveillance capabilities by acquiring assets such as military reconnaissance satellite, Equipment and materials stored

and managed in advance in

microsatellite system, and mid altitude ISR UAVs. a conflict area or in nearby

areas to enable the U.S. Army
to quickly deploy and carry

**Improving AI-based Alert Systems** Although the ROK Armed Forces have carried out missions when entering

a conflict area as soon as the

out monitoring operations and installed fencing need arises.


-----

at GOPs (General Outposts), coastlines and riverbanks to prepare against enemy infiltration,
defection from North Korea and unauthorized crossing of the MDL to enter into North
Korea occurred in 2004 and 2005. In response, the 5th Army Division conducted a pilot test
of the scientific monitoring system from 2006 to 2009, and as its effectiveness in improving
the monitoring capability and reducing the number of security personnel was confirmed, the
system was installed across all GOPs by 2016.

Thereafter, the ROK Armed Forces carried out a pilot project to install cameras equipped

with the latest technology and AI image analysis technology in order to increase the
efficiency of monitoring operation, by replacing surveillance and detection equipment that
reached the end of its life cycle and relieving the workload of monitoring personnel caused
by frequent false alarms. Once the results of the pilot project have been confirmed, all GOPs
will be replaced with an AI-based boundary system by 2026. Moreover, a demonstration
project for an AI convergence coastline monitoring system that integrates and processes
surveillance system data has been implemented in cooperation with the Ministry of Science
and ICT since 2020 to strengthen monitoring operation capabilities in coastal areas, and
there are plans to introduce the system to all coastal surveillance forces by 2026. In the
future, the ROK Armed Forces will continue to improve AI-based surveillance and vigilance
operational capabilities in conjunction with the latest advances in science and technology.


**Establishing Readiness Posture against Local** Since the signing of the Armistice

**Provocations in Land, Air, and Sea** Agreement in 1953, North Korea has

carried out provocations in land, air

and sea in violation of the Armistice Agreement and the Non-Aggression Treaty between
the ROK and North Korea and recently perpetrated armed provocations in violation of the
Comprehensive Military Agreement. As such, the ROK Armed Forces are maintaining a
robust military readiness posture on the basis of close coordination between the ROK and the
U.S. in order to deter North Korea’s provocations and provide prompt and stern response in
case of provocations.

Furthermore, the ROK Armed Forces maintain surveillance and an immediate response

posture that covers the entire Korean peninsula so as to firmly defend the ROK territory
including its land, waters, and airspace over the East Sea, West Sea, and South Sea, including
the northwest islands, Marado, Ulleungdo, and Dokdo.

In particular, the Northern Limit Line (NLL) is a de-facto boundary that the ROK Armed

Forces have firmly preserved to date. The ROK Armed Forces will continue to firmly uphold
the principle of compliance with the NLL and resolutely respond to any provocation against
it. Moreover, the ROK Armed Forces remain strongly committed and are maintaining
a readiness posture to safeguard Dokdo, a ROK sovereign territory in terms of history,
geography and international law. To respond effectively to the changing operational
environment, the ROK Armed Forces will optimize their surveillance, decision-making, and
strike systems in land, sea, and air and continue to strengthen its critical capabilities.


-----

**Maintaining Readiness Posture against** The ROK Armed Forces have been rein
**Other Types of Provocations** forcing the integrated civil-government
military-police-fire department defense

posture in preparation for terrorist and cyber-attacks against key national infrastructures and
public facilities in the capital and rear areas.

To complete the posture for executing integrated defense operations led by the heads of

local government, a civil-government-military-police-fire department information sharing
system has been built and is now being operated. The ROK Armed Forces are reinforcing
the posture of integrated readiness by developing operational plans and response manuals for
each type of provocation, as well as conducting integrated defense trainings and exercises,
such as the Ulchi Exercise as well as Hwarang and Chungmu Training.

To swiftly respond to diverse terrorist threats, special units dedicated to counter-terrorism

operations against diverse types of terror threats have been designated, and the concept of
the integrated operation of anti-terrorism operation forces centered around regional military
commanders has been developed. In addition, the ROK Armed Forces have increased the
number of specialized personnel of the anti-terrorism operation force, strengthened its special
equipment, and reinforced its ability to carry out anti-terrorism operation missions through
regular civil-government-military-police-fire department-integrated training exercises.

Meanwhile, considering the impact of cyber-threats on national security, the ROK Armed

Forces actively participate in the operation of a government-led National Cyber Threat
Intelligence System that can promptly share information on cyber-threats amongst civil,
government, and military bodies, and are strengthening cyber security capabilities by
developing cyber professionals and training on cyber-attack response.


**Developing Crisis Management System** The ROK Armed Forces have firmly esta
blished the ROK Armed Forces-led crisis

management system and the ROK-U.S. combined crisis management system to respond
effectively to various provocations and threats from North Korea. The National Defense
Crisis Management Directive was revised in November 2022 to strengthen coordination with
the Guidance for National Crisis Management and to specify missions to enable the MND
and subordinate forces and agencies to respond systematically during a crisis. At the same
time, the ROK Armed Forces continue to improve the crisis management system to respond
firmly to any provocations from North Korea, such as reinforcing the combined crisis
management exercises and developing the ROK-U.S. combined crisis management system.


-----

**[Figure 3-6] Area of Responsibility of the ROK Armed Forces**


Defense of the Northwest Islands

Dokdo Security Operation

Patrol Activities around Marado Island



-  Source: National Geographic Information Institute.


-----

**3. Maintaining Readiness Posture for All-out War**


**Enhancing the Capability to** To improve their ability to carry out wartime

**Execute Wartime Operations** operations, the ROK Armed Forces continue to refine

the ROK-U.S. bilateral OPLAN and validate and

supplement them through annual ROK-U.S. theater-level combined exercises.

At the 53rd ROK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) held in 2021, the ROK

Ministry of National Defense and the U.S. Department of Defense agreed on new Strategic
Planning Guidance (SPG) to develop the OPLAN. The new SPG reflects the various changes
in the strategic environment, since the ROK and the U.S. agreed on the SPG in 2010, such
as changes in the form of North Korea’s threats, structural reform of the ROK Armed Forces
and changes to the future combined command structure with continuation of the Combined
Forces Command. Based on the new SPG, JCS prepared the Strategic Planning Directive
(SPD), which was approved the ROK and the U.S. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
in March 2022. The ROK and the U.S. military authorities are developing a combined
operational plan based on the agreed SPG and SPD to prepare for full-scale war provoked by
North Korea.

Furthermore, the ROK and the U.S. are conducting exercise and FTX to verify the

OPLAN’s effectiveness and improve the service member’s ability to execute combined
operations in wartime. Starting with the combined exercises held in the second half of 2022,
the ROK Armed Forces changed the name of the exercise from Combined Command Post Training
(CCPT) to Ulchi Freedom Shield (UFS), thus inheriting the tradition of the ROK-U.S. Alliance,
restoring a theater-level combined training system, and demonstrating a strong ROK-U.S.
Alliance internally and externally.

In addition, integrated government and military exercises are conducted to improve the

government-wide ability to execute all-out war. Likewise, the ROK Armed Forces are
improving their ability to conduct wartime operations by developing OPLANs as well as
combined exercises and training in preparation for an all-out war, with the aim of achieving a
decisive victory in all domain including ground, sea, air, space, and cyber to end the war with
“minimal damage within the shortest possible time.”


**17)**
Maintenance procedures or the
capability to perform system
maintenance according to need
based on real-time analysis
of conditions of weapon
systems using data obtained
from sensors or measuring
instruments built into weapon
systems and to determine the
optimal maintenance time
by diagnosing and predicting
defects in advance via the
integrated application of data,
processors, technology, and
knowledge-based capabilities.

**18)**
Construction of a digital
maintenance environment
to monitor and control the
maintenance processes for
each system and to share
information by applying
Industry 4.0 technology, such
as the IoT and big data, to
maintenance sites in order
to overcome the limitations
and difficulties of managing
labor-intensive maintenance
processes and maximize
maintenance efficiency.

**19)**
A system designed to detect
abnormal/early signs of
equipment malfunctions and
defects in real time in order to
ensure rapid recovery support
and conducts preventive
inspections of ships and remote
ground forces (radar bases
and anti-aircraft batteries)
and quickly provide technical
information via information and
communication networks.

**20)**
A system whereby long-term
contracts are signed with
logistics support companies to
ensure stable utilization rates
of major military supplies. The
respective service presents
performance measurement
indicators such as the target
utilization rate, while the
contractors provide part or
all of the military support
requirement and are paid
according to their performance.


**Reinforcing War Sustainability** The term “war sustainability” refers to the nation’s

ability to wage war and achieve the objectives of

a war, and to the continuous maintenance of the nation’s potential and military operational
capability at the required level and time. The ROK Armed Forces acquire and maintain the
necessary capacity to conduct a war in terms of equipment, ammunition, fuel, and military
forces based on wartime requirements and current capabilities.

In the field of equipment, core maintenance capabilities and environments are being

improved through Condition Based Maintenance Plus (CBM+),[17)] which applies the core
technologies of Industry 4.0, smart factory,[18)] and remote maintenance support systems[19)] to
guarantee high equipment utilization rate.

Furthermore, the ROK Armed Forces implement economic and effective military support

by applying Performance Based Logistics (PBL)[20)] support utilizing RAM-C (Reliability,


-----

Availability, Maintainability, Cost.[21)]

With regards to ammunition, the ROK Armed Forces establish and implement policies

related to storage management, performance maintenance, and explosives disposal support in
order to strengthen independent ammunition support capabilities in preparation for wartime
OPCON transition.

For POL, the ROK Armed Forces have secured sufficient supplies for wartime through

stockpiling, the amassing of defense reserves, and industrial mobilization in collaboration
with the relevant ministries. In particular, considering the increase in ground operations as
well as maritime and air joint operations, fuel for the operational mobility of equipment,
including ships and aircraft, has been secured and supplied promptly to ensure that there are
no restrictions on operations.

On transportation, the ROK Armed Forces have established and implemented various

policies to expand war and peacetime transportation support capabilities, such as
standardizing cargoes, securing high-mobility and multi-functional medium-size transport
vehicles, implementing a real-time location tracking system for transportation assets, and
integrated use of civil, government, and military means of transport, in order to build an
integrated transportation support system.

For personnel, the ROK Armed Forces have established and implemented various policies,

along with position-specific personnel acquisition and supplementation plans covering
military, civilian and technical personnel, as well as workers, in order to secure and support
troops promptly and efficiently and thereby guarantee current and future operations and
maintain the optimum combat capability.

Regarding medical services, the ROK Armed Forces have introduced additional mobile

medical deployment facilities to the medical corps in each division in order to provide full
medical support to wartime operations forces. Moreover, new paramedics are deployed
mainly to combat companies, and additional MEDEVAC helicopters and ambulances are
gradually introduced to quickly treat and transport patients.

For mobilization, the effectiveness of the wartime readiness plans is validated, and

implementation procedures are mastered through annual training exercises in each region.
Additionally, preparations are made to mobilize planned resources quickly in case of need
through the National Defense Force Mobilization and Development Conference[22)] (force
mobilization), the Defense Mobilization Resource Survey[23)], and the confirmation of
resources subject to focused management[24)] (i.e. material mobilization).

For engineering, the ROK Armed Forces have established and implemented sustainability

assessment measures, such as the application of criteria for evaluating each facility and
understanding recovery status, to demonstrate the sustainability of national infrastructures
(institutions, power, transportation, airports, harbors, water reservoirs, underground
communal zones, etc.) that have a direct impact on military operations and the wartime
emergency recovery objectives (facilities subject to restoration by the Corps of Engineers,
command facilities, port mooring facilities, airfields, POW camps, emergency runways, etc.).

In the future, the ROK Armed Forces will reestablish the definition of war sustainability

and its individual elements, which are currently limited to the existing military domain, by
expanding them to the fields of politics, economy, society, and diplomacy, and will play


**21)**
An engineering analysis
technique that provides an
alternative to minimizing life
cycle costs while meeting RAM
goals.

**22)**
A meeting in which each
service and the Military
Manpower Administration
participate to develop a system
related to the requirements
and designations for troop
mobilization.

**23)**
A survey of the production
capacity and human resource
management of designated
companies is held around
May of each year to identify
the status of personnel and
materials required for the
defense sector in the event of
an emergency.

**24)**
Personnel, materials,
and businesses that are
required and designated for
mobilization by organizations,
such as military units or local
governments, during wartime
are called “resources subject
to priority management”,
and are subject to regular
joint inspections by the civil,
government, and military
authorities throughout the year.


-----

a leading role in establishing a government-level system for analyzing and evaluating the
national war sustainability based on this expanded definition.

These efforts will contribute to expanding the war sustainment capabilities of the ROK

Armed Forces and to establish optimized defense strategies in line with the ongoing changes
in modern warfare.


**Reinforcing the MND’s Role during Wartime** In December 2021, the Ministry of

National Defense revised the “Defense

War Execution Guidance” and the “Regulations on National Defense Command Operation”
in order to specify the wartime missions and tasks of the JCS, units directly under the
MND and associated agencies. In particular, it has redefined the MND’s role in wartime by
specifying the three major wartime functions (advising the conduct of war, execution of war
and support to the war effort) of the National Defense Command Headquarters, reviewed the
list of decisions to be taken at each stage of war to enable it to carry out its duties effectively
during wartime and familiarize the wartime execution procedures during government and
combined exercises.


-----

**Section**

**2** **Acquiring ROK 3K Defense Capabilities**

The MND is expanding capabilities and posture of the ROK 3K Defense[25)], which consists
of Kill Chain, Korea Air and Missile Defense (KAMD), and Korea Massive Punishment and
Retaliation (KMPR), in order to respond to North Korea’s increasingly advanced nuclear
and missile threats and significantly strengthen the military’s ability and readiness to attack,
defend, and retaliate. By early acquisition of key assets of ROK 3K Defense, ROK Armed
Forces are striving to strengthen response capabilities against North Korea’s nuclear and
missile threat and establish a balanced immediate response posture that include operational
concept and development plan.

**1. Securing Capabilities to Execute the Right of Self-defense with Kill Chain**


Kill Chain is an offensive system that
swiftly and precisely detects key targets Kill Chain
such as nuclear and missile related North Korean nuclear and missile
command, launch and support system and
mobile Transporter Erector Launchers
(TEL), then eliminate them prior to launch,
if there are clear indicators of their intended
use. This system supports realizing the
concept of ‘deterrence by denial[26)]’.

To this end, the ROK military will

Kill Chain

An offensive system that eliminates
North Korean nuclear and missile
weapons before launch

Kill Chain

strengthen its posture to proactively detect
and disrupt before launch and procure ISR
and high-precision strike capabilities that can achieve swift and accurate effects  against
fixed and mobile targets throughout North Korea.


**25)**
Collectively refers to the ROK
Armed Forces’ independent
capabilities and readiness
for deterring and responding
to North Korea’s nuclear
and missile weapons. It
is comprised of Kill Chain
(offense), KAMD (defense) for
deterrence by denial, and KMPR
(punishment and retaliation) for
deterrence by punishment.

**26)**
A concept designed to convince
the enemy that loss and risks
far outweigh the benefits of
aggression by acquiring the
capabilities to deny adversary’s
specific strategic goal, thus
discouraging the enemy from
committing an attack.


**Developing Powerful Military Response** The MND is developing a strong military

**Concept and Plan for Self-Defense** response concept and plan, enabling the

ROK Armed Forces to respond sternly under

right to self-defense, when there are clear signs of nuclear and missile use by North Korea.
In particular, the MND will respond and deter North Korea’s nuclear and missile threats by
refining the operational execution system that swiftly disrupts and destroys their nuclear and
missile systems before and after launch in conjunction with the Alliance’s Comprehensive
Counter-Missile Strategy


**Reinforcing Surveillance and** Ability to early identify signs of nuclear and missile use

**Reconnaissance Capabilities** is paramount to deterring and effectively responding to

North Korea’s growing nuclear and missile threats. As

such, the ROK Armed Forces continue to develop its capabilities to collect imagery, SIGINT


-----

and integrating the information including through expanding surveillance, reconnaissance
as well as space assets in order to gain the capacity to constantly monitor North Korea’s key
targets and nuclear missile threats.

First, the ROK Armed Forces use High-Altitude Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (HUAV) to

obtain imagery on North Korea’s key targets, while it’s pursuing to field military reconnaissance
satellites, Medium-Altitude Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (MUAV), and microsatellite systems to
gain imagery on key targets across North Korea at all times. Furthermore, the military is using
ground, sea and air-based SIGINT gathering platforms to detect indications of imminent North
Korea missile launches, and is carrying out programs to enhance the existing SIGINT gathering
platforms, such as Phase II of the Baekdu System Capability Enhancement Program to further
detect SIGINT on North Korea at an earlier stage.

Second, the ROK Armed Forces are currently developing an all-source imagery

convergence system using advanced technology such as AI to consolidate and analyze
diverse imagery obtained through satellites and aerial reconnaissance assets quickly and
accurately, and to support real-time decision-making by the leadership. Going forward, the
ROK Armed Forces will continue reinforcing intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
(ISR) assets using advanced technology to effectively deter and respond to North Korea’s
increasingly advanced nuclear missile threats.


**Enhancing High-Precision Disruption[27) ]** As North Korea strives to operate TELs and

**and Destruction[28)] Capabilities** diversify its launch platforms to increase

the survivability and concealment of its

missile forces, the ROK Armed Forces are responding by expanding their high-power, highyield, high-precision disruption and destruction capabilities, and by diversifying the strike
platforms across ground, sea, and air and strengthening their strike capabilities against fixed
and mobile targets. Strike capabilities will be strengthened with tactical surface-to-surface
guidance weapons and high-yield missiles against fixed targets, while precision strike
capabilities against mobile targets will be reinforced by bolstering the fleet of fifth-generation
fighter jets and securing long-range air-to-surface missiles. In addition, ROK military will
enhance the ability to detect and strike North Korean submarines by employing maritime
patrol aircraft and submarines.

Following the advances in science and technology, the ROK Armed Forces continue

to acquire weapons systems equipped with new technology. In addition to kinetic strike
capability, the ROK Armed Forces will secure capabilities in the space, cyber, and
electromagnetic spectrum domains in order to disrupt and destroy North Korea’s nuclear and
missile threat before and after launch by strengthening non-kinetic means, such as black-out
bombs, electromagnetic pulse bombs, and EW aircraft.


**27)**
The concept of striking
stationary infrastructures,
such as ground facilities that
support missile operations, in
order to impede North Korea’s
missile activities by reducing
the threats (size, concentration,
timeliness, accuracy, etc.).

**28)**
The concept of directly striking
ballistic missiles and their
TELs to eliminate North Korean
missile activities that pose a
direct threat to the ROK.


-----

**2. Building a Complex, Multi-layered Missile Defense System**

Korea Air and Missile Defense (KAMD)
refers to a complex, multi-layered defense KAMD
system[29)] that can early detect and intercept system that can detect and intercept various types of incoming missiles.
various types of missiles launched at
the ROK and disseminate warnings to
minimize damages. Collectively with Kill
Chain, it realizes the concept of deterrence
by denial. To this end, the ROK Armed
Forces will expand the concept of missile
defense from the existing vertical (altitude)

KAMD

A complex multi-layered defense
system that can detect and intercept
various types of incoming missiles.

Korea Air and Missile Defense (KAMD)

dimension to the horizontal (distance)
dimension to strengthen readiness. From
a capability standpoint, the military will continue to pursue early missile detection, multilayered engagement capabilities and invest in research and development on forward-leaning
weapon system based on cutting edge technology.


**Developing the Concept of Complex,** North Korea is developing irregularly ma
**Multi-layered Defense** neuvering missiles capable of gliding and

aerodynamic flight that exhibit a different flight

trajectory to that of traditional ballistic missiles, and is expected to employ tactics designed to
complicate the ROK missile defense system by firing multiple types of missiles at the same
time. To respond effectively to North Korea’s tactics, the ROK military will increase the
probability of kill by expanding the existing vertical defense concept to the horizontal level and
sequentially intercept missile from a distance. Moreover, it will develop a complex defense
operation system in the metropolitan area in preparation for a mix of missile and long-range
artillery attacks, and improve operational efficiency by effectively integrating (networking)
the indigenously developed ground-based upper- and lower-tier defense radar systems.
Furthermore, the ROK Armed Forces will continue to strengthen their defense capabilities and
readiness to protect the lives and assets of the Korean people and minimize damages that can
occur from nuclear missile explosions and EMP (Electro-Magnetic Pulse) damage.


**Reinforcing Ground, Sea, and Space Based** It is vital to strengthen the ROK military’s

**Early Missile Detection Capabilities** early missile detection capability in order

to respond effectively to North Korea’s

advanced nuclear and missile threat. As such, the ROK Armed Forces are reinforcing early
ballistic missile detection capabilities across the Korean Peninsula by deploying more
ballistic missile early warning radars and Aegis ships with improved detection range and
capability. Furthermore, ROK Armed Forces will promptly detect missiles flying at low
altitudes and initiate the development and fielding of a space based early warning satellite
system capable of identifying launch points to improve the responsiveness of offensive
operations. In parallel with the efforts to acquire all-weather early missile detection


**29)**
“Multi-layered defense” refers
to a defense system that
can engage enemy missiles
at least twice with multiple
defense systems at different
altitudes. The complex multilayered defense system is
a combination of a multilayered defense system against
ballistic missiles and a defense
system against long-range
artillery


-----

capabilities, KTMO-Cell[30)] will be modernized for an improved C2 capability and seamlessly
employ sensors and defense systems.


**Expanding Missile Defense Systems** The ROK Armed Forces are gradually building

a complex, multi-layered defense system to

defend all regions of the Republic of Korea. To this end, the military is bolstering lowertier defense system by upgrading the current PATRIOT system, increasing the inventory of
interceptors and fielding homegrown missile interceptor—Cheongung-II. Furthermore, to
acquire the ability to intercept at terminal
phase, imperative to ensure the safety of
the people, the ROK military will establish
terminal phase upper and lower-tier defense
system by fielding and improving L-SAM.

In particular, the ROK Armed Forces

plan to early deploy Low Altitude Missile
Defense system (LAMD), a ROK indigenous system that is similar to that of the
“Iron Dome”, and build complex, multilayered defense system in order to secure
the ability to respond simultaneously to the
mixed firings of North Korea’s missiles and
MRLs. While strengthening its independent
complex, multi-layered defense capabilities
by establishing a missile defense system
developed with domestic technology.
Under the ROK-U.S. combined defense
system, the ROK military will continue to
develop the alliance’s response capabilities Cheongung-II (Medium-Surface-to-Air Missile)
by strengthening interoperability with the
USFK missile defense system. Furthermore, through continuous technological development,
ROK military plans to promote research and development of technologically advanced
weapons systems such as high-power laser interception weapon systems.

**3. Reinforcing Overwhelming Massive Punishment and Retaliation Capabilities**

Korea Massive Punishment and Retaliation (KMPR) refers to a system designed to punish
and retaliate against the enemy’s war leadership and core facilities using the ROK Armed
Forces’ overwhelming strategic strike capabilities, such as high-yield and high-precision
striking capability, in case North Korea uses nuclear or WMD. This supports implementing
the concept of “deterrence by punishment[31)]”.

To this end, the ROK Armed Forces will utilize their strategic capabilities to strengthen the

deterrent posture against North Korea’s use of nuclear weapons, while increasing its high

**30)**
KTMO-cell (Korea Theater
Missile Operation Cell)
receives and processes
the enemy ballistic missile
trajectory data gathered by the
detection system and executes
engagement control of the
interceptor system.

**31)**
A defense concept based on the
threat of retaliation with the
aim of preventing the adversary
from acting by forcing it to
recognize that the cost will
outweigh the anticipated
benefit.


-----

power, high-precision strike capability
against North Korea’s war leadership and
core facilities.

**Refining Deterrence Concept**

**against North Korea's Nuclear Use**


The ROK Armed Forces are strengthening
and increasing its overwhelming strike
capabilities, to include extending the range
of its missiles, enhancing lethality, and
enabling mass firing to deter North Korea
from using its nuclear capability and,
should deterrence fail, retaliate and punish
them. The ROK military is strengthening
its deterrence posture by exerting strategic
capabilities consisting of high-yield ballistic
missiles and covert infiltration and strike
assets such as the F-35A stealth aircraft and
submarines.

**Expanding Long-range, High-yield,**

**and High-precision Strike Capabilities**


KMPR

Punishment and retaliation system
using ROK overwhelming strategic
strike capabilities when North Korea
uses nuclear, missiles or WMD.


KMPR

F-35A Elephant Walk[32)]


The ROK Armed Forces are demonstrating
robust deterrence by developing powerful
missiles with longer range and greater
accuracy. that provide operational efficiency
and flexibility. An overwhelming strike
capability, including mass firing, is being Hyunmu Surface-to-Surface Ballistic Missile
pursued with plans to acquire land, air and
sea-based high-yield missiles capable of striking all regions of North Korea. Furthermore,
the military will enhance its destructive capacity in order to enable the destruction of tunnels
and buildings, and continue to secure precision strike capabilities against key targets.


**Reinforcing Special Warfare and** It is essential to reinforce infiltration capabilities

**Covert Infiltration Capabilities** with guaranteed survivability and to enhance state
of-the-art forces in order to execute the mission

of eliminating the North Korean war leadership in case of North Korea’s use of nuclear
weapons. To this end, the ROK Armed Forces will improve the performance of the transport
aircraft used in Special Forces operations (C-130H) to enable rapid infiltration into contested
areas, and field Special Operations Heavy-Lift Helicopters.


**32)**
Training in which large number
of military aircraft line up on the
flight line in dense formation
at short intervals to practice
maximum sortie generation


-----

Furthermore, ROK military will continue to expand the all-weather infiltration and strike

capabilities of special warfare units by reinforcing special mission brigade capabilities to
secure robust special operation capabilities.

**4. Creation of Strategic Command for Deterrence and Response to North Korea’s**

**Nuclear and Missile Threats**


**Integrated Operation of Strategic Capabilities** The MND plans to establish the

Strategic Command in order to respond

effectively to North Korea’s increasingly advanced nuclear and missile threats and lead the
development of the related forces. Strategic Command will deter North Korea’s nuclear and
missile threats and lead systematic development of the related capabilities by integrating its
high-precision, high-yield strike capabilities and multi-domain capabilities encompassing
space, cyber, and the electromagnetic spectrum. To this end, it will gradually implement and
operate missile and cyber forces as well as space and electromagnetic spectrum forces, and
other forces required for strategic deterrence and response in specified events.


**Promoting Phased Establishment** The MND aims to gradually establish the Strategic

Command based on jointness. In Phase 1, JCS’s

CWMD Center has been enlarged into the Chief Directorate of CWMD as of January 2023.
In Phase 2, Strategic Command will be activated after drafting its OPLAN, establishing
command and control infrastructure and evaluating and verifying its operational capabilities.
After its stand up, Strategic Command will continue to evolve to reflect the ongoing threats
and changes in the strategic landscape of North Korea and the capabilities of the ROK
Armed Forces.


-----

**Section**

**3** **Reinforcing the Capabilities to Respond to**

###### Comprehensive Security Threats

To protect the life and safety of their citizens, the ROK Armed Forces are building a
comprehensive system for responding to the comprehensive security threats including
cyber-attacks, terrorism, disasters, and chemical, biological and radiological attacks, which
are beyond the scope of conventional security threats. Defense cyber-security capabilities
are being strengthened by establishing defense cyber security policies and plans for the
foundation of the response system that consider the increasingly intelligent and advanced
nature of cyber threats and the rapid development of cyber technology. To prevent acts of
terrorism and respond quickly and effectively against terrorist threats, the ROK Armed Forces
are continuously developing their capability to carry out counter-terrorism operations by
reinforcing the organization, personnel, equipment, and supplies of the counter-terrorism
operation units. They are also developing a government-wide readiness and strengthening
cooperation with the U.S. and the international community in a bid to strengthen their capacity
to respond to chemical, biological and radiological threats and national disasters.

**1. Development of the Capability against Cyber Threats**


**Development of the National Defense Cyber Policy** In October 2019, the MND publi
**and Mission Execution System** shed the “National Defense

Cyber Security Policy” to set the

cyber security vision and goals and proposed medium-to-long term development goals and
plans. The National Defense Cyber Security Policy sets goals of creating, protecting and
maintaining cyberspace with accurate, safe, and effective measures, securing our activities in
cyberspace, and countering that of the enemy. It also contains plans for developing a defense
cybersecurity mission execution system, professionalizing and nurturing professional cyber
security personnel, improving the capability to respond to cyber-attacks, and strengthening
international cooperation in defense cybersecurity.

In February 2019, the Armed Forces Cyber Command was reorganized into the Cyber

Operations Command and designated as a joint force to strengthen the cyber operations
posture, and the Cyber Protection Center of each military branch was reorganized into
the Cyber Operation Center and reinforced with manpower suitable for executing cyber
operations.

In 2021, the Cyber Operation Command was reorganized to play a leading role in various

fields such as operations, planning, research and development, project management, as well
as education and training as the highest echelon in cyber operations, based on an evaluation
of their performance so far and identification of challenges to be overcome.

Going forward, the ROK Armed Forces will continue specializing and refining the defense

cyber security mission execution systems and cyber security personnel, while further
developing the cyber warfare mission execution system.


-----

**Development of Cyber Experts** The field of cyber operations is an area in which

**and Education/Training Programs** operational capability is greatly influenced by the

expertise of the personnel, when compared to other

theaters of war. The MND is developing a comprehensive personnel management system
that links acquisition, education/training, positioning, and promotion to enhance the expertise
of cyber personnel.

First, to secure the professional capabilities of cyber workforce whose main tasks include

establishing cyber policy and doctrine, conducting R&D on countermeasure technologies,
and detecting cyber threats, cyber-professional positions have been designated each year
since 2019 in order to recruit cyber professionals with guaranteed priority. Meanwhile, the
“National Defense Personnel Management Directive” was revised in 2022, to establish the
criteria for selecting and categorizing cyber professionals.

Furthermore, in line with the addition of “Cyber” specialty to the military occupational

specialty system in November 2019 and the “Cyber Positions” to the positions list in March
2020, the ROK Armed Forces are organizing and developing an education and training
program and providing specialized training courses that match the type of cyber operation
and job competencies of the trainees. Each military branch conducts basic cyber education
on preventive activities through means such as education in schools, and the Defense
Counterintelligence Command conducts fundamental cybersecurity education across the all
military branches. The Cyber Operations Command provides specialized cyber education
consisting of educational courses of each field and level of services, while the top-level
training for elite cyber talents is outsourced to external agencies. An advanced military course
was created at the ROK Army Information and Communication School in 2020 to cultivate
the expertise of cyber officers.

In particular, a new system was established in 2022 to nurture information security experts,

including the creation of an education and evaluation course run by the military that enables
the participants to acquire a national certificate for information security engineer.

In 2021, a virtual cyber warfare environment was set up as a defense cyber training field

in order to conduct realistic offensive and defensive training and evaluation, and the pilot
training was successfully carried out. Actual offensive and defensive cyber combat training
has been provided since 2022.

Furthermore, in November 2022, the White Hat Contest, a hacking defense competition

and conference, was held to raise awareness of the importance of national cyber security and
strengthen the nation’s cyber security capabilities by identifying personnel with outstanding
skills. The competition was held based on actual cyber-attack cases, thus contributing to
expanding the participants’ experience and strengthening their cyber capabilities. Total of
653 people from 302 teams participated in the contest, making it the largest hacking defense
competition in Korea.

For 2023, the MND plans to establish a comprehensive development plan for cyber defense

personnel to train elite cyber personnel, review previous education and training systems, and
develop practical education and training programs using the defense cyber training field to
enable the personnel to demonstrate their capabilities in various cyber operations.


-----

**Expanding and Advancing Cyber** The ROK Armed Forces are expanding their cyber

**Warfare Capabilities** capability to respond effectively to ever-changing

cyber threats and continuously improving it into an

integrated, automated, and intelligent force.

The Military has also established basic protection systems required for each protection

target including networks, servers, PCs, software, data, weapon systems, drones, and
digital devices, and operates advanced cryptographic systems to strictly protect crucial
military information. In 2018, it established the Incident Response & Intelligence System,
which collects, analyses, and distributes cybersecurity information gathered from variety
of sources, followed in 2019 by the Cyber Information Management System-Enterprise
Vulnerability Management, which comprehensively manages actions to be taken for the
identified vulnerabilities, and the Military Enterprise Security Management System, which
integrates monitored information from each military branches and analyzes it using big data
technology. In 2020, it advanced the Military Virus Prevention System and implemented the
Network Cyber Threat Indications Analysis System.

In 2021, the ROK Armed Forces developed the Cyber Command and Control(C2) System

to synthesize and visualize diverse information necessary for cyber operations to enable
commanders to make decisions quickly and control the situation, and also developed the
Education and Training System to support simulated cyber training under various cyber
crisis scenarios. They also aim to expand the scope of integrated cyber security monitoring
by establishing a real-time threat detection system for the smart fighter wing IoT (Internet of
Things) environment in 2022.

In the future, in line with the rapidly changing cyber environment, the ROK Armed Forces

will continue to research operational concepts required for the cyber warfare environment
of the future and the technical elements necessary for conducting cyber operations, and will
further strengthen their cyber security with the expedited securing of future cyber warfare
response capabilities through R&D investment and timely execution of its follow-up force
deployment projects.


**Strengthening International** Hostilities in cyberspace, where the whole world is

**Cyber Security Cooperation** connected, are transnational threats that no single state

can resolve by itself, which makes trust and cooperation

between the states essential in order to respond to and resolve them in an effective manner.

The ROK Armed Forces are strengthening international cooperation in the field of cyber

security through various bilateral and multilateral consultation channels, and are particularly
proactive in exchanges with the United States. Since 2014, the ROK MND and the U.S.
DOD have been running the ROK-U.S. Cyber Cooperation Working Group (CCWG),
sharing cyber threat information and discussing ways to cooperate and exchange in terms
of technology, personnel, and organizations. At the 7th ROK-U.S. CCWG meeting held in
May 2022, the two countries agreed to expand and strengthen their cooperation throughout
the entire cyber field, including policy, operations, training, and education. Consequently, in
August 2022, the Korea Cyber Operations Command and the U.S. Cyber Command signed
an MOU for close cooperation in cyber operations and exchanges of cyber threat information


-----

along with education & training in cyber operations.

Furthermore, the ROK is expanding its participation in international cyber training, including

the very first participation in Cyber Flag 23-1, a cyber military exercise hosted by the U.S.
Cyber Command in October 2022.

In addition, signing of the Korea-Poland Cyber Cooperation Agreement in 2020 has laid

the foundation for bilateral cooperation, while the Korea-Colombia Cyber Security Workshop
held in 2021 provided both parties with an opportunity to share defense cyber policies and
strategies.

Efforts are also being made to promote

multilateral cooperation. First, the MND
has been operating the Cyber Working
Group (CWG) within the Seoul Defense
Dialogue (SDD), an annual multilateral
security consultation body held annually at
the vice minister level. Each year, around
twenty to thirty countries participate in the
CWG to share information on the status
of cyber threats, introduce their respective Special Session on Cyber Security as part of the 2022 Seoul

Defense Dialogue (September 2022)

cybersecurity policies and systems, and
engage in the active exchanges.

While the meetings were held online in the form of a video conference from 2020 to 2021

due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the September 2022 meeting was held offline in the largest
scale up to this point, involving 180 government officials and private experts from 45 countries.

Since 2018, the ROK has participated in the Experts’ Working Group on Cyber Security held

at the ASEAN Defense Ministers Meeting (ADMM-Plus), which invites ten ASEAN countries
and eight other countries, including Korea and the United States to share cyber defense policies
and conduct realistic training to strengthen their crisis management capabilities in the event of
a cyber threat.

In particular, the ROK is leading

the development of cybersecurity and
international collaboration in the Asia-Pacific
region by co-chairing the Experts’ Working
Group on Cyber Security with Malaysia for
four years from 2021 to 2024.

At the 9th Experts’ Working Group on

Cyber Security meeting held in November
2022, the first cyber international training
program in a joint response with the member ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Group on Cyber Security (2022)
states to counter cyber threats including
hacking, was successfully held remotely.

The ROK Armed Forces are also participating in foreign cybersecurity agencies’ cyber
attack response training programs to acquire advanced technologies and expand the basis for
cooperation. The ROK Cyber Operation Command and each branch of the Armed Forces


-----

participated in the International Cyber
Training (CYBERNET) hosted by the
Dutch Defense Cyber Command for the
first time, winning the Runner-up Prize
in 2021 and the Championship in 2022,
proving that the ROK Armed Forces boast
world-class cyber operation capabilities.

In April 2022, the ROK Armed Forces

participated for the first time in Locked ROK Armed Forces Representatives at CYBERNET 2022
Shields, a multinational civil-government- (May 2022)
military cyber training presided by NATO.
In November of the same year, ROK Forces were invited to and observed the Cyber
Coalition, the world’s largest cyber training conducted for military purposes, as part of its
efforts to pursue international cyber cooperation.

**2. Establishing a Response System to Prevent and Counter Domestic and Overseas**

**Terrorism**


**Development of Counter-Terrorism** The ROK Armed Forces are complementing their

**Policies, Schemes, and Systems** anti-terrorism preparation plans and manuals to

respond to the growing threat of terrorism in an

effective manner. The 2021 revision of the Counter-Terrorism Preparedness Plan (2021)
designated additional anti-terrorism operation units and adjusted the areas of responsibility
for each unit in order to enable rapid initial action and response to potential simultaneous
terrorist acts across the country. The ROK Military also improved the counter-terrorism
response system by supplementing the “Working Manual for a Military Response to
Terrorism Crises” in order to establish new criteria for promptly determining and responding
to suspected acts of terrorism.

Furthermore, there are plans to revise the Ministry of National Defense Directive on

Counter-terrorism Activities to establish a system for objectively evaluating the antiterrorism preparedness of both anti-terrorism operation units and anti-chemical, biological
and radiological terrorism operation units.


**Reinforcement of Anti-Terrorism** The ROK Armed Forces laid the foundations for

**Operation Capability** nationwide rapid deployment and response against

terrorist attack by designating additional counter
terrorism units to each metropolitan cities and provinces. Previously, counter-terrorism units
were concentrated in the Greater Seoul Metropolitan Area and western parts of the country.

The Roadmap for the Comprehensive Development of Counter-Terrorism Equipment and

Supplies is supplemented annually to ensure that aging equipment and materials are replaced
or reinforced on a continuous basis in order to guarantee the conditions required for antiterrorism operation units to carry out their missions.


-----

Furthermore, the counter-terrorism units regularly conduct comprehensive exercises with

related organizations such as the National Counter Terrorism Center, National Police Agency,
Korea Coast Guard and National Fire Agency, and operate joint civil, government, military,
police and fire department drills at the local level in conjunction with the Hwarang Training
of each municipality. Efforts are also being made to strengthen the ability to carry out antiterrorism operations by conducting additional air deployment training, maritime anti-piracy
training, and port anti-terrorism training in 2022.


**Establishment of Comprehensive** As shown by recent overseas cases, terror
**Countermeasures against Drone Terrorism** ism is an effective means for achieving

political and military objectives, and drones

are now being widely utilized as a new means to conduct terror. In particular, as seen in cases
such as the drone attacks against the UAE’s International Airport and petroleum facilities and
on Saudi Arabia’s petroleum facilities, as well as the unauthorized drone flights over the ROK
Hanbit and Gori Nuclear Power Plants, terrorist acts involving the use of drones against major
national facilities have emerged as a real threat in Korea and abroad.

Accordingly, the ROK government is establishing a comprehensive, government-wide

plan to respond to drone terrorism led by the National Counter Terrorism Center. The ROK
Armed Forces are providing their anti-aircraft detection assets to support the protection of
major national infrastructures from the threat of drone terrorism, and conduct R&D aimed at
securing anti-drone capabilities including anti-drone laser weapons system, jointly with the
Agency for Defense Development. In addition, the Integrated Defense Guidelines and the
Working Manual for a Military Response to Terrorism Crises were supplemented in 2021 to
improve the response procedures against drone terrorism threats and are now in being applied.


**Development of Domestic and Foreign** The threat of domestic and foreign terrorism

**Counter-Terrorism Cooperation Systems** is increasing as acts of indirect support for

terrorism, such as the financing of terrorist

groups by extremists, have occurred domestically, while anti-Asian sentiment has spread
abroad since the outbreak of COVID-19, exposing overseas citizens to racially-motivated
hate crimes.

To prepare against such threats, the ROK Armed Forces are maintaining a system to share

information with the relevant agencies, such as the National Counter Terrorism Center,
National Intelligence Service, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and National Police Agency,
as well as strengthening cooperation with civil, government, military, police and fire
departments to enable integrated operations.

Having signed International Terrorism Information Sharing Agreements with the major

allied countries, the Armed Forces are also sharing anti-terrorism information with other
nations to properly respond to the international terrorist threats. In 2022, Korea hosted
a Working Group meeting on the prevention of terrorism with the UN Global Office of
Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), and made efforts to strengthen international cooperation and
collaboration against terrorism by resuming joint counter-terrorism exercises with Indonesia,
which had been suspended due to the spread of COVID-19.


-----

**3. Reinforcement of the ROK’s Capability to Respond to CBR Threats**


**Developing the CBR Response System** The ROK Armed Forces seek countermeasures

to respond to non-traditional security threats

including North Korea’s CBR threats, along with other CBR-related terrorist activities,
accidents, and infections. As the ROK and the U.S. have built a close combined defense
system, they use combined intelligence assets to monitor North Korea’s CBR trends
continuously and maintain a state of military readiness in order to detect early indication
of an attack and neutralize it in case of contingency. Moreover, CBR and medical units are
organized to establish CBR surveillance, reconnaissance, decontamination, and treatment
systems, and protection capabilities are being improved by securing protective equipment
and supplies, such as gas masks, antidotes, and therapeutics, and by building CBR facilities.
In particular, the ROK Armed Forces are deploying new CBR equipment, such as K5 gas
masks and the CBR Reconnaissance Vehicle-II, and applying cutting-edge technology to
reinforce their CBR protection and detection/identification capabilities.

Meanwhile, the ROK Armed Forces are operating a special task force against CBR terror

attacks and a rapid CBR response team to respond quickly to CBR incidents and terrorist
activities, while continuously developing response systems in cooperation with the CBRN
Defense Command, JCS, ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command, Operations Command
and other relevant organizations. Moreover, the ROK Armed Forces maintain a close
cooperative system with the relevant agencies to prepare for CBR threats, CBR incidents,
terrorism, and outbreaks of infectious diseases, while establishing a joint government-wide
response strategy. In particular, in situations such as the COVID-19 pandemic, outbreaks
of African Swine Fever (ASF), and hazardous chemical spills, the ROK Armed Forces
will deploy the available military assets including CBR units in the field to protect life and
property of its citizen and support expedited recovery from the damage. In November 2022,
the CBRN Defense Command established the CBRN Special Mission Group to respond
systematically to various types of CBR terror attacks and incidents. In October 2020, the
CBRN Defense Research Institute was accredited as the agency responsible for handling
clinical and environmental samples on behalf of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), making it possible to provide internationally credible
information via rapid and precise analysis in the event of a chemical weapons attack on the
Korean Peninsula.

To improve the government-wide

capability to respond to CBR attacks,
the ROK Armed Forces conduct annual
integrated civil-government-military-police
and fire department training in connection
with the National Comprehensive AntiTerrorism Exercise and the Disaster Response Safety Korea Training. Furthermore,
to enhance the nation’s combined response
capabilities, they actively participate in Support for Response to COVID-19


-----

the bioterrorism crisis response exercises organized by the Korea Disease Control and
Prevention Agency and the National Joint Exercise for Radiation Disaster Prevention
organized by the Nuclear Safety and Security Commission.


**Strengthening International Cooperation** Since 1997, the ROK MND and the U.S.

DoD have been holding director general
level annual consultative Counter Proliferation Working Group (CPWG) whose objective
is to prevent the spread of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and develop joint response
capabilities. In 2017, the CPWG was renamed as the “ROK-U.S. Countering Weapons of
Mass Destruction Committee”
(CWMDC), and its policy
consultation functions are
bring gradually strengthened.
To address these threats and
enhance the ROK Armed
Forces’ response capabilities,
the ROK-U.S. CWMDC held in CWMDC Meeting (July 2022)
July 2022 assessed North Korea’s
WMD threat and agreed to strengthen cooperation by reinforcing the development of education
and training programs, expand ROK-U.S. combined training, and increasing cooperation in area
such as joint research on chemical and biological weapons disposal technology.

In 2017, both the ROK and the U.S. expanded the scope of the ROK-U.S. Biological Defense

Exercise - initiated in 2011 with the purpose of improving the joint response capability to
biological threats - to include the CBR domain, and renamed it the “ROK-U.S. CBRN Response
Exercise”. This exercise, in which both the ROK and the U.S. government agencies participate,
is held to evaluate the CBR crisis response system to prepare against possible mass damages
to the Korean peninsula, and to discuss the cooperative response system between the relevant
agencies, such as the joint national response plans. Moreover, in September 2022, the MND
held the first CBR cooperation meeting with the NATO ACDC Arms Control, Disarmament
and WMD Nonproliferation Center in order to expand international collaboration on CBR.
Through this meeting, the two organizations
agreed to confirm and continue developing
practical CBR cooperation in various fields
such as education, training, and research.
In November 2022, the MND conducted
the first tabletop exercise involving rapid
cooperation with the OPCW in preparation
against a possible chemical weapons
attack. This training presented a valuable
opportunity to build human networks, ROK-NATO CBRN Cooperation Meeting (September 2022)
master investigation procedures, and seek
technical cooperation, and the two organizations formed a solid consensus on the necessity to
expand the training.


-----

Furthermore, the results of the exercise were presented to all member nations at the

27th General Meeting of the Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) held in
November 2022, thereby contributing to raising the ROK’s status in the field of chemical
weapons prohibition.

Going forward, the ROK Armed Forces will continue strengthening their capability to

respond to non-traditional security threats, including CBR attacks, chemical spills, and largescale infectious diseases, while thoroughly maintaining the military readiness posture against
North Korea’s CBR threats.

**4. Reinforcing Disaster Response Capabilities**


**Development of the Disaster** In March 2021, the MND thoroughly revised the

**Management System** Defense Disaster Management Directive by reflecting the

amendments of the Framework Act on the Management

of Disasters and Safety along with the reorganization of the roles and duties for emergency rescue
support agencies. In January 2021, the Common Manual for Defense Disaster Response was
created to respond effectively to a disaster in the early stage. This manual established the basis for
the operation of the National Defense Rapid Support Team and laid the foundations for providing
rapid and combined support for large-scale disasters by integrating those disaster response units that
operate similar missions and transferring the command authority from each service to the JCS.

In addition, the MND established the “Improvement Plan for the Ministry of National Defense

Manual to Respond to Disasters in Entirety” in September 2021, setting the mid- to longterm direction for its improvement. The plan presented instructions on the preparation of the
manual for the MND, each service Headquarters, and the Marine Corps Command as well as
their subordinate units, and established an overall management and operation system, including
annual revision and regular inspection of the manual. In August 2022, the MND launched the
Crisis Management Manual Operation Council, composed of three civilian experts and sixteen
personnel relevant to the manual, in order to gain momentum for improvement by deriving and
discussing development plans for the manuals.

The MND has been developing the national defense-combined disaster management

information system since 2021 and plans to complete it by 2023. Upon its completion, it will be
possible to share information closely with the relevant agencies including the Ministry of Interior
and Safety, the Korea Meteorological Administration, the Korea Forest Service, and the National
Fire Agency in the event of a national disaster, thus enabling timely decision-making and a rapid
response at the disaster site.

The demand for responsibility and expertise is growing, as the government officials responsible

for disaster and safety management must complete specialized training under the Framework Act
on the Management of Disasters and Safety within six months to one year of their appointment.
As a result, the ROK Military designated the Army Integrated Logistics School and the Air
Force Aviation Safety Agency as specialized educational institutions to conduct systematic and
substantial disaster training, with 158 people trained in 2021 and 283 in 2022.

The ROK Armed Forces participate in the Disaster Response Safety Korea Training,


-----

which is conducted every year across
the government. In 2021 and 2022, the
military’s disaster response capabilities were
strengthened and their cooperation system
with the relevant organizations was assessed
by conducting Disaster Response Safety
Korea Training based on a scenario of fires
as well as structural failures and collapses
in densely populated multi-use facilities. 2022 Disaster Response Safety Korea Training (January 2022)

Moreover, each unit of ROK Armed For
ces conducts regular disaster preparedness drills, taking into consideration the season and the
type of disaster. There are variety of types of disasters and accidents, including: forest fires
caused by climate change, fires and collapse of densely populated multi-use facilities, food
poisoning, radioactive disasters, infectious diseases, and terrorist activities. Even during the
COVID-19 pandemic, the ROK Armed Forces conducted drills to respond to the following:
multi-use facility fires and typhoons in 2020; COVID-19, forest fires, large-scale fires at
densely populated multi-use facilities, large-scale water pollution, hazardous chemical spills,
and aircraft accidents in 2021; and earthquakes, fires, and forest fires in 2022. In particular,
in 2022, field training was resumed to verify the disaster response capabilities by conducting
realistic training. The ROK Armed Forces are fulfilling their mission of protecting the life and
property of its citizens with the highest priority by maintaining a constant state of readiness
against not only military threats but also disasters, which are non-traditional security threats.


**Supporting National Disaster Recovery** When a national disaster occurs, the ROK

Armed Forces strive to protect the life and

property of its citizens by committing itself to the frontline of disaster. After the situation is
resolved, the ROK military continues its best effort to restore damages at the disaster site so
that its citizens may quickly return to their daily lives.

In the Republic of Korea, significant number of lives and properties are lost by natural

disasters such as heavy rain, typhoons, and heavy snow[33)]. The ROK Armed Forces deployed
75,126 service members and 4,645 pieces of equipment, such as dump trucks and excavators,
to support the recovery of areas affected by torrential rain and Typhoon Hinnamnor in August
and September 2022 respectively. In Pohang, where sudden damages occurred by Typhoon
Hinnamnor, the Marine Corps sent Korean Amphibious Assault Vehicle (KAAV) and
Inflatable Boat Small (IBS) to rescue twenty-seven people, while deep-sea divers rescued
two people trapped in the underground parking lot of an apartment complex.

In addition, the ROK Armed Forces actively supported the government-wide response to

COVID-19 by mobilizing all available human and material resources. From January 2020 to
the end of 2022, a combined total of about 1.7 million medical and administrative personnel
were deployed. Military hospitals such as the Armed Forces Capital Hospital became
hospitals dedicated to infectious disease while the Korea Defense Language Institute was
converted into a residential treatment center, playing a pivotal role in protecting the lives and
property of its citizens.


Support for the
recovery of damages
caused by Typhoon
Hinnamnor

**33)**
Annual average loss of lives
(typhoon, heavy rain): 18.3
people/ Average annual
property damages: KRW 441.9
billion (2020 Annual Report on
Disasters, 2019-2020, Ministry
of the Interior and Safety,
December 23, 2021)


-----

**[Figure 3-7] Status of Disaster Response and Damage Recovery Support in the Past Five Years**

|Year|Support Details|No. of People|No. of Equipment (Units)|
|---|---|---|---|
|2018|Total|2,699,121|171,486|
||Subtotal|44,560|9,832|
||Forest fires|8,970|186|
||Drought, torrential rain, and typhoon damages|16,125|8,168|
||Search and rescue of missing people|1,165|219|
||Control of foot-and-mouth disease and avian influenza (AI)|10,452|1,246|
||Heavy snow and earthquake damage|7,848|13|
|2019|Subtotal|204,988|11,484|
||Wildfires and fires|22,242|526|
||Heatwave/drought, typhoon/heavy rain, and heavy snowfall|64,745|2,319|
||Search and rescue of missing people|4,208|748 (military watch dog 15)|
||Preventing the spread of AI/African Swine Fever (ASF)|108,985|7,490|
||Railroad and freight union strike-related support|3,900|-|
||Marine pollution, Incheon red water, etc.|908|401|
|2020|Subtotal|674,452|48,405|
||Wildfires and fires|1,984|89|
||Heatwave/drought, typhoon/heavy rain, and heavy snowfall|128,699|17,063|
||Search and rescue of missing people|5,604|778|
||Preventing the spread of AI/ASF|60,161|6,108|
||Chemical accidents, busy farming season, etc.|478,004|24,367|
|2021|Subtotal|1,111,888|61,108|
||Wildfires and fires|1,031|122|
||Heatwave/drought, typhoon/heavy rain, and heavy snowfall|5,672|131|
||Search and rescue of missing people|5,932|367|
||Preventing the spread of AI/ASF|201,685|17,047|
||COVID-19|869,120|43,439|
||Chemical accidents, busy farming season, etc.|28,448|2|
|2022|Subtotal|663,233|40,657|
||Wildfires and fires|23,265|1,139|
||Heatwave/drought, typhoon/heavy rain, and heavy snowfall|74,469|4,639|
||Search and rescue of missing people|2,856|343|
||Preventing the spread of AI/ASF|153,431|28,430|
||COVID-19|405,961|5,897|
||Chemical accidents, busy farming season, etc.|2,833|-|
||Collective strike by the Freight Transport Union|418|209|


-----

Damage Recovery and Rescue Activities after Typhoon Hinnamnor (September 2022)


Extinction of Forest Fires in the Gangwon/

East Sea Region (March 2022)


Furthermore, the ROK Armed Forces provided military disinfection vehicles and carried

out search and capture of animals to prevent the spread of infectious diseases such as
ASF and AI among livestock, and contributed to the rescue operation of buried miners by
dispatching experts and equipment from the drilling battalion during a mining accident in
Bonghwa-gun, Gyeongbuk in October 2022.

Over the past five years, the ROK Armed Forces mobilized 2.69 million service members

and 171,000 pieces of equipment for disaster relief and damage recovery activities. Table 3-7
above shows the types of support provided in detail. The ROK Armed Forces will continue
to take the lead role in protecting the lives and property of its citizens by putting every effort
required to support disaster-stricken places where a helping hand is desperately needed.


**Emergency Relief and** Due to rapid climate change and the increasing scale

**Disaster Response Abroad** of disasters, it is becoming difficult to recover from

disasters with only the efforts of countries affected by

such disasters. As such, the need for a joint response from the international community is
becoming increasingly urgent from a humanitarian perspective. Humanitarian aid and disaster
relief for overseas disasters are provided by the Public-Private Joint Council Overseas
Emergency Relief, which is composed of representatives from government ministries such
as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of National Defense, and the Ministry of
Economy and Finance, as well as those from civil organizations, in accordance with the
Overseas Emergency Relief Act. The MND supports the transportation of emergency relief,
rescue personnel, supplies and provisions; and starting from May 2010, the MND formed the
military transport support system to dispatch overseas emergency relief teams using military
cargo aircraft within 48 hours of an emergency to fifteen Asian countries.

To overcome the global health crisis caused by COVID-19, the ROK Air Force’s C-130

crew members completed their mission of transporting 400,000 KF94 protective masks to
Timor-Leste where there are no direct commercial flights from Korea, and to the Philippines,
in July 2020, despite the challenging conditions including the possibility of becoming
infected with COVID-19.

At the 16th ASEAN Defense Ministers Meeting (ADMM Plus) held in 2021, the

participants shared the military activities and roles of the ADMM-Plus member nations
working together for disaster relief, and solidified their cooperation.


-----

Furthermore, as a result of discussions during the 7th Regional Consultative Group annual

meeting, the ROK Armed Forces cooperated with the local private sector and the military
on matters necessary to ensure that the overseas emergency relief mission of their military
cargo aircraft could be carried out smoothly, including the unloading of cargo, the residence
for aircrew and the securing of means of transportation. The ROK is expected to play a more
significant role in joint disaster response in the Asia-Pacific region through these efforts.

In June 2021, the MND established the Overseas Incident Response Manual for Korean

Military Aircraft in preparation for potential accidents while ROK military cargo aircraft are
carrying out emergency relief missions for overseas disasters. The main contents include
the rapid dissemination of information of the situation, establish and operate a cooperation/
response system, procedures for strengthening initial response and recovery systems in the
event of an incident, the tasks and roles of the relevant agencies as well as response procedures
and measures.

Moreover, the MND published the “Guide Book for Civil-Military Cooperation in Overseas

Emergency Relief Missions” to help mission personnel understand both the disaster response
system of the affected country and the global military cooperation system when supporting
military cargo aircraft in the event of an overseas disaster, and encouraged crew members to
use it during their mission. The guidebook consists of an overview of disaster response and
the disaster response systems for each of the five disaster-vulnerable countries in the AsiaPacific region, including Bangladesh and
Indonesia. The MND plans to publish a
Korean version in line with the biennial
revision of the book.

Due to the impact of COVID-19, the

training for the Korea Disaster Relief
Team (KDRT) was conducted in a form of
online domestic joint simulated exercise in
October 2021. In 2022, however, the MND
provided a tanker aircraft to support an in- Simulation Training for Overseas Emergency Relief in 2022
person lodging training event, strengthening (December 2022)
the emergency relief team’s capability to
respond to disasters overseas.

**5. Government-wide COVID-19 Response and Support**


**Medical Support** The MND provided proactive support in the form of human and

medical resources to the government-wide effort to control the

spread of COVID-19 and treat patients. Starting with the Armed Forces Capital Hospital in
January 2020, a number of military hospitals including the Armed Forces Goyang, Daegu,
Daejeon, and Pocheon Hospitals were designated as hospitals dedicated to infectious disease,
providing up to 597 beds, while the Korea Defense Language Institute was designated as a
residential treatment center in December 2020, providing 285 wards. As a result, the military


-----

hospitals and residential treatment center
treated 13,000 COVID patients as of 2022,
contributing to resolving the national
shortage of beds.

Furthermore, since January 2020, a com
bined total of about160,000 military doctors
and nurses were dispatched to hospitals
dedicated to infectious diseases, residential
treatment centers and screening clinics. Maritime Inoculation Support Using Navy Ships in Island Areas
In March 2022, 181 newly commissioned
military doctors were dispatched to public health hospitals, tertiary hospitals, and emergency
response control center at the National Medical Center, which suffered shortage of medical
personnel, to provide dedicated support to treat COVID-19 patients.

Military medical personnel have also been deployed to nationwide vaccination centers

and nursing hospitals to quickly and safely complete the COVID-19 vaccination programs,
which began in February 2021. In June 2021, a navy vessel was deployed to inoculate 680
island residents who lacked access to medical facilities due to their remote locations. This
was the first time in the world that a navy vessel was used to support a vaccination drive;
such actions by the navy was selected as the “best practice for government innovation” by
the MND and cited as an excellent case of innovation by the Korea Disease Control and
Prevention Agency in 2021.


**Administrative Support** The ROK government implemented comprehensive measures

to prevent and control COVID-19 represented by the 3T

strategy (i.e. [Test] Test/Confirmation, [Trace] Investigation/Tracking, and [Treat] Quarantine/
Treatment), social distancing, and nationwide vaccination drive. To effectively pursuit
such endeavor, there was a dire requirement for administrative personnel to implement
the necessary measures. As a result, the MND began deploying eighty-one administrative
support personnel at eight airports and thirteen ports’ quarantine stations across the country
in January 2020; and, by 2022, a combined total of around 1.19 million Armed Forces
personnel had been deployed at airport/port quarantine stations, screening clinics, temporary
screening stations, residential treatment centers, vaccination centers, epidemiological
investigation and quarantine/disinfection
activities in a drive to provide on-scene
support across the country. In particular,
as the number of confirmed cases spiked
due to the spread of the Omicron variant
in January 2022, the epidemic control
authorities requested an additional 1,000
personnel for 17 local governments across
the country, and the MND duly provided
the much-needed personnel to overcome

Public Service Staff Guiding a Citizen at a Temporary Screening

the national crisis. Inspection Center


-----

**Vaccine Transportation** Recognizing the need for a nationwide vaccination drive

**and Vigilance Support** to quickly to overcome the COVID-19 crisis and return

to normal daily life, the ROK government established

a government-wide vaccine transportation organization, while the MND organized the
preparation team for establishing Vaccine Transportation Support Headquarters in January
2021, as well as establishing a vaccine transportation support plan. Based on the plan,
the COVID-19 Vaccine Transportation Center was officially established in February
2021 under the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency’s COVID-19 Vaccination
Response Group. The MND played a leading role in establishing and operating the
Vaccine Transportation Center by appointing a lieutenant-general of the Army to head
the organization as the Director of Vaccine Transportation Center and dispatching MND
personnel to the center to support its effort.

The COVID-19 Vaccine Transportation Center established a ground, air, and sea

transportation model based on vaccine sourcing (overseas purchase or domestic production)
and conducted 9 simulated training to ensure that the vaccines are distributed as planned.
Since February 2021, the Vaccine Transportation Center has safely transported approximately
120 million doses of the vaccine from large-scale warehouses (Icheon, Pyeongtaek, and
Ochang) to 282 vaccination centers and 17,000 contracted medical institutions across the
country; to support this effort, the MND provided around 29,000 vehicles, 77,000 personnel,
as well as military aircraft and vessels. As a result, the total distance traveled by the vaccine
transportation convoy reached approximately 8.6 million kilometers, equivalent to 214 laps
around the globe, which showcase the dedicated effort by the MND to support a safe and
timely vaccination drive throughout the nation.

Moreover, the Vaccine Transportation

Center operated an on-site control room
and conducted frequent checks of vaccine
status to promptly identify and respond
to instances such as vaccine transport
container failures, vaccine production/
storage facility leaks, power loss, and
freezer abnormalities, thereby preventing
the unnecessary disposal of 190,000 doses
of vaccine and contributing to a combined

Air Transportation of Vaccines

saving to the amount of KRW 4.2 billion.


-----

**Section**


###### Establishing a United Defense Posture composed of Civil–Government–Military–Police–Fire Department

The ROK government is building a mutual consultation system to specify the roles and duties
of civil, government, military, police, and fire departments, organize command relationships
led by regional (maritime) military and police chiefs within the jurisdiction and formulation
of forces, when a united defense incident is declared. Furthermore, it has developed an
integrated government-wide response system and united defense operation execution system
by expanding the information-sharing system centered around the united control center of
local governments.


**1. Operation of the United Defense Organizations**


**United Defense Organizations** The ROK government operates a number of integrated

defense organizations including the Central and

Regional United Defense Councils, United Defense Headquarters, and United Defense Support
Headquarters to foster national defense elements and establish a united defense posture. Chart
3-8 below shows the command and cooperation relationship with relevant agencies.

**[Figure 3-8] United Defense Command and Coordination Relationship[34)]**

**President** Guidance

**Central** Operational control


**34)**
Revision of the Guidelines
on Detailed United Defense
Implementation (Article 36),
which designate the Operations
Commander to command
and control united defense
operations by controlling
regional military and naval
commanders within the scope
delegated by the Head of the
United Defense Headquarters
(Nov. 30, 2021).

**35)**
According to Article 4 of
the United Defense Act,
the Central United Defense
Council is chaired by the Prime
Minister, and is composed
of the Cabinet Ministers
such as Minister of Strategy
and Finance, the Minister of
Office for Government Policy
Coordination, Minister of
Patriots and Veterans Affairs,
the Minister of Government
Legislation, the Minister
of Food and Drug Safety,
the Director of National
Intelligence Service, and the
Head of the United Defense
Headquarters (Chairman of the
JCS) and others determined by
presidential decree.


Command

Guidance

Operational control

Cooperation


Central United Defense Council

(Chaired by the Prime Minister)




**Regional**


On declaration of Jindogae One alert/combined defense state and Police Special Forces

|S MND|Col2|MO|IS M l Police Korea Co ncy|
|---|---|---|---|
|United Defense Headquarters (JCS)||Nationa||
|||Age||
|||||
|Operations Command (Operation Commander) ntelligence Regional Military Command||City/Pro||
||ces Command Police A, Division Commander, ommander) Police Stations, Poli|||


**Council support organization** Regional civil/government/military/police/firefighting combined defense system

(Regional United Defense Council and United Defense Support Headquarters)


**Central United Defense Council[35)]** As the highest decision-making body on united

defense under the Prime Minister, the Central

United Defense Council deliberates and votes on united defense policies, the issuance of


-----

guidelines for united defense operations and training, the declaration and cancelation of
united defense incidents, coordination with government ministries and relevant agencies on
matters pertaining united defense as well as deliberating and passing expenses incurred in the
mobilization of national defense elements for united defense operations.


**United Defense Headquarters** As an organization that manages work related to united

defense, the Chairman of the JCS serves as the head

of the United Defense Headquarters and performs such works as the establishment and
coordination of united defense policies, confirmation and supervision of the united defense
readiness posture, comprehensive analysis of united defense operations and establishment of
follow-up measures, establishment of guidelines and plans for united defense operations and
training, and coordination and control of their implementation as well as coordination and
consultation with relevant agencies on matters pertaining united defense. The United Defense
Headquarters shall establish the United Defense Working Committee in order to efficiently
promote cooperation within the Government in relation to united defense and perform other
tasks related to united defense.


**Regional United Defense Councils** Regional United Defense Councils are to be esta
blished in special metropolitan city, metropolitan

cities, provinces (do), cities (si), and counties (gun, gu), and metropolitan and regional
mayors, governors, county and district chiefs shall serve as the council chair. Each council
deliberates and votes on declaration or cancellation of Class II or III incidents, measures
for supporting united defense operations and exercises; designation or cancellation of an
area vulnerable to the enemy’s infiltration or stealth activities, and measures for the efficient
development and operation of national defense elements.


**United Defense Support Headquarters** United Defense Support HQs are to be estab
lished in metropolitan cities, provinces (do),

cities (si), counties (gun, gu), and districts (eup, myeon, dong) to oversee such affairs as
the establishment and implementation of a plan for supporting united defense operations
and exercise, installation and operation of a united defense situation room, development
and support of national defense elements, establishment of the resident reporting system
in vulnerable areas in united defense, provision of support for mobilization work related to
united defense operations, and the implementation of matters deliberated and voted upon by
the Regional United Defense Council.


**2. Development of a United Defense Operation Execution System Centered arounds**

**Heads of Local Governments**

As the security domain expands to include not only military threats but also non-traditional
security threats such as terrorism, infectious diseases, disasters, and safety accidents, the
ROK government is working to develop a united defense operation execution system that


-----

integrates and manages all elements of national defense to protect people’s lives and property
from complex security threats.


**Reinforcing United Defense Capabilities** The United Defense Headquarters evaluates

the nations’ state of military readiness and

the united defense posture for military threats, new terrorist threats based on the use of
drones, infectious diseases such as COVID-19, cyber threats, and non-traditional security
threats such as natural and social disasters, and prepares and implements countermeasures
at the government level in collaboration with government departments and other related
agencies.

Efforts are being made to establish conditions for a timely integrated response by

implementing comprehensive countermeasures to drone terrorism and expanding the nation’s
drone terrorism response capabilities at the government level, as well as establishing and
operating an information-sharing system between national defense elements. In addition, the
new Operational Rules of the United Defense Headquarters, published in December 2021,
aim to develop an efficient and systematic work performance system between the United
Defense Headquarters and government ministries and other related organizations. In the
future, the ROK Armed Forces will continue to strengthen their united defense capabilities by
enhancing civil, government, and military cooperation in contact areas, developing military
and police operation execution systems linked to police reorganization, and reinforcing the
organizations and equipment required for each element of national defense.


**Improving the Performance** To guarantee public safety from the diverse complex

**of United Defense Exercises** security threats that may occur in war and peacetime,

the United Defense Headquarters has divided the

seventeen metropolitan and autonomous cities and provinces nationwide into eleven zones
and conducted comprehensive exercises in the rear area (Hwarang Training),[36)]and has
formed an integrated government evaluation team composed of experts in the relevant areas
to diagnose, supplement, and develop the united defense operation system in each zone. As a
result, the nation’s ability to carry out united defense operations has been greatly enhanced primarily by improving the deliberation and decision-making procedures for declaring Class
II or III incidents, operating the United Defense Support Headquarters in a realistic manner,
improving the civil air defense warning system, and developing an integrated response
system for CBR surveillance.

In the future, the ROK Armed Forces will strengthen the civil and air defense warning and

evacuation exercises for residents for practical united defense training, and will also further
consolidate the united defense strategy centered on local government leaders by expanding
the use of evacuation training for members of the pubic who live near facilities where mass
damages are likely to occur, such as chemical and gas facilities.


**36)**
An exercise was conducted in
four zones (Daegu/Gyeongbuk,
Gwangju/Jeonnam, Incheon/
Gyeonggi, and Gyeongnam) in
2021, and again in five zones
(Busan/Ulsan, Gangwon,
Jeonbuk, Chungbuk, and Jeju)
in 2022. Notably, in 2022, the
exercise was expanded to preCOVID-19 state.


-----

**3. Establishment and Expansion of the United Defense Information Sharing System**

The ROK Armed Forces operate the combined defense information sharing system to ensure
a timely integrated on-site response by civil, government, military, police, fire department,
and national defense elements, by sharing in real time the videos of the integrated control
center, which cover the Police 112 service, disaster CCTV, and the local government social
safety net, in the event of enemy infiltrations or provocations, terrorist acts, and disasters.


**Sharing of Information by the Local** The ROK government is operating an inte
**Government's Integrated Control Center** grated control center that can jointly respond

to various emergency situations by integrating

the control functions of CCTVs installed around the country to ensure the safety of residents
and prevent crime. In addition to conducting counter-terrorism and counter-infiltration
operations on a regional basis, the ROK Armed Forces are building a video information
sharing system between the integrated
control centers and relevant regional forces
to share real-time information with local
troops in the event of a disaster situation
and to improve the efficiency of rapid initial
action and united defense operations.

In 2022, 137 integrated control centers,

i.e. one more than the previous year, out of
245 were completed, and 108 centers will
be constructed in connection with the Smart CCTV Integrated Control Center
City platform[37)] in cities and provinces
nationwide in phases from 2023 to 2025.


**37)**
A support system for smart
city safety service realized
through various information
connections such as 112, 119,
and the disaster situation call
system

**38)**
A service that provides
marine traffic information to
ships via a maritime wireless
communication network
based on information and
communication technology in
order to scientifically manage
marine traffic at the Ministry
of Oceans and Fisheries
(implemented on January 30,
2021).

-  It provides real-time

electronic nautical charts,
assistance for preventing
collisions and grounding, safe
route support (navigation),
automatic entry/departure
reports, and emergency
rescue requests.


**Sea Navigation (e-Nav) Information Sharing** The Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries,

the Ministry of National Defense and the

National Intelligence Service have developed an integrated marine safety and security
platform based on the sea navigation (e-Nav) service[38)], which provides maritime
navigational traffic information. This system has improved the tracking and management
of ships (targets) during coast guard operations; and, in the event of a security incident, it
enables coordinated operations by sharing the same common operating picture with relevant
agencies including the Korea Coast Guard. The MND is collaborating with the Ministry of
Oceans and Fisheries and the National Intelligence Service on improving the functions of
the integrated marine safety and security platform and connecting it to the military coastal
monitoring system as well.


-----

**Section**


###### Education and Training Focused on Combat Missions and Reinforcing Esprit de Corps

The ROK Armed Forces are operating a variety of education programs aimed at fostering
competent officers and NCOs as well as creative military experts who can operate in future
warfare and battlefield environments. To achieve the objective of national defense education
and training, namely, “to nurture strong combatants and combat units that can fight and
defeat enemies,” the ROK Armed Forces are developing a scientific school education system
that incorporates new technologies such as AI, innovating practical troop training, instilling
service members with a sound perspective on the country and the enemy, and fostering a
strong military spirit based on education designed to reinforce the esprit de corps.

**1. Establishment of a Scientific Training System**

The ROK Armed Forces are expanding a scientific training system incorporating cuttingedge science and technology to respond to changes in future warfare and overcome current
limitations in education and training, such as the decrease in military manpower resource
and mandatory service period for conscript service members, and increasing civil-military
discord due to urbanization. Notably, regarding the scientific training programs developed in
connection with Defense Innovation 4.0, the main focus is on expanding the introduction of
MILES (Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement System), which enables two-way maneuver
training, building a virtual simulated training system for tactics and skills training and
mastering the use of equipment, establishing a scientific training complex for the collection
and use of data for actual maneuvers and “live fire” training, and establishing an education
and training management system to analyze and manage all training courses through digital
database.


**Advanced Training System** MILES (Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement System)

allows troops to master tactics and skills in an en
vironment similar to a real battlefield through bidirectional engagement. The ROK Armed
Forces first distributed MILES for platoon-level training in 1998, introduced equipment
capable of training at the company level in 2014, and began deploying the new platoon-level
MILES in 2019. The ROK Navy and Air Force will also increase the distribution of the new
platoon-class MILES for base defense training, while MILES for artillery training are being
distributed since 2020. Furthermore, R&D on MILES for armored and mechanized units are
currently in progress.

A virtual simulation training system that allows troops to master equipment functions and

conduct tactical training in a virtual environment has been introduced, centered on simulators
for operation procedures for ships, aircraft, and tanks.

In addition, armored and mechanized units facing limitations on conducting FTX, will

be supplied with additional tactical training equipment, and there are plans to establish a


-----

brigade-level synthetic training environment (STE) platform that can integrate and operate
training systems in a virtual environment.


**Establishing Scientific Training Complexes** The ROK Armed Forces are building scie
ntific training complexes where trainees

can master practical maneuvering and live-fire skills and objectively analyze and evaluate
the training outcomes in an environment similar to battlefield conditions using scientific
equipment and systems.

The construction of scientific training complexes began in 2012 as the need for training

ranges where battalion or smaller echelons could perform live-fire training exercises
involving integrated operation of organizational equipment and supporting firepower became
increasingly apparent. Currently, three corps-level training ranges including the Seungjin
Training Range and two division-level training ranges including the Baekdu Training
Range have been built, and there are plans to establish three additional corps-level and eight
additional division-level training grounds by 2032.

The scientific training complex is equipped with a combat fire control system that can

monitor the training situation and on-target hits from the control room via cameras installed
at critical points, a mission confirmation system that can transmit combat actions and
communication of combatants in real time, and a training observation system that collects
and stores transmitted data and enables phase-by-phase analysis and after action review.


**Establishing a Comprehensive** Although the demand for live-fire gunnery to

**National Defense Training Complex** maintain a firm readiness posture has increased,

and live-fire training complexes that provide

greater operational space and allow the deployment of advanced high-powered weapon
systems are urgently needed, residents’ complaints, such as infringements of their property
rights and hindrances to regional development due to noise, dust, and safety incidents around
the training ranges have also increased. As a result, efforts are being made to establish a
Comprehensive National Defense Training Complex that incorporates advanced technology
and allows joint and combined forces to conduct live fire and maneuver exercises in
connection with the need to create and expand the scientific training environment. To this
end, a study was conducted between 2021-2022 on measures to support the area surrounding
the National Defense Training Complex, and preparations were made to detail the military
requirements on training areas and to
enact a special regulation to support the **Cannon (Biho)/Laser30mm Anti-Aircraft**
surrounding areas. The project to construct **Militech/Military Town** **Convention CenterOO Research Center** **Mortar** **Vulkan** **RayboltK-4 Tanks** **CenterOO**
the National Defense Training Complex **K-55** **Tanks** **Recreation Center**
aims for coexistence with local governments **OO Lab** **Experience Marine Center**
at the core by selecting site with a new
regional open contest process. The creation of a comprehensive National Defense **OO Weapons Test Center** **(Hellfire)Aviation Army** **Drone** **Landing Training Marine Corps Center** **VesselNavy**
Training Complex could guarantee practical **OO Unit** **Recreation Center**

**Cannon (Biho)/Laser30mm Anti-Aircraft**

**Militech/Military Town** **Convention CenterOO Research Center** **Mortar** **Vulkan** **RayboltK-4 Tanks** **CenterOO**

**K-55** **Tanks** **Recreation Center**

**OO Lab** **Experience Marine Center**

**Fighters** **AviationArmy**

**OO Weapons Test Center** **(Hellfire)Aviation Army** **Landing Training Marine Corps Center**

**Drone** **VesselNavy**

**OO Unit** **Recreation Center**

training conditions in response to future Concept map of Comprehensive National Defense Training Complex


-----

changes in the battlefield environment and minimize damages to locals living near the training
range, thereby contributing to mutual prosperity between the military and civil sectors.

**2. Improvement of the School Education System**

In order to build an elite force equipped with military expertise, the MND and each branch
of the Armed Forces are developing the school education system that includes training that
shapes conscripted civilians into service members and refresher training aimed at providing
the specialized knowledge and skills necessary to perform tasks by class, rank, and position,
and cultivating the ability to perform tasks. The ROK Armed Forces are reorienting the
educational methods from lecture-oriented education centered on instructors to self-directed
participatory education, such as discussions and debates, and practical education centered
on the trainees. The curriculum is being developed to consider changes in the defense
environment, such as Industry 4.0, the introduction of cutting-edge weapons systems, the
development of military doctrine, and the increase of civilian employees. Furthermore, the
education environment is being transformed into a smart education system (smart campus,
etc.) that incorporates the latest IT technologies, such as 5G, VR (Virtual Reality), AR
(Augmented Reality), and digital twin,[39)] invigorating online/offline mixed education and
remote education to respond to the increase in demand for non-face-to-face education due
to the COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, efforts are being made to improve the educational
system for military academies in order to foster elite officers and to expand the Reserve Noncommissioned Officer’s Training Corps (RNTC) to acquire and nurture excellent NCOs. The
ROK Armed Forces are also focusing on enhancing the cutting-edge science and technology
education provided on refresher training courses linked to Defense Innovation 4.0, improving
the joint and combined operations training system, and promoting remote education for
national defense. [Chart 3-9] shows the current status of military school education.

**[Figure 3-9] Curriculum Status of Combined Educational Institutes of Each Service**

As December 2021 Unit: Course

|Type|Total|Army|Navy|Air Force|Marine corps|Joint Force|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Training|50|27|8|8|6|1|
|Refresher training|2,455|866|963|475|28|123|


**Improving the Educational System** The MND is strengthening participatory edu
**of the Military Academies** cation, including discussion and presentation

classes led by cadets, and carrying out projects to

create a self-directed learning environment in an attempt to cultivate cadets’ creativity and
problem-solving skills, and is also conducting tailored education/training focusing on the
end users, such as reorganizing the curriculum with the focus on combat missions in order to
reflect field demands. In addition, to foster active academic exchanges with excellent civilian


**39)**
A technology that creates a
twin object that is identical
to the object in the real world
in a virtual space and verifies
it through various simulated
tests.


-----

universities, the Enforcement Decree of
the Act on the Establishment of the Korea
Armed Forces Academy was amended
in August 2022 to provide a basis for
dispatching cadets to civilian universities
for training.

Furthermore, the MND has newly

established a Department of Artificial
Intelligence in academies related to AI and Joint Training for Cadets
big data, expanded the basic liberal arts
courses, and created additional integrated majors to strengthen the cutting-edge science and
technology education, while designating the Korean War History, North Korean Studies,
and Military Strategy as compulsory subjects in order to shape the cadets’ perspective on
the country and the enemy. The MND conducts joint education centered on experience in
the field for 2-3 weeks every year for first- to third-year cadets of the ROK Armed Forces’
academies to enhance their understanding of jointness and joint operations.

First-year cadets receive education designed to deepen their understanding of ground

operations and the Army, including field trips to mechanized army units and the Warrior
Platform experiences. Meanwhile, to improve the understanding of the Navy, second-year
cadets receive opportunities to board training ships and landing ships and visit major islands
(Ulleungdo, Dokdo, Gageocho, and others) as well as countries surrounding the Korean
Peninsula, and are subject to training voyage in which they experience various maritime
exercises and daily life on board naval ships. Third-year cadets receive education designed
to deepen their understanding of the Air Force, including tours of Air Force Wings, flight
environment adaptation training, and flight aptitude training experiences. Since 2019, the
joint education program for the cadets of the military academies has been expanded to
include the Armed Forces Nursing Academy, while separate joint education sessions are
conducted for fourth-year cadets at the Korea Army Academy in Yeong-Cheon.


**Operation of the Reserve Non-commissioned** Pilot operation of the RNTC, which was

**Officer’s Training Corps (RNTC)** launched in 2015 at six junior colleges

to secure and nurture talented NCOs,

showed promising results. The plan for the formal operation and expansion of the RNTC
program was finalized in 2019, and the Navy and Air Force began their official operation
in January 2020, followed by the Army and the Marine Corps in April 2020. The RNTC
program was expanded in 2021, with the selection of 4 additional junior colleges (3 for the
Army and 1 for the Navy); today, there are RNTC programs at 10 junior colleges across the



**[Figure 3-10] Status of Appointment of RNTC**


As of December 2021, Unit: People

|Category|Total|Graduating Class of 1 (2017)|Graduating Class of 2 (2018)|Graduating Class of 3 (2019)|Graduating Class of 4 (2020)|Graduating Class of 5 (2021)|Graduating Class of 6 (2022)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Appointed Non- Commissioned Officers|992|143|173|169|156|170|181|


-----

nation. Each service plans to expand the program gradually by considering the status of noncommissioned officer staffing. Chart 3-10 above shows the current status of appointment of
the Non-commissioned Officer Training Corps.


**Improving the Educational System** As part of Defense Innovation 4.0, the MND is

**for Civilian Employees** upgrading the military civilian education system

as the quotas and roles of military civilians have

been expanded following changes to the unit and force structure of the military. Plans for
the integrated training of new civilian employees and future leadership courses for civilian
employees were specified at a policy meeting held in 2019, while the refresher training for
grade 6 workers and below was reviewed and reinforced with a focus on cultivating the
competency and knowledge required for each rank.

Since 2021, the National Defense University is undergoing a pilot run for integrated

training of new civilian employees, which was conducted by each service up to this point. In
preparation for the increase in the number of civilian employees serving as department heads,
a mid-level course designed to cultivate the skills and leadership of military civilian leaders
was established by selecting competent outstanding talents from employees at grade 4 and 5.


**Establishing the Joint and Combined** The ROK Armed Forces have set up a rank
**Operation Training System** specific education system to train officers as

military specialists equipped with the expertise

required to carry out joint and combined operations in preparation for future warfare and the
transition of wartime operational control. Joint education has been expanded for cadets in the
officer training course, and new basic and introductory courses related to joint education have
been added to the curriculum for officer candidates, including ROTC and OCSs. Meanwhile,
the refresher training course for company grade officers added a course dealing with basic
concepts related to the organization of other services and the conduct of joint and combined
operations. Notably, in 2020, the joint advanced course (short-term, remote) was designed
and piloted to provide specialized joint and combined operation training to more officers,
which was previously only offered to selected officers from among majors and lieutenantcolonels, and based on the pilot results, the short-term and remote courses will be integrated
and provided as mandatory courses from 2023.

Furthermore, the joint and combined policy managers course is available for colonels

who work in policy departments and joint
units. Additionally, the MND is expanding
education to ensure joint and combined
operation capabilities for all officer ranks,
from junior officers to general and flag
officers, such as expanding the course
subjects related to joint and combined
operations in the high-level policy decisionmakers course for officers promoted to the
rank of brigadier-general.

Joint and Combined Policy Manager Course


-----

**Activating Online Defense** The ROK Armed Forces are expanding its online edu
**Education** cation programs in order to minimize personal shortage

at field units caused by call-up, and to provide timely

education to larger number of trainees. Those enrolled is call-up education programs
can prepare for their classes in advance by taking online lectures prior to entering each
educational institution, and can freely choose the courses offered by each educational
institution at a time and place of their choosing. In 2017, the Military-Massive Open Online
Course (M-MOOC)[40)] system was established to allow all service members to complete the
necessary education online at their workplace. Currently, some 41 organizations, including
the Joint Forces Military University, the Korea Armed Forces Nursing Academy, the Defence
Agency for Spiritual & Mental Force Enhancement, and the ROK Army Infantry School,
provide 95 integrated defense-related M-MOOCs. We expect that the need and effectiveness
of online education courses will considerably increase in the near future.


**3. Reinforcing Practical Unit Training**

The ROK Armed Forces are strengthening practical unit training to address the changing
educational and training environments, including changes in the security environment, the
reduction of compulsory service period, ongoing urbanization, and increasing civil-military
conflicts. In particular, the ROK Armed Forces are striving to offer opportunities for practical
training involving real maneuver to many personnel as possible by creating scientific
education and training conditions utilizing cutting-edge Industry 4.0 science and technology,
expanding domestic and international combined training to improve the ability of each
services to perform joint and combined operations, and organizing joint units that integrate
the Army, Navy and Air Force.


**Key Trainings for Army, Navy,** In order to provide practical training centered on the

**Air Force and Marine Corps** battlefield, the ROK Army is strengthening individual

and unit training, expanding scientific education and

training, and conducting various combined exercises.

As part of an effort to strengthen individual combat power, the foundation of the Army’s

combat power as a whole, soldiers’ ability to overcome battlefield situations is cultivated
through physical training focused on
combat missions. Also, the best-performing
300 elite combat soldiers are selected and
rewarded individually and by teams once
a year to create an atmosphere in which
combat experts are appreciated. Also, in
order to implement education and training
based on missions, the proficiency of
each training task is evaluated based on
the Mission-Essential Task List (METL), Combined Scientific Trainings (KCTC)


Army KCTC brigadelevel bilateral training

**40)**
A Web-based (online) course
on military education open to
everyone (open) with no limit
on the number of trainees
(massive).


-----

which is used to select the tasks that a given unit must perform.

Scientific education and training using cutting-edge science and technology are also

being strengthened to overcome various obstacles, such as reduction of compulsory service
periods, extreme weather conditions, and civil complaints.

The training offered by the KCTC (Korea Combat Training Center) was converted in to

a brigade-level bidirectional training to enable more units to participate[41)], and the MILES
system was distributed to more field units, making it possible for them to carry out small unit
bidirectional combat training at garrisons or at arbitrary locations.

Furthermore, the Army’s ability to overcome diverse contingencies is being improved by

enabling firing, piloting, and tactical simulations training in a virtual battlefield environment
using simulators. The combat command capability and integrated combat power
management capability of commanders and staff are also being improved through the Battle
Command Training Program (BCTP) using computer simulation.

The Army is also carrying out a variety of combined exercises such as ROK-U.S. special

operations, irregular warfare, combined arms training, air assault and high-altitude low
opening exercises in order to improve the ability to execute combined operations procedures
and enhance interoperability. In particular, combined small-unit scientific training is carried
out at the Vandal Training Center owned by the U.S. 8th Army as well as combined smallunit training at the National Training Center in continental U.S. The number of combined
KCTC training has also been increased from twice to four times a year. [Chart 3-11] shows
the current status of the Army’s combined training for the past three years.

**[Figure 3-11] Status of ROK Army Combined Training in the Past 3 Years** As of December 2022, Unit: Times

|Type|Total|Within Korea|Col4|Col5|Outside Korea|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Subtotal|ROK-U.S. combined training|Multilateral training|Subtotal|ROK-U.S. combined training|Multilateral training|
|2020|30|29|29|-|1|1|-|
|2021|66|64|64|-|2|2|-|
|2022|66|63|62|1|3|3|-|



The ROK Navy conducts practical cooperative[42)] and combined exercises that reflect the

battlefield environment in each maritime area in the East, West and South Seas, and aims to
improve operational performance by holding ROK-U.S. and multilateral combined exercises.
Moreover, the Navy conducts midshipman cruise annually to develop cadets’ ability to
perform their duties and promote the national interest.

Cooperative and combined exercises involve ground, maritime and air forces, and consist

of exercises suited to various types of operations, such as anti-ship, anti-submarine, and air
defense operations. Typical cooperative and combined exercises include maritime maneuver,
northwest islands defense, joint response against local provocation at the Northern Limit
Line (NLL), joint amphibious landing, and East Sea territory defense. These exercises are
held to confirm, among other things, the performance of precision-guided weapons, and to
maximize operational capabilities through live-fire exercises.


**41)**
8 units in 2021 → 14 units in
2022

**42)**
Two or more units without
a command relationship
cooperating with each other
to achieve a specific common
goal.


-----

In addition to expanding the scope of

ROK-U.S. combined exercises to establish a
combined defense posture and strengthen the
ROK-U.S. Alliance, the ROK is expanding
multilateral combined exercises to promote
humanitarian aid and military cooperation.
The ROK-U.S. combined exercises include
ROK-U.S. maritime opportunity exercises,
combined theater anti-submarine exercises, RIMPAC Exercise
and mine/rescue/special warfare exercises,
all of which aim to improve operational capabilities and enhance interoperability.

Combined multilateral exercises include the Cobra Gold, West Pacific mine countermeasure

training, Rim of the Pacific Exercise (RIMPAC), multilateral rescue training (KOMODO),[43)]
and Search and Rescue Exercise (SAREX) with neighboring countries such as Japan and
Russia. In addition, the combined opportunity training with neighboring countries and partner
nations such as Australia, Canada, and New Zealand is recently being expanded. [Chart 3-12]
shows the status of the Navy’s combined training for the past three years.

**[Figure 3-12] Status of ROK Navy Combined Training in the Past 3 Years** As of December 2022, Unit: Times

|Type|Total|Within Korea|Col4|Col5|Outside Korea|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Subtotal|ROK-U.S. Combined Training|Multilateral training|Subtotal|ROK-U.S. Combined Training|Multilateral training|
|2020|88|75|70|5|13|5|8|
|2021|104|87|78|9|17|10|7|
|2022|116|94|81|13|22|7|15|


Midshipman cruise[44)] is conducted annually for about 100 to 140 days, alternating between

four routes. The cruise enhances the nation’s prestige by making visits to key figures,
providing support for defense industry exports, and organizing consolation activities for
Korean War veterans and overseas Koreans.

The ROK Air Force conducts independent and joint exercises as well as number of

combined exercises both within Korean and abroad of various sizes to establish military
readiness posture and improve its capability to lead air operations.

The Air Force carries out independent trainings such as large-scale air campaign training

(Soaring Eagle), strike package training, air-to-air and air-to-ground live fire exercise as well
as, DCA and ISR training. Air Force also carries out joint training such as joint air defense,
AI, counter-fire, CAS, air seas joint training in the Northwest and large-scale maritime search
and rescue training.

Combined trainings conducted within Korea include the Korea Flying Training to improve

the capability to execute large scale combined air operations, along with combined air
training (Vigilant Storm) combined special operations training (Teak Knife) sand combined
Combat Search And Rescue Training Event (CSAR-TE). Since 2019, two new exercises,


Naval RIMPAC exercise

ROK-U.S. Air Force
Transporter erector
launcher strike
training and combined
attack formation
flight.


**43)**
KOMODO is an island in
the Lesser Sunda Islands of
Indonesia.

**44)**
Ocean sailing training for
fourth-year cadets at the Naval
Academy.


-----

the mid-sized Combined Forces Exercise
(CFE) and the Buddy Wing B Exercise,
a small-scale training exercise involving
ROK and U.S. fighter squadrons, were
established to expand combined training
opportunities.

The ROK Air Force also regularly parti
cipates in overseas combined training
events, such as the multinational combined Humanitarian Aid and Disaster Relief Cooperation Training
theater-level air training (Red Flag-Alaska), (Cope North)
humanitarian aid and disaster relief training
with countries in the Pacific Rim region (Cope North), as well as combined wartime damage
recovery training (Silver Flag) to improve wartime damage recovery capabilities. Since
2018, the ROK Air Force began participating in advanced airborne tactical training in the
United States to improve its ability to perform special operations, such as infiltration and
airdrop tactics. It also participated in Operation Christmas Drop for the first time in 2021.
By participating in such exercise, ROK Air Force seeks to enhance its capability to execute
combined operations, secure interoperability, and promote tactical exchanges with various
countries. Chart 3-13 below shows the status of Air Force combined exercises training for
the past three years.

**[Figure 3-13] Status of ROK Air Force Combined Training for the Past 3 Years**

As of December 2022, Unit: Times

|Type|Total|Within Korea|Col4|Col5|Outside Korea|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Subtotal|ROK-U.S. combined training|Multilateral training|Subtotal|ROK-U.S. combined training|Multilateral training|
|2020|25|20|19|1|5|1|4|
|2021|45|43|43|-|2|-|2|
|2022|56|50|49|1|6|1|5|



In addition, the ROK Air Force conducts scientific training using simulators, Air Combat

Maneuvering Instrumentation (GPS-ACMI), and the Electronic Warfare Training System
(EWTS), when live training is limited. ROK Air Force also aims to improve its space
situational awareness and combined space operations capability by participating in Global
Sentinel, designed to reinforce cooperation on multilateral space management.

The Marine Corps conducts amphibious landing exercises twice a year or more to improve

its ability to execute forcible entry operations and maintain the highest level of operational
readiness posture through Quick Maneuver Force training, joint and combined training, and
tactical training for each echelon.

The Marine Corps conducts Ssangyong and Hoguk training at the brigade level or higher in

order to enhance its ability to execute combined joint forcible entry operations and conducts
Quick Maneuver Force training to improve its ability to perform defensive and stabilization


-----

operations as well as non-military operations in the Northwest Islands. In addition, it carries
out Northwest Islands reinforcement training and field trainings at Ulleungdo and Jeju-do.

For combined trainings, the ROK-U.S. Marine Corps tactical echelon combined exercise

(KMEP: Korea Marine Exercise Program)[45)] is carried out regularly throughout the year to
improve the capabilities of each branch to conduct combined operations. The Corps also
participates in overseas combined exercises such as the Cobra Gold, Khaan Quest, and
Pacific Rim Exercise (RIMPAC). Also, the Marine Corps participated in Talisman Saber
Exercise in Australia and the Kamandag Exercise in the Philippines, and it plans to expand its
multilateral overseas combined training such as its participation of combined arms military
training exercises with the U.S. beginning in 2023. [Chart 3-14] below shows the status of
the Marine Corps’ combined training in the past three years.

The Marine Corps conducts tactical trainings by each echelon to ensure the integrity of

operational execution and its ability to lead and manage independent battlefields. The Marine
Corps also carries out tactical training linked to specialized airborne training, amphibious
assault training, and guerrilla training specific to each unit; reinforces practical combat
training by conducting bidirectional training using high-tech equipment; and conducts regular
amphibious ship loading exercise and amphibious landing operation passage exercises at the
battalion or lower level echelons.

**[Figure 3-14] Status of ROK Marine Corps Combined Training in the Past 3 Years**

As of December 2022, Unit: Times

|Type|Total|Within Korea|Col4|Col5|Outside Korea|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Subtotal|ROK-U.S. combined training|Multilateral training|Subtotal|ROK-U.S. combined training|Multilateral training|
|2020|20|17|17|-|3|-|3|
|2021|18|16|16|-|2|-|2|
|2022|18|14|14|-|4|-|4|


**Joint Exercise and Training** The ROK Armed Forces are strengthening joint exercises and

trainings to improve its ability to perform joint operations in

preparation against the rapidly changing security environment.

The Taegeuk Exercise, a ROK unilateral command post exercise (CPX) in which

battle staff from the operations command or higher echelons participate, uses a computer
simulation model to implement wartime transition procedures, such as declaring an united
defense incident and elevating the defense readiness posture following a local provocation.

The Hoguk Exercise is an annual field maneuvers exercise led by the ROK JCS to cultivate

the ROK Armed Forces’ joint operation capabilities, integrated combat force operation, and
operational support capability. Based on an integrated shaping of the situation, the exercise is
designed to reinforce the jointness of each service and operations commands, and maximize
the response capabilities and force management with all functions integrated.

The Hwarang Exercise is a comprehensive training managed by the United Defense

Headquarters, in which all operational elements of the civil, government, military, police


**45)**
A combined training for the
ROK-U.S. Marine Corps,
conducted in the ROK to
develop combined operational
capability and interoperability
in a systematic manner.


-----

and fire department sectors participate. The exercise is focused on mastering the execution
and support procedures of the united defense operation plans linked to both peacetime and
wartime, reinforcing an united defense posture centered around local government heads, and
raising security awareness and spreading consensus among local residents. In particular, as
proactive responses are required at the united defense level to counter the increasing number
of non-traditional security threats such as natural disasters and terrorist attacks, the principal
aim of the Hwarang Exercise is to inspect the practical response architecture of all national
defense elements and to foster integrated response capabilities.


**Combined Exercise and Training** While maintaining military readiness posture based

on the current combined defense architecture, the

ROK and the U.S. are conducting combined exercises and training with an emphasis on combat
readiness posture and improving combined operation execution as well as operation sustainment
capability in an effort to enhance the warfighting capability of the combined forces.

From the second half of 2022, as a result of the ROK and the U.S. consultation, the allies are

conducting the Freedom Shield (FS) and Ulchi Freedom Shield (UFS) Exercises once each in
the first and second half of the year, which replaced the Combined Command Post Training
(CCPT). In particular, the name change continues the tradition of the ROK-U.S. Alliance
and reestablished the theater-level combined exercise architecture. Also, the UFS Exercise,
from 2022 onwards, will integrate annual military and government exercises, which would
substantially improve the capability to execute all-out war. Also, the FS Exercise creates
computer-simulated battlefield conditions
in order to inspect the combined defense
posture, and enhances proficiency in war
execution procedures by linking it with
FTX.

Meanwhile, since the second half of

2022, the ROK and the U.S. are improving
their combined operation execution
capabilities by focusing on combined FTX,
such as the Combined Counter WMD ROK-U.S. Combined Exercise
training and Buddy Wing in conjunction
with the UFS Exercises. In the first half of 2023, the scale and scope of the combined FTX
will be expanded by elevating the Ssangyong Exercise, from the brigade level and lower of
the past to the division level, expanding the combined KCTC Exercise from the platoon/
company level to the battalion level, and elevating more than twenty training events, such
as the ROK-U.S. Maritime Counter Special Operation Force (MCSOF) Exercise, to the
level equivalent to that of the Foal Eagle Exercise in the past. Furthermore, a large-scale
combined joint fires demonstration will be pursued marking the 70th anniversary of the
ROK-U.S. Alliance and the 75th anniversary of Armed Forces Day.


-----

**4. Training Facilities Conflict Management**


**System Maintenance** With growing calls for protection of basic rights such as

property and environmental rights, and encroachment near

training ranges caused by urbanization causing complaints on training noise and dust as well
as restrictions on development, conflict management with local communities has become
increasingly important.

The MND discussed measures for managing conflicts concerning training areas at a

policy meeting held in April 2019, in order to systematically manage conflicts related to
training complexes and enacted the Directive on Training Facilities Conflict Management
in June 2019. Also, the ministry designated a dedicated desk for each service, and increased
the number of personnel responsible for conflict management (20 civilian employees).
In particular, in the case of the Army, which has the largest number of training ranges, a
dedicated team is organized at the corps level to respond to conflicts related to training
grounds. Moreover, in the case of each service’s key training complexes,[46)] the Conflict
Management Committee works to resolve any conflicts by managing the tasks.

Furthermore, the MND enacted the Military Airfields And Military Firing Range Noise

Prevention And Compensation Act in December 2019 through which the ministry provides
compensation when damages are confirmed by official investigation that noise damage
has occurred around gunnery ranges. Compensations are being made based on a survey
completed in 2021 (Phase 1, 2020 to 2021) on gunnery range noise damage which assessed
the impact of noise on the surrounding communities living near the 49 gunnery ranges.
Additional surveys were completed on 16 shooting ranges in 2022 (Phases 1 and 2, 2021 to
2022). The December 2022 Central Noise Countermeasures Review Committee announced
the noise countermeasure areas.


**46)**
Pocheon Yeongpyeong
Rodriguez Live-fire Complex,
Pohang Suseong Gunnery
Range, Yangpyeong Training
Complex, and Gapyeong
Gunnery Range, Pocheon
Seungjin Nightmare Training
Range, Cheorwon Artillery
Training Range, Paju Mugonri
Training Range, Hwacheon
Artillery Training Range,
Boryeong Daecheon Gunnery
Range, Boryeong Uncheon
Gunnery Range, and Sangju
Nakdong Gunnery Range.

**47)**
The Yeongpyeong Rodriguez
Live-fire Complex Conflict
Management Council
(Chairman: Vice Minister of
National Defense, Members:
Officials from the Ministry
of National Defense, Office
for Government Policy
Coordination, Ministry of Public
Administration and Security,
Gyeonggi Province, Pocheon
City, Citizens Countermeasures
Committee, etc.) held a total
of six meetings in June 2018,
January 2019, July 2019, July
2020, April 2021, and February
2022.

**48)**
Eight out of twenty-eight
projects have been completed,
and seventeen are in progress.
(The initial nineteen projects
continue to be improved and
developed.)

**49)**
The Pohang Suseong Gunnery
Range was found to be the most
optimal location for Apache
helicopter live-fire gunnery
trainings by the 2019 ROK-U.S.
Joint Inspection for National
Training Range.


**Conflict Management** The MND manages training facilities conflicts to

**for USFK Training Facilities** ensure optimal training conditions for the USFK while

minimizing disturbances and damages to the local

residents. In particular, in the case of the Yeongpyeong Live-fire Complex used for livefire gunnery trainings of key U.S. Eighth Army weapons system such as tanks, armored
vehicles, and mortars, live-fires gunnery was temporarily suspended due to a ricochet
accident in 2018. Thanks to safety measures such as installing protective walls to prevent
ricochet accidents as well as the Yeongpyeong Live-fire Complex Conflict Management
Council’s efforts to identify and promote projects for residents and regional development[48)]
in Pocheon City,[47)] it is now possible to conduct live-fire training for tanks, artillery, and
armored vehicles. However, Apache helicopter live-fire gunnery are still restricted.

The U.S. Eighth Army’s Apache helicopter live-fire gunnery were temporarily conducted

at the Pohang Suseong Gunnery Range from 2019 until the beginning of 2020 due to
restrictions on shooting at the Yeongpyeong Live-fire Complex.[49)] However, gunnery at
the Suseong Gunnery Range had to be halted as well due to opposition from local residents
in mid-2020, and since then the MND has been working to mitigate the conflict by taking
various measures, such as measuring the noise and compensating local residents in the


-----

vicinity of training areas in Suseong and Yeongpyeong ranges, along with partial diversion of
shooting trainings to the Seungjin Training Range in Pocheon.

The MND plans to create stable conditions for Apache helicopter live-fire gunnery training

of the ROK and the U.S. Armed Forces by devising a mutually beneficial plan with the
local community, such as building regular communication channels with local communities
near the training areas, pursuing projects to improve the living conditions of residents, and
disperse planned annual shooting exercises to various training ranges.

**5. Strengthening the Esprit de corps**


**Education to Establish** The ROK Armed Forces run systematic spiritual and mental

**Mental Readiness** force education courses with a sound perspective on their

nation, the enemy, and military spirit. In particular, special

education materials designed to foster an accurate perspective on the enemy are distributed
and used intensively since June 2022 to ensure that service members recognize that “the
North Korean regime and the North Korean military, threatening the lives of our citizens
and our national security with nuclear
weapons and missiles, are our enemies.”

The “Basic Textbook on Spiritual and

Mental Force Education” (published
every five years), which is the standard
material used in spiritual and mental
force education for service members,
will be revised and republished in 2023
by dedicated TF management, review Special Education Materials for Establishing Firm Perspective on the
by experts and public hearings. Enemy

The ROK Armed Forces spiritual and

mental force education is categorized into separate courses for new recruits, schools, and units.
The course for new recruits focuses on fostering an elite force armed with robust military spirit,
and spiritual and mental force education is considered on every aspect of training with the aim
of “arming soldiers first with the military spirit and teaching them master combat techniques
second”; the officer and NCO courses in schools focus on presentations, discussions, and
practical training aimed at improving
the skills required as mental strength
instructors; the course for units are given
repetitively on a daily, weekly, and semiannual basis, led by the commander
of each unit. In particular, the weekly
spiritual and mental force education
program and method were reorganized
in November 2022. While maintaining "On That Day, the Military Story," a Video Education Material on
the “Kanggun (Strong Military) Current Affairs and Security


-----

Vitamin”[50)] program centered on basic textbooks, the previous culture-oriented “TV Special
Knowledge IN”[51)] was revamped to “On That Day, the Military Story”[52)] following a format
preferred by Millennials and Gen Z to further strengthen service members’ perspective on
the enemy and the military spirit.

In addition, in order to reflect the voices of service members in the field, findings produced

by military monitoring personnel were reflected in educational materials. Education aimed
at building up the military spirit, such as field trips to historical battle sites and contents
production on the military spirit using combat films, is also being reinforced to raise service
members’ patriotic mindset and the will to fight.


**Communication and Compathy** Innovative improvements are made in the teaching

**Education Using New Technology** and learning paradigm by incorporating Industry

4.0 technologies into spiritual and mental force

education to maximize the outcomes. The introduction of experiential and self-directed
education that incorporates new technologies, such as AI, VR, and metaverse, goes beyond
conventional classroom-based education centered on lectures and discussions, increasing the
degree of immersion and effectiveness of education aimed at Millennials and Gen Z service
members. In particular, an initial version of the mobile-based AI spiritual and mental force
education platform,[53) ]was developed in 2021 to provide customized learning tailored to each
level and establish a scientific evaluation system. The platform begun its pilot service with
field units since January 2022. Moreover, service members are acquiring a strong military
spirit through mission-oriented educational and VR contents as well as through digital
education centers[54) ]that allow trainees to gain an indirect experience of battlefield situations.


**50)**
A 10-minute video lecture
for weekly mental force
education produced by experts
on the concept of the nation,
adversaries, and military
mentality, focusing on the
essential tasks covered in the
Basic Textbook for Mental
Force Education.

**51)**
Video lectures by instructors
specializing in humanities,
sports, and personal
development.


**52)**
Storytelling video material on
current security matters, such
as the Yeonpyeong-do Shelling.

**53)**
The mental force education
platform utilizes Industry 4.0
technologies such as digital
teaching aids, AI chatbots, and
AI humans to create customized
learning for Millennials and Gen
Z service members and to store,
analyze, evaluate, and innovate
learning results.

**54)**
Education centers offering
trainees the opportunity to
experience various types of
realistic contents, such as
VR and 3D for trainee-led
education. Starting with 10
centers installed by 2021, 12
new centers will be built every
year, reaching a total of 68
centers by 2026.


**Strengthening the Functions of the** The Defense Agency for Spiritual and Mental

**Defense Agency for Spiritual and** Force Enhancement operates various programs

designed to strengthen the mental force of service

**Mental Force Enhancement**

members, such as refresher education for troop

information and education officers and noncommissioned officers, military spirit leader
courses for all service members and civilian employees, and recruits’ mental strength training
instructor’s course. The agency also produces tailored mental force education contents that
reflect the applicability for field units and preferences of service members. Also, it pursues
research and seminars aimed at developing mental force policies and institutions as well as
publishing academic journals.

The MND is increasing the number of instructors and specialized personnel responsible for

creating learning materials, contents and policy research (institutions) to enable the agency
to perform its role and mission as the military’s sole mental force education and specialized
research institute. Moreover, various efforts are being made to strengthen the agency’s
functions and roles, such as constructing an independent building to improve the education
and research conditions.


-----

**Construction of the North Korean Military** In 2022, the MND established a

**Provocation Room at the War Memorial of Korea** permanent exhibition room in the

War Memorial of Korea to provide

accurate information on cases and threats of North Korean provocations against the ROK
since the Korean War and to raise awareness of security issues among service members and
the general public. The exhibition room show cases of North Korea’s military provocations
and threats by period and type, and offer an experience zone featuring video materials
related to North Korea’s nuclear tests. Furthermore, the ministry plans to enhance the public
understanding and consensus on the importance of peace and national security by running
education and experience programs for the general public.


-----

**Section**

**6** **Military Assurance for Establishing Peace on the**

###### Korean Peninsula

The ROK government has proposed the “Audacious Initiative for Denuclearization, Peace,
and Prosperity on the Korean Peninsula” to North Korea as a key measure for complete
denuclearization and a virtuous cycle of confidence building between the two Koreas. The
MND supports the government’s efforts based on the security policy of “peace through
strength and deterrence.” The MND will gradually implement measures to ease military
tensions and build trust between the two Koreas based on the principle of reciprocity in
tandem with North Korea’s substantial progress with denuclearization in the future.

**1. Easing Military Tensions and Confidence Building between the two Koreas**


**Easing Military Tension between** To realize sustainable peace on the Korean Penin
**the Two Koreas** sula, it is essential that the two Korea’s establish

a virtuous cycle based on the denuclearization

of North Korea and the building of trust. With the denuclearization of North Korea as
the top priority of ROK’s North Korean policy, the ROK government is striving to lead
North Korea to substantive denuclearization and normalize inter-Korean relations. On
August 15, 2022, President Yoon Suk Yeol
proposed the “Audacious Initiative for a
Denuclearization, Peace, and Prosperity
on the Korean Peninsula” to North Korea
and called for a speedy return to dialogue
on the subject of denuclearization. The
“Audacious Initiative” is a comprehensive
approach - comprising economic, political,
and military measures - to the complete
denuclearization of North Korea and the

Congratulatory Speech for National Liberation Day

establishment of a unified foundation for (August 2022)
sustainable peace and prosperity.

While maintaining a strong deterrence and response posture based on the ROK-U.S.

combined defense system, the MND is preparing military measures designed to ease military
tensions between the two Koreas in the event that North Korea responds to the ROK
government’s “Audacious Initiative.”


**Confidence Building between the Two Koreas** Confidence building between the two

Koreas has proved to be extremely

difficult due to North Korea’s repeated violations of the inter-Korean agreement and
military provocations. In 2018, the two Koreas agreed to implement various measures for
preventing accidental military conflicts and to build trust based on the Comprehensive


-----

Military Agreement (CMA). However, North Korea has yet to properly implement
confidence building measures, such as establishing and operating a Joint Inter-Korean
Military Committee or agreeing to the joint excavation of the remains of service members.
Furthermore, the North has repeatedly violated the measures for ceasing mutual acts of
hostilities provided under the CMA by firing artillery rounds within the maritime buffer zone,
launching missiles across the NLL, and flying small UAVs into the Republic of Korea.

Since the 8th Party Congress held in January 2021, North Korea has focused on advancing

its nuclear and missile capabilities, launching ballistic missiles - including new ICBMs more frequently than ever in 2022. Furthermore, it has rejected any dialogue while escalating
military tensions, such as legislating the Nuclear Force Policy in September 2022 and
declaring that it will not give up nuclear weapons at the 6th Plenary Session of the 8th Party
Central Committee held in December of the same year.

The ROK government is pursuing a consistent policy on North Korea according to sound,

rational principles in an effort to fundamentally resolve the North Korean nuclear issue and
achieve lasting peace on the Korean Peninsula. Meanwhile, the MND provides military
support for the government’s policy on North Korea based on the consistent principle of
ensuring peace on the Korean Peninsula through strong deterrence against North Korea.
Although no armed provocation by North Korea will be tolerated, and any such provocation
will be met with a resolute response, efforts to ease military tensions, such as preventing
accidental military clashes between the two Koreas, will nonetheless be carried out.

Furthermore, the MND will gradually promote measures aimed at establishing military

trust between the two Koreas based on reciprocity, provided, however, that North Korea
implements practical denuclearization measures in response to the ROK’s “Audacious
Initiative”. First, the MND will seek to ease military tensions between the two Koreas by
implementing the Audacious Initiative in the military field, and then extend it to include
military confidence building measures which will take place in lock step with the progress on
denuclearization of North Korea.


**Excavating the Remains of Fallen Soldiers** The ROK government is maintaining its

**in the DMZ** efforts to recover the remains of fallen

service members in order to commemorate

those who made the ultimate sacrifice to the country and to continue on their legacy in a
responsible manner. September 2021, the ROK Armed Forces have been excavating the
remains of ROK service members in the White Horse Hill area of the Demilitarized Zone
(DMZ) since September 2021, excavating the remains of 67 service members and 15,670
mementos by 2022. Among the remains, 40 are presumed to be the remains of ROK service
members, and the identities of 4 were confirmed, allowing them to return to their family after
70 years. The recovery of remains in the DMZ has a symbolic meaning not only with regards
to patriotism and humanitarianism, but also in terms of easing military tensions between the
two Koreas. As such, the MND will press on with the planned recovery of the remains of
fallen service members in the White Horse Hill area with consideration to military stability
and other surrounding conditions.


-----

**2. Military Assurance of Inter-Korean Exchange and Cooperation**


**Military Assurance of Inter-Korean Passage** Direct traffic between the two Koreas

has mainly been done via land routes,

although some movement took place through the air and sea routes. Although inter-Korean
traffic has largely been carried out on roads and railways in the Joint Administrative Areas in
Transportation Corridors East and West, they have been repeatedly suspended and resumed
depending on vicissitudes of inter-Korean relations. Rail traffic has been suspended since
December 2008, while road traffic has been suspended since the end of January 2020. Since
the implementation of May 24 Measures[55)] in 2010, in principle, Sea-route traffic was banned
as well, prohibiting North Korean ships from operating in ROK waters.

The MND has prepared military assurance and support measures necessary for inter
Korean passage in preparation for normalization of inter-Korean relations and the resumption
of direct traffic between the two Koreas in the future. If such traffic is resumed, discussions
will be held with the United Nations Command and the North Korean military authorities to
militarily guarantee inter-Korean passage and to provide security and escort for inter-Korean
passage in the DMZ. If passage through air and sea routes are necessary, various measures to
guarantee safe passage, such as monitoring, surveillance, and maintaining military readiness
posture will be taken.


**Operating Inter-Korean Military** The ROK Armed Forces operate military com
**Communication Lines** munication lines in the Joint Administrative Areas in

Transportation Corridors East and West as channels

of communication between the military authorities of the two Koreas. In September 2002,
the two Koreas agreed to establish communication lines between their respective military
situation rooms, and additional military communication lines were installed in Transportation
Corridor West on September 24, 2002, and Transportation Corridor East on December 5,
2003. The ROK government has endeavored to ensure that the military communication lines
between the two Koreas operate normally.

Despite such effort by the ROK government, North Korea has repeatedly and unilaterally

cut off the military communication lines for its own political purposes. On February 11,
2016, it cut off the military communication lines in Transportation Corridor West under the
pretext of closing the Kaesong Industrial Complex. It also cut off the military communication
lines on June 9, 2020, and again on August 10, 2021. However, the inter-Korean military
communication line was restored on October 4, 2021, and is now operating normally, with
calls being made twice a day through the military communication lines in Transportation
Corridors East and West.

The military authorities of the two Koreas agreed to operate the “international maritime

communication network” from July 1, 2018 as means to prevent accidental clashes in the
West Sea and to exchange information on illegal fishing vessels from third-parties on a
daily basis from November 2 of the same year. However, on June 9, 2020, North Korea
unilaterally suspended communication over the “international maritime communication
network” and daily exchanges of information on illegal fishing vessels from third parties


**55)**
The ROK government
announced its North Korean
policy in response to the sinking
of the “ROKS Cheonan” by
North Korean on May 24, 2010.
The main topics include the
prohibition of North Korean
ships in ROK waters, the
suspension of inter-Korean
trade (excluding the Kaesung
Industrial Complex), the
prohibition of visits by ROK
citizens to North Korea, the
prohibition of new investments
in North Korea, and the
suspension of support projects
for North Korea.


-----

under the pretext of deteriorating inter-Korean relations. On October 4, 2021, the inter-Korea
communication lines were restored as well as communication through the “international
maritime communication network” and exchanges of information on illegal fishing vessels
from third parties with regular communication taking place on a daily basis.

It Is essential to maintain the inter-Korean military communication lines in order to prevent

accidental clashes between the two Koreas, ease military tensions, and facilitate future interKorean cooperation projects. As such, these lines of communication must not be blocked
by either side for political purposes. The MND will continue its efforts to promote mutual
cooperation between the two Koreas to ensure normal and stable operation of the inter-Korea
military communication lines.

**3. Development of the Arms Control Policy**


**Denuclearization of North Korea and** While promoting denuclearization and the

**Establishment of a Peace System** establishment of a peace system based on

consistent principles and policy, the ROK

government has proposed a predictable road map for denuclearization in close coordination
with the U.S., and has also proposed negotiations for the denuclearization of North
Korea based on the principle of reciprocity as a national agenda. To that end, the MND is
strengthening its deterrence and response strategy against North Korea’s continuous nuclear
and missile provocations, and is considering various forms of military support for achieving
a sustainable, lasting peace on the Korean Peninsula based on the complete denuclearization
of North Korea, which the government is pursuing. The ROK government will maintain
its arms control policy to reduce or eliminate military tensions and threats between the
two Koreas in conjunction with substantial denuclearization measures by North Korea and
monitoring effort over its military threat.


**Arms Control Policy** The MND is developing arms control policies based

**and Institutional Development** on confidence-building between the two Koreas, while

constantly monitoring the denuclearization of North

Korea and its military threats, and is seeking ways to improve those policies by taking into
account the changed internal and external security environment, in order to ensure feasible
arms control on the Korean Peninsula. At the same time, the MND is identifying arms control
issues and preparing detailed plans for implementing arms control in conjunction with the
government’s “Audacious Initiative” and is operating an arms control expert network for
discussions on the use of various forms of arms control measures.

Furthermore, since 1991, the MND has developed policies and systems related to arms

control, published the Arms Control Policy[56)] to provide the basic directions and guidelines
for the implementation of arms control, and worked to strengthen its arms control policy
development capabilities by holding annual arms control seminars in order to gather the
opinions of internal and external security experts and reflect them in policies related to arms
control.


**56)**
This is a planning document
concerning the direction
of defense policy. It was
presented in the National
Security Strategy Guidelines
and the National Defense
Strategy, and is drafted from
the perspective of arms control.
It will be revised to reflect
the changes in the security
situation on the Korean
Peninsula and surrounding
areas and published in 2023.


-----

In the coming years, the MND will maintain a firm defense posture, manage the military

situation in a stable manner, and pursue arms control policies based on the principle of strict
reciprocity.


**International Cooperation on** The MND continues to promote international arms

**Arms Control** control by strengthening its cooperation with partner

nations and international organizations with the aim of

establishing a peace regime on the Korean Peninsula. At the annual Seoul Defense Dialogue
(SDD) held since 2012, sessions related to arms control have been facilitated on each
occasion to introduce the ROK government’s arms control policy and secure international
understanding and support for the security situation on the Korean Peninsula.

The MND also contributes to international peace and stability by actively participating

in major international disarmament and nonproliferation agreements, such as the Nuclear
Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT), the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), and the
Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons (CCW), thereby enhancing the
transparency and credibility of its approach
to arms control.

In particular, the first nonproliferation

meeting held between the Ministry of
National Defense and NATO in September
2022 identified mutual development tasks,
including an assessment of the WMD
threat, exchanges of information, and ROK-OPCW Tabletop Exercise (September 2022)
cooperation on education and training. At
the same time, the first chemical weapons tabletop exercise[57)] was conducted with the OPCW
in order to discuss cooperation procedures in preparation for CBR and terrorist attacks and
discuss future tasks for cooperation.


**4. Development of the POW Policy**


**Confirmation, Reunion, and** In 2006, the MND enacted the Act on the Repatriation and

**Repatriation of POWs** Treatment of Republic of Korea Armed Forces Prisoners

of War following the return of the late First Lieutenant

Cho, Chang-ho in 1994 and prepared government-wide measures for the repatriation of
POWs. Also, through inter-Korean dialogue, the ROK government repeatedly urged North
Korea to confirm the fate of POWs and repatriate them, stressing that this is the foremost issue
that needs to be addressed for the reconciliation of the two sides and humanitarian concerns.
However, North Korea has consistently denied the existence of POWs ever since the signing
of the Armistice Agreement, making it difficult to fundamentally resolve this issue.

Between 1994 and 2010, 80 POWs have returned to the Republic of Korea after escaping

from North Korea on their own. Since 2011, however, there has been no cases of POWs


**57)**
This is a planning document
concerning the direction
of defense policy. It was
presented in the National
Security Strategy Guidelines
and the National Defense
Strategy, and is drafted from
the perspective of arms control.
It will be revised to reflect
the changes in the security
situation on the Korean
Peninsula and surrounding
areas and published in 2023.


-----

returning to the Republic of Korea due to their old age and enhanced surveillance by North
Korean authorities to prevent their escape. As of December 2022, fourteen repatriated POWs
are still alive in the ROK.

**[Figure 3-15] Status of Repatriated POWs** As of December 2021 Unit: People

|Year|1994|1997|1998|1999|2000|2001|2002|2003|Col10|2004|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|POWs|1|1|4|2|9|6|6|5||14|
|Year|2005|2006|2007|2008|2009|2010|2011~2022||Total||
|POWs|11|7|4|6|3|1|-||80||



The MND is making efforts to ensure that ROK POWs and their families who have

escaped to a third country can be safely repatriated to ROK. If it is confirmed that a POW
and his or her family have escaped from North Korea, the government-wide POW task force
is formed to ensure their personal safety as overseas ROK nationals and carry out missions
to repatriate them to ROK as soon as possible. In 2015, the Act on the Repatriation and
Treatment of Republic of Korea Armed Forces Prisoners of War was amended to allow the
ROK government to support the repatriation of the remains of fallen POWs.

Meanwhile, the ROK government chose to discuss the issue of POWs and their separated

families at the inter-Korean Red Cross Talks and the Inter-Korean Ministerial-level Talks
held after the Summit in June 2000. In particular, “consultation and resolution of the matter
of confirming the life or death and the address of those who went missing during the War”
was specified for the first time in the agreement of the 4th Inter-Korean Red Cross Talks in
September 2002, and it was agreed to discuss and resolve the issue as a part of the wider
issue of separated families at the 7th Inter-Korean Red Cross Talks held in February 2006.
The 20th Inter-Korean Ministerial Talks in March 2007 and the 8th Inter-Korean Red Cross
Talks in April 2007 reaffirmed this principle. Up to now, 56 POWs have been confirmed to
be alive through family reunions, and eighteen of them have met their families. The ROK
government is continuously working to resolve the POW issue by including POWs within
the scope of separated families in the 3rd Basic Plan for the Promotion of Inter-Korean
Exchanges between Separated Families in December 2019.

In the future, the MND will continue striving to resolve fundamental issues such as

confirming the existence of, and repatriating, POWs through inter-Korean talks, and will
also strengthen cooperation with third countries and the relevant ministries to ensure the safe
repatriation of POWs and their families in the event that they escape from North Korea.


**Increasing the Resettlement** The MND supports repatriated POWs to settle down and

**Support for Returned POWs** spend their lives in their homeland in an early and stable

manner as prescribed in the Act on the Repatriation and

Treatment of Republic of Korea Armed Forces Prisoners of War. The returning families of
POWs who died in North Korea are also registered as POW families at the place of detention
and are eligible to receive separate benefits in addition to treatment and support as North
Korean defectors.


-----

Furthermore, since 2012, private sector companies with expertise have been selected to

carry out settlement support projects in order to resolve the various difficulties arising from
the resettlement process of returned POWs, including home visits and psychological and
legal consultations. In addition, returned POWs are invited to events such as Armed Forces
Day, and receive funeral support upon their passing away.

The MND will continue the improve its policies for stable resettlement of repatriated

POWs into the Republic of Korea and cooperate with associated agencies to continue the
government-wide efforts on this issue.


-----

-----

**Chapter**
# 4

**Defense Innovation 4.0:**
**Developing a Powerful Modern**
**Military Based on Advanced**
**Science and Technology**

**Section 1. Base Plan for Defense Innovation 4.0�**

**Section 2. Phased Transition to an AI-based MUM-T**

Combat System

**Section 3. Defense AI and Digital Transformation**

**Section 4. Development of Spacepower Based on**

Jointness

**Section 5. Reorganization of the Military Structure**

Based on Advanced Science and
Technology

**Section 6. Development of Elite Reserve Forces**
**Section 7. Fostering the Defense Industry into a**

National Strategic Industry


-----

**Section**


###### Base Plan for Defense Innovation 4.0

In the future, our national defense will face a radically different and far more challenging
environment, due to the rapid progress of science and technology represented by the Fourth
Industrial Revolution, the realization and progress of North Korea’s nuclear and missile
threats, and a sharp decrease in military manpower resource due to the second demographic
cliff. To preemptively prepare for such changes in the future defense environment, the MND
has established the Master Plan for Defense Innovation 4.0. Defense Innovation 4.0 consists of
five focus areas and sixteen tasks aimed at transforming the ROK Armed Forces into a strong
military based on innovations in AI science and technology, by actively utilizing the ROK’s
strengths in the field of science and technology of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.

**1. Results of Defense Reform 2.0**

The Defense Reform program initiated in 2006, which was based on the premise that the
threat from North Korea would gradually diminish, set the goal of reducing the size of the
standing military to 500,000 by 2020, and promoted the concept of the “Elite Military Force”
in every area of defense, including the military structure, defense management, the barracks
culture, and defense acquisitions. In particular, Defense Reform 2.0, which began in 2017,
focused on realizing and succeeding the agendas of Defense Reform 06~20. As a result, the
number of troops was reduced to 500,000, the service period was shortened, many units were
disbanded, and the prison system was abolished by 2022. However, as the threats from North
Korea grew in intensity and sophistication, there has been criticism to the effect that such
reform efforts were primarily external in nature, such as excessively reducing the number
of units and troops before capability enhancement reducing the number of general officers,
reinforcing civil control, and allowing conscripted servicemembers to use their cellphones on
base, and that the reform tasks were short-sighted and failed to apply advanced science and
technology, instead promoting reforms from the current point of view.


**Military Structure** As it was agreed that the current ROK-U.S. Combined Forces

Command system would be maintained, a review was conducted

on the distribution and organization of functions between ROK JCS and the future Combined
Forces Command in regards to wartime OPCON transition. The size of the standing military
was reduced to 500,000 by 2022, percentage of officers and NOCs were adjusted upwards
from 31.6% in 2017 to 40.1% in 2022, and the defense staffing structure was reorganized,
including an increase in the number of civilian personnel. In particular, ROK Army reduced
the number of standing troops by 118,000, from 483,000 in 2017 to 365,000 by 2022,
reduced the number of army corps from 8 to 6, and the number of divisions from 39 to 34. In
the wake of these troop reductions, the reorganization of military units and the reinforcement
of capability are expected to be completed in the late 2020s.


-----

**Defense Management** The reforms undertaken in the area of defense management

included the creation of more civilian positions at the Director

General and Director level at the MND, expanding the number of Executive Agencies,
shortening the service period of conscripted service members by 90 days, increasing the ratio
of female service members and promoting a more transparent management of national defense
including the establishment of a civilian integrity ombudsman and a mothers’ group dedicated to
monitoring the food and clothing of service members.


**Barracks Culture** The reforms of the barracks culture included improvements in military

affairs and service conditions, such as the establishment of the Truth
Finding Committee for Deaths in the military, increased wages for conscripted service members,
permission to leave base and use mobile phones after duty hours on weekdays, and increase
of medial subsidy for service members who choose to receive treatment at private medial
institutions. Meanwhile, these reforms also exposed heavy workload of junior officers and NCOs
and the relative negligence of their welfare as well as relaxation of military discipline.


**Defense Industry** Regulatory reforms including the establishment of the Defense

Acquisition Program Council in 2019 and the introduction of a rapid

acquisition pilot program have been pursued; however, the scope of such reform remains limited
and fielding a weapons system continues to be a complicated and time-consuming process.


**2. Implementation Plan for Defense Innovation 4.0**


**Necessity** As shown in [Figure 4-1] below, the ROK is expected to face a challenging

defense environment characterized by increasing instability around the

world and Northeast Asia, intensification of North Korea’s nuclear and missile threats,
changes in warfare and intensification of the competition for technological hegemony due
to the rapid development of science and technology, and a shortage of military manpower
resource due to the second demographic cliff.

As an alternative means to overcome this challenging security environment, the ROK must

utilize its strengths in science and technology as an opportunity. In particular, the country’s



**[Figure 4-1]** **Future Defense Environment Factors**

Materialization of North Korea’s nuclear **Factors**

and missile threats


Changes in the pattern of warfare and

intensification of technological hegemony

competition


**Challenging** Decrease in military human resources due

**Factors** to rapid decline in birth rate

-  Population of 20-year-old males: 290,000 (2021)

→230,000 (2035) →130,000 (2040)

**Opportunity**

**Factors**

Development of science

and technology in

the Fourth Industrial

Revolution

Increased instability in Northeast Asia


-----

active utilization of rapid developments in science and technology resulting from the Fourth
Industrial Revolution, to foster a strong military with a competitive advantage over the
enemy will enable it to prepare for future battlefield environments preemptively, reduce the
number of troops and further realize the principle of respect for human life.


**Concept of Defense Innovation 4.0** Defense Innovation 4.0 aims to foster a robust

Armed Forces by exploiting the advanced science

and technology developments of Industry 4.0, such as AI, autonomous vehicles, and robots.
It aims to respond to North Korea’s nuclear and missile threats by introducing Industry
4.0 innovations to military strategic/operational concepts, advanced core forces, advanced
military structures, education/training programs, defense R&D, and capability enhancement.

In “Defense Innovation 4.0”, the number “4.0” carries the symbolic meaning of creating

a new national defense based on the advanced science and technology of the Fourth
Industrial Revolution, as well as being the fourth plan to pursue groundbreaking changes
in national defense since the founding of the ROK Armed Forces: (1980s) research on the
developmental direction of the country’s long-term defense posture → (1990s) five-year
defense development plan → (2000s) defense reform → (2020s) defense innovation.


**Focus and Tasks of Defense Innovation 4.0** [Figure 4-2] shows the five focus areas and

sixteen tasks included in the Master Plan for

Defense Innovation 4.0. Each task is further divided into detailed tasks and will be executed
according to the implementation plan. The main contents of each focus area are as follows.

First, the ROK 3K capability to respond to North Korean nuclear and missile threats will

be strengthened by a significant degree. To this end, the ROK Armed Forces will secure
reconnaissance and surveillance capabilities throughout North Korea, establish kinetic and
non-kinetic strike capabilities and complex multi-layer missile defense systems, and secure

**[Figure 4-2]** **Focus Areas and Tasks of Defense Innovation 4.0**


**Transformation of military structure**

Ⅳ **and education & training systems**



-  Develop a military structure based on cutting-edge


**Strengthening of response capabilities**
**against North Korean nuclear weapons and missile threats** Ⅰ


science and technology

ROK 3K Defense - Establish a scientific training systems

- Significantly strengthen the ROK 3K - Expand reserve forces capabilities

capability. - Foster human resources in science and technology

- Establishment of the Strategic Command

**Defense** **Restructuring the Defense R&D and**

**Development of future military strategy** **Innovation** Ⅴ **force augmentation system**

**and operational concepts** Ⅱ

- Develop a military strategy in line with the **4.0** - Establish a defense R&D system based on

future security environment innovation, openness, and convergence

- Develop operational concepts based on - Restructure of the force augmentation process

science and technology - Establish a national defense AI base

- Reform the organization structure for

**Prioritizing in securing key advanced weapon systems** Ⅲ innovation in science and technology


-  Establish a MUM-T combat system

-  Strengthen the operational capability

in space, cyber, and electromagnetic
spectrum domains

-  Establish a Joint All-Domain Command

and Control (JADC2) system


-----

overwhelming mass punishment and retaliation capabilities. Moreover, the ROK Armed
Forces will unify the command structure for major strategic assets and establish a strategic
command that can take initiative for a systematic capability enhancement.

Second, the ROK Armed Forces will take the lead in developing military strategies and

operational concepts. To this end, the ROK Armed Forces will develop military strategies by
reevaluating the strategic environment, including the North Korean threat, unconventional
threats, and the advent of increasingly advanced science and technology. In addition, the
future joint operation concept will be developed to generate cross-domain synergy based on
MUM-T combat systems that incorporate the advanced science and technology of the Fourth
Industrial Revolution, providing the future direction for securing new concepts of weapon
systems and changing the overall military structure.

Third, actively acquire advanced MUM-T combat systems such as AI-based autonomous

vehicles and robots. The ROK Armed Forces will develop MUM-T combat systems into
remote-controlled, semi-autonomous, and autonomous systems with consideration of
the technological development of weapon systems in all fields including ground, sea, air,
space, cyber, and the electromagnetic spectrum, and will establish the foundations, such as
frequency, airspace control, interoperability, and security systems, for their implementation.
Moreover, the ROK Armed Forces will establish an AI-based Joint All-Domain Command
and Control system to equip themselves with faster surveillance, decision, and strike capacity
than the enemy by hyper-connecting and hyper-fusing the expanded battlefield area with
various weapons systems. These efforts will maximize the ROK Armed Forces’ ability to
carry out combat missions and minimize the loss of life.

Fourth, the military structure as well as education and training will be innovated to

meet the demands of future warfare. The ROK Armed Forces will develop the command
structure to lead the future allied defense and integrated operations in all areas, while the
unit structure will be developed into a format that can efficiently operate AI-based MUM-T
combat systems. For the military capability structure, priority will be to secure advanced core
power while achieving an appropriate balance of high-low capabilities. Regarding the troop
structure, the size of the standing forces will be reformed by comprehensively considering
future available military manpower resources and capability requirements. For education
and training, a virtual simulation training system and scientific training complex will be
established in phases to provide training on tactics, techniques and equipment functions.
For the reserve forces, a reserve military unit structure and a scientific training system that
matches the future battlefield environment will be designed. Furthermore, the requirements
for science and technology experts will be specified in connection with the expansion of the
scope of application of science and technology, and the related development and management
system and institution will be improved based on this.

Fifth, the defense R&D and acquisition system will be redesigned. The ROK Armed Forces

will reorganize defense R&D into an open military, industry, academia and research system
to enable the rapid application of advanced science and technology developed by the private
sector to national defense and to strengthen each service’s R&D capabilities. In addition, the
military capability enhancement process will be redefined, such as creating a new fast track
acquisition process, improving the flexibility of the evaluation system, and strengthening


-----

the military capability enhancement policy of the MND in order to establish an acquisition
system in line with the pace of scientific and technological developments. At the same time,
the ROK Armed Forces will establish the legal and institutional foundation for utilizing AI
in defense, build a high-performance AI infrastructure for the construction, management and
utilization of defense data based on high-speed and hyper-connected networks, and establish
a defense AI center that will lead AI development in the defense sector.


**Implementation Strategy for** A consistent strategy is necessary to complete Defense

**Defense Innovation 4.0** Innovation 4.0 in a systematic and practical manner. As

such, the MND has adopted three implementation strategies:

Selection and Concentration, Realization and Experience, and Communication and Empathy.

1) Selection and Concentration: Among the core areas related to advanced science and technology,

tasks in areas requiring fundamental change must be carefully selected and strongly implemented.

2) Realization and experience: Defense Innovation 4.0 must be materialized into a feasible plan

and supported by budgetary and institutional support in order to bring about tangible changes in

the field beyond mere policy planning. To this end, the short- and mid-term tasks to be carried

out within ten years should be evaluated and verified using scientific means based on data, such

as pilot unit operation and combat experiments, along with the establishment of specific action

plans. For long-term tasks requiring more than ten years to complete, the concepts and policy

directions should be presented, and efforts should be made to continuously update them to ensure

they become reality.

3) Communication and empathy: Active internal and external communication will be pursued in

order to generate public support and form a consensus on Defense Innovation 4.0.


**Expected Benefits of** Defense Innovation 4.0 will transform the ROK Armed

**Defense Innovation 4.0** Forces into an AI science and technology military force with a

competitive advantage over the enemy. The expected benefits

of Defense Innovation 4.0 can be divided into the defense and national levels. First, the
ability to respond to threats will be dramatically reinforced in terms of the level of defense.
The ROK’s deterrence and response capabilities against North Korean nuclear and missile
threats and all-around threats will be improved by acquiring the ROK 3K capability, Joint
All-Domain Command and Control system, and future game changers. Second, a military
structure that significantly improves operational performance by utilizing MUM-T combat
systems will resolve the anticipated shortage of military manpower resources in the future.
Third, operational efficiency will be maximized, and wartime human casualties reduced, by
deploying an AI-based unmanned and robotic combat system designed to improve combat
capabilities and realize a low-cost and high efficiency defense system.

At the national level, the fostering of defense science and technology experts will enhance

the skills, manpower, and capabilities of the private sector in connection with the Fourth
Industrial Revolution and meet the requirements of domestic industries. Furthermore, defense
science and technology combined with advanced science and technology will be a new
growth engine for national development, including increased defense exports.


-----

**Section**

**2** **Phased Transition to an AI-based**

###### MUM-T Combat System

To implement Defense Innovation 4.0, the MND is promoting the transition from a troopcentered manned system to an AI-based MUM-T Combat System. To this end, the ROK Armed
Forces will lay the foundation for strengthening jointness and ensuring stable operation
between manned and unmanned systems, and will deploy them in phases by operating,
verifying, and evaluating pilot units for each service according to the 2022 Development
Plan for Unmanned Systems of National Defense. At the same time, a public-private-military
cooperation system will be established with the aim of quickly incorporating advanced
technologies from the private sector into the defense sector, thereby contributing to the
development of national science and technology.

**1. Background**


The technology of the Fourth Industrial Revolution is drastically changing the pattern of warfare

and the development of weapons systems. Drones are widely being used, and the importance of the

space and cyber domains is growing. Developing and operating such advanced weapons require the

establishment of the necessary infrastructure, such as frequency, security, and airspace control, and the

development as well as standardization of related technologies.

In deploying such weapon systems, it is necessary to divide them into three stages: remote control,

semi-autonomous, and autonomous, according to the prevailing trends of technological development.

**2. Establishment of the Mid- to Long-Term Development Plan for Unmanned**

**Systems of National Defense**


In December 2022, the MND announced the Development Plan for Unmanned Systems of National

Defense, which aims to lay the foundation for the development of unmanned defense systems that

will serve as a core capability in future battlefields. The plan covers twelve key tasks in the following

three areas: infrastructure establishment, development and standardization of technologies, and rapid

deployment.


-----

**[Figure 4-3]** **Vision and Tasks of the Development Plan for Unmanned Systems of National Defense**

**Vision** To foster strong AI science and technology-oriented armed forces through the development of defense unmanned systems.

**Goal** To lay the foundations for the development of unmanned defense systems as the core force on the future battlefield.

① Infrastructure Establishment ② Technology Development and ③ Rapid Deployment

**Standardization**

① Securing interoperability
② Securing frequency
③ Establishing security systems ① Developing core technologies ① Operating demonstration units

**Key** ④ Building an integrated drone ② Standardizing technologies for ② Improving the acquisition

**Tasks** control system civil and military purposes system and institution

⑤ Establishing the foundation for ③ Establishing technology ③ Expanding civilian-military

education/training planning governance cooperation

⑥ Establishing an operation and

management system


**3. Operating Demonstration Units and Laying the Foundation for Unmanned**

**Systems**


**Operation of Demonstration Units[1)]** The MND will build the MUM-T Combat System

in three phases: remote control, semi-autonomous,

and autonomous, after taking into consideration prevailing and future trends in technological

development, such as AI. First, in July 2022 the MND designated a demonstration unit for each group

in order to secure an efficient transition from a remote-controlled to a semi-autonomous system. Thus,

the 70th Brigade (Tiger Brigade of the ROK Army) of the 25th Division will test ground operation

using autonomous combat vehicles and reconnaissance and attack drones; the 5th Flotilla of the ROK

Navy will test a combined mine clearance operation by linking the minesweeper with an autonomous

mine searching unmanned underwater vehicle; the 20th Fighter Wing of the Air Force will fly UAS

wingman; and the 1st Division of the Marine Corps will pilot MUM-T amphibious assault vehicles

and multi-purpose autonomous vehicles. The ROK Armed Forces plan to expand the operational

performance of these demonstration units in phases after evaluating and improving them.

**[Figure 4-4]** **Demonstration Units and Leading Systems of Each Service**


**1)**
The leading units of each
service will prioritize the
adoption and operation of
optimized weapons systems
and troop structures with the
goal of securing an efficient
transition to a MUM-T Combat
System and promoting the
proliferation of applied units
through combat tests and test
evaluations.


**Ground combat** **Mine-clearing operation**

**70th Brigade of the 25th Division** **5th Flotilla**

attack helicopters

Minesweeper

Reconnaissance drones dronesattack

command and autonomous mine

control vehicles searching

command postsfollow-up combat vehicles lead combat vehicles **Semi-Autonomous** unmanned underwater vehicle

**MUM-T Combat**

**System**

**UAS wingman operation** **(Demonstration Units and Major Systems)** **Amphibious operation**

**20th Fighter Wing** **1st Division**

Manned command

vehicles

(fire support)

KT-1 UAS

unmanned combat

vehicles (Assault Breacher )


-----

**Building the Unmanned Defense** The MND is building the infrastructure required to

**System Infrastructure** develop and operate unmanned defense systems. First,

it sets the direction for standardization according to the

Research for National Defense Informatization Standard Measures. It then selects and develops the

standard core technologies to be applied to the unmanned systems that will be introduced in the future.

Second, in preparation for the projected increase in the use of unmanned systems, the ROK Armed

Forces are securing dedicated frequencies and developing frequency utilization technologies. Third,

the ROK Armed Forces announced the National Defense Standard in September 2022, with the focus

on the technology required to ensure safe and effective communication between unmanned defense

systems, and they will develop a pre-security certification system[2)] for the prompt introduction of

commercial products. Fourth, the ROK Armed Forces will establish an integrated drone control

system to guarantee safe and efficient drone operations for each branch of the armed forces and

contribute to future joint battlefield operations.


**4. Establishment of a Public-Private-Military Cooperation System**

The MND is making concerted efforts to swiftly introduce advanced science and technology,

including qualified civilian drones and robots, and lay the foundations for shared growth between the

civilian sector and the military.

First, the MND plans to cooperate with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy to establish civil
military drone/robot demonstration test sites at idle military training grounds and open them to the

private sector. These test sites are expected to verify whether the commercial drones and robots can

be used for military application introduce them to the armed services, and contribute to developing

related national industries.

Second, the ROK Armed Forces provide test beds for the drone and robot demonstration projects

of other ministries. The MND designated the 31st Infantry Division of the Army as a test bed for the

Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy’s 10kg drone delivery demonstration project and conducted

the demonstration project from January to December 2022. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Land,

Infrastructure and Transport (MOLIT) designated the Army Air Operations Command as a test

bed for the K-Drone System Demonstration Project and the launch of Korean Urban Air Mobility

(K-UAM), and the demonstration project was carried out from May to November 2022.

Third, the MND is building a collaborative system with other ministries for the future



**[Figure 4-5]** **Status of Drone Delivery and K-Drone System Demonstration Projects**


**2)**
Pre-security certification
system for commercial
products: A simplified security
certification system that
only checks for forgeries or
alterations when introducing
commercial products that
have been certified in advance
according to military security
requirements.


Ground control지상관제

Secured communication communicationLTE 통신LTE LTE modem LTE 모뎀(LGT)(LGT)

(Video + Serial + Encryption)(영상 +시리얼 +암호화)보완신장치device

Secured communication device보완통신장치

(영상 +시리얼 +암호화)(Video + Serial + Encryption)


-----

development of the aviation industry. For
example, it signed a business agreement
with MOLIT in July 2022 for the rapid
application of advanced technologies -such
as drones and urban air mobility- to the
military, and contributed to the demonstration
and development of civilian technology.


MOU for Urban Mobility and Drone System Development

between the Ministry of National Defense and the Ministry of

Land, Infrastructure and Transport


-----

**Section**

**3** **Defense AI and Digital Transformation**

The MND is applying advanced science and technology to every field of defense while
promoting AI and digital transformation in the fields of defense intelligence and informatization
to achieve the goal of nurturing ROK Armed Forces with advanced science and technology
capabilities. Accordingly, the MND will gradually establish a defense AI development
model in consideration of current level of technology, while developing an intelligent and
advanced military force system in preparation for the future battlefields based on the
advanced information and communication technology (ICT) including AI, big data, and cloud.
Furthermore, it will accelerate the digital transformation of the defense domain by building a
high-performance AI infrastructure and training experts in AI and SW.

**1. Establishment of the Defense AI Center and Defense AI Introduction Initiative**


**Establishment of the Defense AI** AI is a major game changer in the defense sector that

**Introduction Initiative** is rapidly emerging to support or replace battlefield

combatants. Accordingly, leading nations worldwide

are focusing their capabilities on the development of autonomous weapons systems with AI
technology to gain a strategic advantage in the future battlefields. The MND is currently focusing
on establishing the institutional foundation to accelerate digital transformation and to apply AI
across all defense fields by planning to launch a robust initiative to oversee such developments.
Accordingly, in July 2022, the MND built a defense AI development model in consideration of
the current level of AI technology, and will gradually apply AI technology to the ROK military
forces accordingly. Phase 1 is the “remote-control” mode, which is applying AI technology to
surveillance and reconnaissance systems, including the development of AI-based multi-source
video fusion systems and GOP/coastal surveillance systems. Phase 2 is the “semi-autonomous”
mode, which is applying AI technology to MUM-T combat systems, such as autonomous combat
vehicles and surface boats. Phase 3 is the “autonomous” mode, which involves the full-scale
adoption of defense AI by implementing “intelligent command and decision support systems” and
“hyperconnected combat systems” and applying them to the command and control(C2) systems.


**Establishment of the Defense AI Center** The MND plans to establish the Defense AI

Center to assume responsibility for integrating

diverse efforts to apply AI technology to the military. The Center will effectively integrate
and link the many AI-related tasks distributed across each branch of the military, the Defense
Acquisition Program Administration, and the Defense Research Institute, while playing a pivotal
role in the application and development of AI in all fields of defense, such as MUM-T combat
systems based on AI technology, and intelligent command decision support systems.

Also, the ROK Armed Forces will create favorable conditions to ensure the construction,

distribution, and utilization of defense data, primarily by establishing a cooperative system for
the data collection management, standardization of data, and improving security systems across
the military.


-----

In October 2022, the Defense AI Center Implementation Team was organized under the MND

to establish the Defense AI Center. This team plans to lay the groundwork for the establishment
of the Defense AI Center by building a system that can effectively integrate the defense AI tasks
being pursued by each service, the Defense Acquisition Program Administration, and the Korea
Institute for Defense Analysis, while planning AI requirements that can be applied to all areas of
defense and reflecting them in the budget.

**[Figure 4-6]** **3-Phase Defense AI Development Model**

**Phase 1: Remote Control**

(Cognition) Surveillance and

Reconnaissance System

- Multi-source video convergence system

- AI integrated GOP/coastal surveillance

system

**Phase 2: Semi-Autonomous**

(Cognition + Assessments)

Combat System

- MUM-T combat systems, such as

autonomous combat vehicles and
surface boats

**Phase 3: Autonomous**

(Cognition + Assessment + Decision Making)

Command and Control(C2) System

- Intelligent command and decision

support system

- AI-based hyper-connected combat

system


**2. Establishment, Management, and Utilization of High-Quality Defense Data**


**Establishment and Management** The term “defense data” refers to all information

**of High-Quality Defense Data** and data produced or acquired and managed by the

MND, respective services, and other related agencies

in the course of performing their duties, ranging from images, signals gathered from radar and
ISR platforms to various reports and statistical data related to policy and current issues. It is
of paramount importance to secure and systematically manage defense data in order to apply
AI and big data technologies to each field of defense. Accordingly, the MND enacted the
“Directives on Activation of Defense Data Management and Utilization” in December 2021
to lay the institutional foundation for managing the generation, collection, registration and
disposal of data, and for promoting its utilization by data provision, standardization, and quality
control. In particular, the directive stipulates the appointment of a Data Officer to carry out data
management tasks at each agency (unit) and the creation of the Defense Data Management
Committee chaired by the Vice Minister of National Defense (Chief Data Officer (CDO)) to
coordinate and control the data management work across all military services.

Based on this initiative, the MND has established the Long-term Defense Data Establishment

Roadmap to proactively build data on medical and logistics, coastal surveillance, radar signals
and more to promote data programs for AI learning and big data analysis. At the same time, the
MND plans to greatly enhance the utilization of data by preparing and applying standards and
quality criteria for all data generated in the areas of national defense.


-----

**Digital Platform Government in** The term “digital platform government” refers to a

**National Defense** form of government by which citizens, businesses

and the government work together to solve social

problems and create new values on the digital platform, where all data are connected. It is a
new model for nationwide governance whereby the government ceases to be the sole service
provider and collaborates with the private sector to become a partner for innovation.

Accordingly, the MND is also working to create a “digital platform government” ecosystem

for civil, government, and military collaboration in the defense sector to incorporate innovative
technologies developed by the private sector, as a part of its effort to construct infrastructures
for integrating defense data distributed to various agencies and departments as well as opening
of administrative services. In the area of services for soldiers and citizens, the MND plans to
provide one-stop mobile services through a single digital platform, which are currently provided
at individual websites for each agencies and departments. Consequently, service members
and citizens will be able to receive essential public services from their pre-enlistment to postdischarge-including welfare, administration, enlistment, and mobilization services-altogether on
a digital platform that integrates defense data and services.

The MND is also preparing to shift to data-driven decision-making in defense management,

such as statistical analysis, rather than relying on experience and intuition. The MND will
promote date-driven decision-making through big data analysis in various fields including
human resources and military affairs, and to automate simple and repetitive administrative tasks
using AI technology.


**3. Building High-Performance AI Infrastructure based on High-Speed and Hyper-**

**Connected Networks**


**Laying the Foundations for a High-** An intelligent wired/wireless hyper-connected

**Speed, Hyper-Connected Network** network is required to effectively apply advanced

ICT of the Fourth Industrial Revolution to the

defense sector, such as the AI and augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR), and to ensure stable data
acquisition and distribution.

The project to construct the next-generation M-BcN[3)] (Military Broadband convergence

Network) and advance the military broadband convergence network is being implemented with
the Build Transfer Lease (BTL) project[4)], and the construction is scheduled for its completion
by 2024.

Upon completion of the next-generation M-BcN, the data transmission capacity of each

echelon will be increased by 5 to 60 times, enabling the stable distribution of the ever-growing
volume of future data, and provide redundancy of major systems and optical cable routes to
significantly enhance survivability and prevent interruptions of user services. Furthermore, the
intelligent integrated network management system will offer efficient user-centered service
support by real-time network status checkups, integration the management of various equipment
and faster monitoring and response to the communication failures and disasters.

Advanced technology has recently emerged as a key factor in the competition for hegemony


**3)**
A high-speed, large-capacity
military optical communication
network that accommodates
all types of military information
systems during wartime and
peacetime.

**4)**
A method of building social
infrastructures with private
capital (Build) while the
ownership is transferred to the
government (Transfer) and civil
sector manages & operates the
infrastructure, and government
pays the lease and operating
expenses of such facility
(Lease).


-----

between countries, and the importance of the latest network technologies, such as 5G, in securing
strategic technological advantages is becoming increasingly significant. In the defense sector,
demand for various mobile-based services such as AI, drones, robots, intelligent CCTVs,
autonomous systems, AR/VR, and wearable devices has increased, as such, it is necessary
to introduce 5G, which enables ultra-high speed, hyper-connectivity, and ultra-low latency
networking. Accordingly, the MND has established a strategy for the systematic and stable
introduction of 5G technology and has formed a consensus on the sharing of technical information
and the application of 5G to national defense through public-private cooperation.

For the mobile network infrastructure to be applied to the defense sector, the ROK Armed

Forces plan to introduce commercial 5G and 5G-specialized networks[5)] systematically, considering
the characteristics of each military service and unit. Currently, technologies specialized for the
defense sector, such as mobile terminal security and 5G national defense encryption technology,
are under development to lay the foundation for the stable introduction of commercial 5G by 2025,
which will be applied to the defense sector following the demonstration and experimental projects.
In addition, the Ministry of Science and ICT is preparing a detailed plan for 5G advancement for
the defense sector, which includes pioneering application projects for 5G+ convergence into public
services in order to create a 5G specialized network infrastructure.


**Construction of a High-** The MND plans to build an intelligent defense platform

**Performance AI Infrastructure** that can train AI models with large amounts of defense

data and support the development of various defense AI

services. The plan is to provide large-capacity, cloud-based data storage, hardware equipment
such as high-performance computers, and software for data analysis and AI learning, which are
essential for learning and developing defense AI, to apply AI models efficiently and quickly
across all areas of national defense. In addition, AI models will be installed in surveillance and
reconnaissance systems, MUM-T combat systems, and command and control systems, while
the related systems and AI infrastructure will be upgraded to enable the AI models mounted on
each system to continuously learn data and improve their performance.

Furthermore, the computer systems at the Defense Integrated Data Center (DIDC)[6)] will be

converted to cloud-based intelligent defense information systems to efficiently operate AI and
process big data, which require large-scale data processing. In addition, the ROK Armed Forces
will establish policies, such as developing a civil-government partnership model, in order to
apply and utilize private-sector cloud to the ROK military.

**4. Reinforcement of Defense Digital Capabilities through Training Experts**

**in AI and SW**


**5)**
A customized 5G network that
is provided to a specific space
via a dedicated frequency
rather than via the existing
commercial 5G network.

**6)**
An operating agency that
integrates and protects the
computer systems of each
services and various defense
agencies.


**Training Experts in AI and SW** The Ministry of National Defense, together with the

Ministry of Science and ICT (MSIT), is implementing

various policies aimed at nurturing talent to lead the application of AI in the military and raising
the national digital reserve workforce in order to strengthen the military with science and
technology. In August 2021, the two ministries collaborated on drafting “AI and SW Capability

-----

Building Plan for All Service Members” in
a bid to raise 1,000 military AI professionals
and 50,000 individuals with talent in such
field by 2026. As a part of this initiative,
an AI-specialized curriculum for military
missions was established in May 2022
in collaboration with private AI graduate
schools and is currently providing intensive
training to active duty officers and NCOs. In

Vision Proclamation Ceremony (July 2022)

addition, efforts are being made to cultivate
the military's digital literacy by providing
digital (AI/SW) literacy education for all service members.

In July 2022, with the Minister of National Defense and the Minister of Science and ICT’s

attendance, a Vision Proclamation Ceremony was held to announce the importance of AI and
SW capability-building projects to military personnel and their vision to train 1,000 military AI
leaders and 50,000 reserve personnel for the digital industry by 2026. Key officers and officials
from the MND, each branch of the Armed Forces, the MSIT, ICT innovation enterprises, and
AI Graduate Schools attended the ceremony to provide service members with the experience of
various technologies and career counseling in the new digital technology field.


**Creating an Environment to Prepare and Educate** Since 2022, the MND, in collaboration

**Reserve Personnel for the Digital Industry** with the MSIT, has provided

customized online AI/SW training with

interactive feedback from professional mentors to assist conscripted service members with their
personal development during their obligatory terms of service, leading them to e opportunities
for employment and starting their own businesses in the digital field after discharge. Service
members who complete their training receive support on obtaining civilian certifications, while
service members who scored excellent grades are offered mentoring opportunities with private
entrepreneurs. With this initiative, the ROK Armed Forces support the discharged service members
to develop themselves to become reserve workforce in the digital industry.

In addition, a project to designate an educational demonstration unit each year and build a

digital training center is included in a plan to create a digital education boom for conscripted
service members. The training center is equipped with the latest ICT equipment and runs teamlevel discussion forums. Starting with six units in in 2022, Army 5th Corps and the 6th Division,
the Navy 7th Flotilla, Air Force 7th Group, the Marine Corps Command and the Information and
Communications Battalion of the ROK Defense Communication Command, this project will be
expanded on a continuous basis until 2026. In addition, the effectiveness of the digital education
programs will be maximized by continuously providing opportunities for service members with
digital capabilities to compete in the Defense AI Competition and other similar events.


AI/SW capacitybuilding project for
military personnel


-----

**Section**


###### Development of Spacepower Based on Jointness

Recognizing that space is a critical domain with significant national security implications,
the ROK Armed Forces are developing spacepower to support joint military operations,
contribute to national space development and respond effectively to space hazards and
threats. Furthermore, the ROK Armed Forces will establish a system of space assets equipped
with advanced science and technology, and simultaneously create an ecosystem for
defense space development by deepening ROK-U.S. collaboration, expanding international
cooperation and strengthening civil and military cooperation.

**1. Creating a Favorable Environment for the Development of Spacepower**


**Establishing a Policy Foundation** In 2018, the MND participated in the preparation of the

“3rd Space Development Promotion Plan” (Ministry

of Science and ICT), which presented the mid- to long-term policy goals and basic directions
for national space development and established the basis for developing military reconnaissance
satellites and space surveillance systems. In 2019, the MND revised its “National Defense
Spacepower Development Basic Plan”, to reflect the evolving space security environment. The
revised plan lay the foundation for the systematic development of spacepower by presenting four
key areas, establishing policy foundation, developing organization, expanding spacepower and
increasing cooperation at home and abroad as well as presenting detailed tasks for each of the four
areas according to the mid-to long-term defense spacepower development goals. Hosted by the
Minister of National Defense and attended by senior military officials such as the Chairman of
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Service Chiefs, Vice Minister of National Defense and Minister of Defense
Acquisition Program Administration, a meeting was held on November 2021 to assess the progress
in spacepower development up to this point. Senior military officials discussed the direction of
developing spacepower based on jointness and establishing space operational execution system,
and affirmed measures to activate the space industry as well as development plans for future
defense related space technology through leveraging defense space programs. In 2023, the MND
plans to publish Defense Space Strategy, which outlines the development goals of spacepower
based on jointness, along with national defense space policies and strategies for the coming years.

The MND is also continuously amending the related laws and systems whenever necessary and

developing space policies, strategies, and doctrines. In May 2021, the Enforcement Decree of the
Defense Acquisition Program Act was amended to categorize space weapons systems separately
from other weapon systems to facilitate their fielding process through a tailored approach.
Additionally, in November 2021, JCS established a joint military space strategy rooted in jointness,
and it will formulate execution concept as well as command and control architecture for joint space
operations based on this strategy.


**Organizational Development** Under the 2021 amendment to the Space Development

Promotion Act, the National Space Council was reorganized

to prepare conditions for promoting the efficient defense space development. Chairmanship of the


-----

National Space Council was upgraded from
the Minister of Science and ICT to the Prime
Minister, while its membership was elevated
from Vice Minister level officials to Minister
level officials. This reform enabled the
Council to establish a comprehensive national
space policy covering such fields as security,
diplomacy, science and technology as well
as industries, and to serve as a hub providing 4th Defense Space Development Committee (December 2022)
overwatch and coordination amongst
government ministries. Furthermore, Chairmanship of Defense Space Development Committee
was elevated from Vice Minister to Minister in order to strengthen ties with the national space
development system and enhance the driving force for developing space power based on the
principle of jointness.

In addition, a new Security Space Development Committee has been formed under the National

Space Council to cover space development issues where there is a need to maintain confidentiality

for national security purposes and to enable the efficient development of space in conjunction

with national space development. The Committee is co-chaired by the Vice Ministers of National

Defense and equivalent counterpart at the National Intelligence Service. A guideline for the

efficient operation of the Security and Space Development Committee has been established and

the security space development implementation plan that specifically incorporates the security

space development plan are to be established every year starting from 2023.


**Development in Personnel and Organization** The MND established a space policy

course for action officers at the Korea

National Defense University in 2021, while the Air Force expanded the eligibility of its practical
space training course to include members of all services rather than just the members of the Air
Force, and increased the duration of the training period from three days to two weeks. Also,
in 2022, the Korea National Defense University established a new Master’s program in space
policy, and it now plans to train military officers of all services on space policy and strategy
starting the first semester of 2023. In addition, efforts are being made to train space experts by
providing those planning to work in the space field with opportunities to obtain master’s and
doctoral degrees at domestic and foreign universities.

At the same time, MND, JCS, and each military service have formed and expanded dedicated

organizations to promote space policy development, while reflecting the characteristics of
each service. Thus, in 2021, the MND reinforced the functions and personnel of the Missile
and Space Policy Division; the Army reorganized its space-related departments into the Space,
Science and Technology Policy Division and the Space Command and Communications Power
Division; and the Air Force reorganized the Space Development Division into the Space Center
directly under the Chief of Staff. In 2022, the Military Space Branch was newly formed in the
JCS to promote the development of national defense space power based on the principle of
jointness; the Navy organized and reinforced the concept of “space operations” within the Battle
System and Space Policy Development Division, while the Air Force reinforced its organization


-----

by expanding the existing Space Operations Unit into the Space Operations Squadron.


**Applying Advanced Science and Technology** The MND is promoting the development

of space capabilities based on advanced

science and technology in order to strengthen operational capabilities in this new domain. To this end,

in 2022, the MND prepared strategies and operational concepts for effectively securing and operating

advanced systems and reviewed the requirements for improving the existing laws and regulations to

develop and secure the necessary military capabilities based on cutting-edge science and technology,

such as AI. In addition, it continues to cooperate with the relevant ministries on the joint use of civil

and military technology to keep pace with the rapid development of advanced science and technology.

It has also laid the foundations for the development of space technology by publishing the “Assessment

of the Current Status of the National Space Industry” and the “Study on National Defense Space

Development Policy and Strategy” produced by a specialist research institute in the space field.


**Expansion of Space Assets** To support joint military operations, the ROK Armed

Forces are building defense spacepower in four areas in a

step-by-step manner: Space Intelligence support, Space Domain Awareness, Space Control,
and Space Combat Power Projection.

“Space Intelligence Support” consists of surveillance, reconnaissance, and communication support

activities for joint operations. The ROK Armed Forces recognize the importance of space intelligence

support from the military perspective and is currently strengthening surveillance, reconnaissance,

and satellite communication capabilities accordingly. The Armed Forces is developing military

reconnaissance satellites and microsatellite systems in order to increase surveillance and

reconnaissance systems to acquire strategic targets on the ground, as well as actively participating in

national satellite development projects.

**[Figure 4-7]** **Building the Satellite Strength of the ROK Armed Forces**


Military Reconnaissance Satellites

(Radar/Optical)


Military Communication Satellite (ANASIS II) Microsatellite System (Constellation)


In particular, the ROK Armed Forces successfully launched ANASIS II, the first military

communication satellite in July 2020, making ROK the tenth country in the world to have its own

dedicated military communication satellite. To expand space-based communication relay capabilities

that can overcome the geographical limitations of ground and maritime communication systems,

the ROK Armed Forces have initiated the military satellite communication system-II[7)] and the naval

operation satellite communication system-II projects and leased commercial communication satellites

in addition to military satellite communication systems.

Second, “Space Domain Awareness” is the activity of identifying risks and threats in space. As


**7)**
ANASIS II has been launched
successfully, and ground
terminals have been deployed.


-----

the use of space increases around the world, the complexity of the space domain has increased
accordingly, along with an increasing number of space threats. As such, it is essential to determine
which activities are taking place in the space domain in order to ensure a safe, stable and sustainable
use of space. The ROK Armed Forces took the first step toward securing Space Domain Awareness
capabilities by deploying the Electro-Optical Satellite Surveillance system in January 2022.

Electro-Optical Satellite Surveillance system monitors the intelligence activities of satellites

passing over the Korean Peninsula and performs information gathering missions in which it detects
and tracks space objects. Air Force Space Operations Squadron protects the country’s major space
assets by using the Electro-Optical Satellite Surveillance system to analyze the orbit and imagery
of satellites and space objects operating around the Korean Peninsula. In the future, the ROK
Armed Forces will gradually expand the space weather forecast and warning systems, acquire
Laser Tracking System and Space Surveillance Radar system to further advance the military’s
independent domain awareness capabilities.

**[Figure 4-8]** **Building the Military’s Space Domain Awareness**


Electro-Optical Satellite Surveillance

System (Search)


Electro-Optical Satellite Surveillance

System (Identification)


High-Power Laser Satellite Tracking System


Third, “Space Control” is acquiring capabilities that can respond against hostile threats.

Lastly, “Space Power Projection” is acquiring various launch platforms. The ROK Armed
Forces plan to acquire these capabilities over the mid- to long-term based on the available level
of technology and budget.

**2. Expanding ROK-U.S. & International Cooperation**


**Strengthening ROK-U.S. Cooperation** As an alliance, the ROK and the U.S. are developing

various forms of cooperation in the space domain. In

particular, the two countries hold Space Cooperation Working Group (SCWG) annually, share Space

Situational Awareness (SSA)[8)] information to jointly respond to space threats, and improve their

capabilities to carry out space operations through joint space exercises and personnel exchanges.

Since the ROK and the U.S. signed the Agreement on the ROK-U.S. SCWG at the 44th ROK-U.S.

Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) in 2012, the working group has convened eighteen times

as of 2022. The SCWG meetings have produced fruitful outcomes, such as providing updates on

respective defense space policies, fostering space professionals and conducting personnel exchanges,

cooperating Space Situational Awareness, and participating in Global Sentinel exercise. In 2021, the

two sides conducted ‘ROK-U.S. Space Policy Joint Study’, which portrays the vision and objectives

of the allied space cooperation, and simultaneously explored ways to strengthen space capabilities, the


**8)**
The concept of collecting and
analyzing data and information
from ground and space systems
in preparation for space
hazards, such as re-entry and
collision of objects in space,
and of providing information,
such as warnings, to users.


-----

outcome of the Joint Study was agreed during the ROK-U.S. SCWG on April 2022.

“ROK-U.S. Space Policy Joint Study”, the first official document between the Ministry of National

Defense and Department of Defense charting the path forward for space policy development, includes

specific tasks aimed at strengthening space response capabilities at the alliance level in preparation

for growing space security threats. As an alliance in the space domain, the ROK and the U.S. have

decided to maintain their cooperation, such as exchanging information to form a shared perception of

the space domain, holding exercises and training for space personnel, and improving interoperability

in order to enhance their ability to perform joint space operations, thus achieving the strategic value

of space cooperation while strengthening their joint space capabilities. Through the routinely held

SCWG, the MND will closely review the progress and proactively pursue the implementation in

support of realizing the ROK-U.S. Space Policy Joint Study into actionable policy. Furthermore,

in October 2022, the ROK became the first Asian country to join the U.S. pledge not to conduct

‘destructive Direct Ascent Anti-Satellites (DA-ASAT) tests̓ further solidifying ROK-U.S. cooperation

in space. The two countries will reinforce the comprehensive space capabilities of the alliance by

effectively responding to threats in the space domain.


**Deepening and Expanding International** The ROK Armed Forces continue to promote

**Space Cooperation** defense space cooperation with the United

States and space powers such as France and

India to respond proactively to growing space security threats and strengthen national defense
and space capabilities.

The ROK agreed to strengthen space cooperation at the 2018 summit with France, and formed

a shared understanding on developing of defense space cooperation between the two countries
and expanding exchanges in the field during the 2021 Defense Strategy Dialogue. Then, during
the Director General-level meeting on defense space held in March 2022, the two sides agreed
to pursuit ROK participating in space exercise organized by the French Space Command and to
promote personnel exchanges.

At a bilateral summit meeting with India held in 2019, ROK made an agreement with India, its

Special Strategic Partner, to expand cooperation in the space sector, while at a meeting between
their respective defense ministers held in March 2021, the two countries agreed to activate space
cooperation in the context of defense. In addition, the two countries will sign an Implementation
Agreement on promoting defense space cooperation in 2023 and continue their cooperation,
focusing on Space Domain Awareness and
defense space technology.

Since 2017, the ROK Armed Forces have

been participating in “Global Sentinel”

annually, an international Space Situational

Awareness exercise organized by the U.S.

Space Command, to strengthen the ability

to respond to space risks and threats with

international partners such as the United

States, the United Kingdom, Canada, France,

and Germany. This exercise enables the ROK International Space Situational Awareness Exercise

(Global Sentinel)


-----

Armed Forces to ensure space stability and
improve their ability to carry out joint space
operations by mastering joint cooperative
response procedures during simulated
situations such as satellite collisions and reentry, ballistic missile launches, and attacks
on satellite.

Furthermore, the ROK Armed Forces

have contributed to forming international The 1st Space Security Working Group (September 2022)

norms for the peaceful use of space. Against

this backdrop, the inaugural space security session of the Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD), a

vice minister-level multilateral security forum, was held in 2021. Known as the Space Security

Working Group, the forum was held in 2022 and more than 150 attendees from 37 countries

including the United Kingdom participated, expanding the scope of its activities. Meanwhile,

Space Security Working Group was also joined by space experts from various countries, and

the theme was “Space Security for Sustainable Space Activities,” emphasizing the necessity of

international cooperation on the peaceful use of space through presentations and lively discussions

chaired by leading experts such as the Deputy Director of the United Nations Institute for

Disarmament Research and the Director of the European Office of the RAND Institute.

In the future, the MND will continue carrying out various activities, such as participating in

the Combined Space Operation Initiative (CSpO Initiative)[9)] to contribute to the international

community’s efforts to guarantee the peaceful use of space.

**3. Strengthening Civilian-Military Space Cooperation and Establishing the Response**

**System to Space Risks and Threats**


**Strengthening Civilian-Military** In 2021, the Defense Acquisition Program Admini
**Cooperation** stration established the Master Plan for the Development

of the Defense Space Program with the aim of making

the ROK a defense spacepower, and since then

it has gradually expanded cooperation between

the private and military sectors on space

technology in order to strengthen the nation’s

space development capabilities and develop its

space industry.

In particular, the Agency for Defense

Development will transfer its solid-fueled
launch vehicle technology to the private sector
in a bid to establish favorable conditions for

Test Launch of a Solid-propelled Space Launch Vehicle

using Korean launch vehicles when projecting (December 2022)
space power, including military satellites.

Private companies, academia, research institutes, and the Agency for Defense Development


**9)**
Since its launch in 2014 by
the US, the UK, Australia,
and Canada as an effort to
coordinate perceptions of the
space domain, New Zealand
(2015), Germany (2019) and
France (2020) have also joined
the CSpO Initiative.


-----

are cooperating to strengthen civil-military space technologies to meet the defense technology

challenges of the future and core technology tasks in the space sector. In the future, the MND will

lead the development of space technology in the private sector by actively raising the requirements

for developing technologies, such as satellites and launch vehicles, in the defense sector, as well as

planning efficient civil and military cooperation on space technology development and continuing to

create the conditions required to revitalize the private space industry and secure competitiveness.


**Establishing Response System for Space** The ROK Armed Forces are participating in the

**Hazards and[10)] Threats[11)]** whole-of-government space hazard response

system to prepare for space hazard situations.

Since 2019, as part of the space disaster response and safety training in Korea, they have taken part
in joint civil-military cooperative response procedures, such as situation notice, situation assessment
meetings, warning issuance, post-accident management, and the response to crashes and collisions
between objects in space, and have maintained close cooperative ties with the related organizations.
Based on such practice, the ROK Armed Forces have maintained a national-level response posture
to risk in space by closely cooperating with the relevant institutions, such as the Korea Astronomy
and Space Science Institute, in carrying out a civil-military combined response to situations such
as the crashes of Tiangong 1 and 2 in 2018 and 2019, Chang Zheng 2B in 2021, and the Angara
Rocket, Chang Zheng 5B, and a NASA satellite in 2022.

The ROK Armed Forces have also held joint civil-public-military Combined Space Situational

Awareness Cooperation Working Council meetings since 2017, according to the Agreement
on Cooperation on Space Situational Awareness.[12)] Under this agreement they have continued
to cooperate on space situational awareness, such as space surveillance and satellite operations,
with major private, public and military institutions, while working to develop an efficient space
situational awareness system at the national level by establishing procedures for the sharing of space
monitoring data, in conjunction with the deployment of the Air Force’s electro-optical satellite
monitoring system in 2022.

Furthermore, discussions are being held on an ongoing basis with the related organizations with the

aim of establishing measures to utilize the national space assets and experts at the related government
agencies, such as the Korea Aerospace Research Institute and the Korea Astronomy and Space
Science Institute; associated regulations are to be revised in 2023. The ROK Armed Forces plan to
develop a wartime operation system within the National Satellite Integrated Operation Center, which
was established in 2022, and to amend the Wartime Mobilization of Resources Act to mobilize civilian
space assets such as observation satellites and space monitoring systems.


Test Launch of Solid
Propellant Space
Launch Vehicle

**10)**
Situations in which space
activities and the viability of
space assets are hindered
by natural or random
circumstances, such as
deteriorating space weather or
collisions and crashes of space
objects.

**11)**
Situations that hinder the space
activities or the viability of the
space assets of other countries
due to hostile intentions, such
as GPS/communication satellite
disturbances, cyberattacks, and
(non-) physical attacks against
satellites.

**12)**
The ROK Air Force, Korea
Meteorological Service, Korea
Aerospace Research Institute,
Korea Astronomy and Space
Science Institute, KAIST, and
KTSat signed an agreement on
cooperation in the field of space
situational awareness (July 2015).


-----

**Section**

**5** **Reorganization of the Military Structure Based on**

###### Advanced Science and Technology

The MND is developing new operational concepts and reorganizing the military structure to
preemptively prepare for changes in the defense environment, such as the spread of MUM-T
combat systems, expansion of space, cyber, and electromagnetic spectrum domains and a
sharp decline in military manpower resource. The future military structure will be reorganized in
phases through verifications based on combat tests and the operation of demonstration units.

**1. Development of the Command Structure**


The command structure will undergo a gradual change and evolution considering future changes in

the battlefield environment as well as adjustments in the size of the standing forces. The ROK JCS,

will comprehensively consider additional functional requirements to counter North Korea’s nuclear,

WMD and unmanned aerial vehicles, the transition of wartime operational control, creating cross

domain synergy in all areas, and assisting the command authority. The headquarters of each service

will pursue the reorganization plan considering organizational efficiency, and the need to reinforce

requirement planning capabilities for advanced weapons systems.

**2. Unit Structure Development**


The unit structure will be developed to apply new operational concepts and operate MUM-T combat

systems in order to respond effectively against North Korea’s nuclear and missile threats and prepare

for new combat environments of the future. Such development will be subject to verification through

pilot unit operation and combat tests, and gradually applied to other units.

First, the unit structure will be redeveloped to strengthen the ROK 3K capabilities. The ROK

Strategic Command will be established to respond effectively against the materializing and advancing

nuclear and missile threats posed by North Korea, the respective organizations and forces to respond

to this threat in each service will also be bolstered in conjunction.

Second, each service will develop its future unit structure and conduct a pilot demonstration. To that

end, the Army designated the Army TIGER Brigade, the Navy selected an unmanned surface ship,

submarine, and aircraft squadron, the Marine Corps chose an unmanned amphibious assault battalion,

while the Air Force elected a MUM-T fighter aircraft unit as their respective pilot units.

Third, units for space, cyber, and electromagnetic domain will be established and reinforced.

Structure of these units will be developed in conjunction with the relevant operational concepts

developed by the JCS.

Fourth, the unit structures will be developed as required to transform the manned surveillance

systems into a MUM-T surveillance system.


-----

**3. Reorganization of Forces Structure**

The MND reduced the number of standing troops to 500,000 by 2022 considering the projected

status of available military manpower resources, the reorganization of unit structures, and

developing plans. The defense workforce structure is being reorganized to secure professional

cadres[13)] capable of operating AI MUM-T combat systems based on advanced science and

technology in order to prevent a gap in combat capability despite the reduction of standing forces

and to increase the number of professional civilian workers with the required expertise. With

the expansion and introduction of advanced weapon systems, the role of professional cadres

with operational capability and specialized skills is becoming more important, in particular with

regards to operations and combat. The MND plans to increase the ratio of such professional cadres

among the standing forces to 40.5% by 2027 with emphasis on combat units that operate weapons

systems.

Measures are being taken to maintain constant combat readiness posture, focusing on combat and

operational sustainment units. Forces that form current operational and counter-terrorism units that

perform 24-hour missions, such as GOP, coastal guard, aerial surveillance and reconnaissance, and

initial response mission are being reinforced. In 2021, manning at surveillance operation units were

increased to strengthen imagery surveillance capabilities. In 2022, manning for logistic units were

increase to enhance operational sustainment capabilities. There are plans to continue improving the

mission conditions for units that are require to maintain constant standby and readiness posture.

In order to utilize skilled professional cadres in the long term to support an all-around defense

posture, the personnel structure is being reorganized with a pot-shaped quota structure that reduces

the number of entry-level professional cadres and increases the number of professional cadres

of intermediate rank[14)] to maintain continuity. Accordingly, the proportion of professional cadres

of intermediate rank among the standing forces increased from 13% in 2017 to 16.8% in 2021

and 18.3% in 2022, and is expected to increase to 19.8% by 2027. The increase in the number

of intermediate-rank professional cadres led to a rise in opportunities to select long-term service

members, thus establishing the basis to secure and maintain professional cadres in a stable manner

in the face of a declining youth population. With training experience and expertise accumulated

due to the rise in the number of officers in long-term service, the capabilities to operate advanced

weapons systems, including those that compose the ROK 3K, will be enhanced.

The ROK Armed Forces are expanding the use of civilian workforce[15)] to overcome the

shortage of military resources and introduce civilian technology. Meanwhile, combat units

are being reinforced by expanding the use of civilian personnel in non-combat areas, such as

education, administration, supply, and maintenance, allowing active duty personnel serving in

such non-combat positions to transition to combat units.

Civilian military employees focus on positions that require continuity and expertise, such as

budget, supply, and maintenance, while growing number of civilian workers are being hired into

areas where it is more efficient for the private sector to perform, such as facility management,

cooking, and language studies. As a result, the proportion of civilian personnel rose from 4.7% of

the total defense workforce in 2017 to 11.0% in 2022, and it is expected to increase further to 11.3%

in 2023. Civilian military employees will become an essential element of defense personnel as the

scope of their work expands to include operational support, new domain technology, while excluding


**13)**
Professional cadres include
commissioned officers,
warrant officers, and noncommissioned officers.

**14)**
Intermediate ranks include
majors and lieutenant colonels
for commissioned officers,
while non-commissioned
officers include sergeants first
class and master sergeants.

**15)**
Civilian personnel include civilian
military employee and civilian
workers.


-----

tasks related to combat duties which are directly carried out by active duty service members.

The General Officer Quota Adjustment Plan, was established in 2018 in conjunction to the

reduction in size of the standing force and the disbandment or reduction of certain units. The plan

aims to reduce the number of general officers from 436 by the end of 2017 to 360 by 2022. The

quota was reduced to 375 by the end of 2021 through integration and improvements in the efficiency

of each general officer position and by reorganizing the unit structure and converting positions in

non-combat areas - such as education and personnel administration – to civilian positions. In 2022,

the number of general officer was re-adjusted to 370 in view of the need to strengthen the ability to

respond against crises in a rapidly changing security situation, such as the North Korean nuclear and

missile threats, bolster the ROK 3K Defense, and gain momentum for Defense Innovation 4.0.

**4. Capability Enhancements**


**Basic Direction for** The MND is reinforcing the ROK Armed Forces’

**Capability Enhancements** capacity to develop advanced science and technology

for overwhelming response against North Korea’s

increasingly advanced nuclear and other WMD threats and to conduct integrated operations

effectively in all fields.

First, the ROK 3K Defense, which consists of the Kill Chain, Korea Air and Missile Defense

(KAMD), and Korea Massive Punishment and Retaliation (KMPR), will be fully equipped to respond

against the rapidly changing and advancing North Korea’s nuclear and WMD threats. Second, the

ROK Armed Forces will enhance their MUM-T combat systems in phases based on advanced

science and technology, such as AI, unmanned systems, and robots, in order to respond to the

issue of declining manpower resources and maximize survivability, while effectively responding

to future changes in warfare and the battlefield environment. Third, the force structure will be

reinforced based on the “High-Low Mix” concept by effectively combining advanced weapons

systems (high level) with existing weapons systems (low level) in order to embody the concept of

future joint operations and thereby meet the challenges posed by the future security environment

and maximize the efficiency of the force structure.

In terms of each battlefield function, battlefield reconnaissance forces will gradually acquire

military reconnaissance satellites, multi-purpose satellites, medium- to high-altitude ISR UAVs

and multi-source imagery convergence systems in order to reinforce surveillance capabilities

on the Korean Peninsula. The ROK Armed Forces will secure unmanned aerial reconnaissance

vehicles, thermal imaging equipment (TOD-III), and Multi-Function Observation Device (MFOD

to improve visibility and day/night surveillance capabilities.

In the area of command and control as well as communication, the ROK Armed Forces will

enhance the performance of C4I[16)] systems for joint and individual services to ensure theater and

joint command and control capabilities, and establish a C4I system under the battalion level in

order to share the battlefield situation down to the smallest tactical echelon. In addition, the ROK

Armed Forces will establish Military Satellite Communication System III and the low-orbit satellite

communication system in order to develop high-speed, large-capacity information distribution

capabilities, and improve the performance of joint tactical data links, air-to-ground communication


**16)**
C4I refers to Command, Control,
Communication, Computer, and
Intelligence, a tactical command
automation system.


-----

radio, and Link-16 in order to enhance interoperability between joint and combined operations.

In terms of ground forces, in preparation against North Korea’s nuclear, missile and long-range

artillery threats, the ROK Armed Forces will strengthen their ability to carry out high-power, super
precision surface-to-surface missile strikes and counter-fire operations in an expeditious manner,

and reinforce armored, mechanized, and aviation forces to carry out high-speed, deep-maneuver

warfare. In addition, ground and air maneuverability will be enhanced to improve rapid response and

decisive operation capabilities, and establish MUM-T combat systems to ensure the survivability of

combatants.

In the field of maritime and amphibious forces, the ROK Navy’s destroyers (KDX-III), frigates

(FFX), submarines (KSS-III), maritime patrol aircraft-II, maritime operation helicopters, and KAAV-II

will maintain maritime superiority around the Korean Peninsula, prepare against potential threats from

North Korea, and expand its capacity to protect Korea’s maritime rights and interests.

For air power, the ROK Air Force will gradually secure next-generation fighters (F-X Batch II),

Korean fighter aircraft (KF-21) F-15K performance improvement, large transport aircraft, and all
weather precision-guided munitions in order to establish covert infiltration and long-range precision

strike capabilities, enabling a proactive deterrence and response against all airborne threats.

In the field of forces protection, the ROK Armed Forces will deploy complex, multi-layered defense

capabilities, such as ballistic missile and air defense capabilities, long-range artillery interception

capabilities, gradually improve electromagnetic pulse (EMP) and CBRN defense capabilities and

reinforce the protection capabilities of individuals, facilities, and equipment to ensure survival in the

early stages of a war.


**Major Capability Enhancement Projects in 2021** Of the 52.84 trillion KRW committed to

defense expenditure in 2021, capability

enhancement amounted to 16.99trillion KRW, an increase of 1.9% over the previous year (2020).

**[Figure 4-9]** **Major Capability Enhancement Projects in 2021**

|Weapons systems for each battlefeild function|Description|New projects initiated in 2022|
|---|---|---|
|Battlefield awareness / command and control|• Medium altitude unmanned reconnaissance aerial vehicle (R&D) • Corps level unmanned reconnaissance aerial vehicle II (R&D) • Performance improvements for the KTMO Cell (R&D)|• Unmanned ground surveillance sensor (R&D) • Coastal Surveillance Radar II (R&D) • MCRC performance improvements • Radio communication device for combatants|
|Ground force power|• Wheeled armored vehicle • 230mm multiple rocket launcher system • K-2 Tank|• Performance improvement for K200 series armored vehicles • 12.7 mm sniper rifle • Light Machine Gun II|
|Maritime force power|• Gwanggaeto III, Batch II • Jangbogo III, Batch I • Maritime Patrol Aircraft II|• CIWS II • Acoustic sensors for long range detection. • Maritime operation satellite communication system|
|Air force power|• TA-50, Block II • Anti-Jamming GPS • Korean Fighter Aircraft (R&D)|• KUH-1 flight simulator (R&D) • Changgong model performance improvements (R&D)|
|Protection force power|• Air defense command and control warning system • 30 mm wheeled anti-aircraft gun • L-SAM (R&D)|• Mine Detector II • Wide area denial munition (R&D) • Infrared shielding smoke tube|


-----

**Major Projects to Improve Military Force in 2022** Of the 54.61 trillion KRW committed to

defense expenditure in 2022, capability

enhancement amounted to 16.69 trillion KRW, a decrease of 1.8% from the previous year (2021).



**[Figure 4-10]** **Major Projects to Improve Military Force in 2022**

|Weapons systems for each battlefeild function|Description|New projects initiated in 2022|
|---|---|---|
|Battlefield awareness / command and control|• Multi-source imagery convergence system (R&D) • Space weather forecast and warning system • Performance improvement for the KTMO Cell center (R&D)|• Ship Electronic Warfare System-II (R&D) • Combined maritime tactical data link (Link-22)|
|Mobility / firepower|• K-2 Tanks • Performance improvements for the K9 self- propelled artillery • Performance improvements for the K1E1 tanks|• Tactical Bridge II, Block I (R&D) • Counter Battery Radar III (R&D) • Wheeled command post vehicle|
|Maritime force power|• Korean destroyer (KDDX) • Ulsan-Class frigate, Batches II and III • Jangbogo III, Batch II|• Performance improvements for the first Amphibious Ship Transport Helicopter • Minesweeper II|
|Air force power|• Korean Fighter Aircrafts (R&D) • Aerial tanker • Performance improvements for F-15K|• 2nd procurement of Heavy Transport Aircrafts • Performance improvements for F-35A • Performance improvements for C-130H|
|Protective force power|• L-SAM (R&D) • Laser Anti-air Weapons Block I (R&D)|• Long-range artillery interception system (R&D) • Second phase of the Patriot missile system performance improvement project|


**2023-2027 Plans for Capability** To prepare against all-around security threats facing

**Enhancement** Korea and respond against North Korea’s nuclear and

other WMD threats, the MND plans to invest 107.4

trillion KRW between 2023 and 2027 to expand critical capabilities of the ROK 3K Defense
and reorganizing the military structure with focus on cutting-edge technology. The MND is
preemptively responding to non-traditional threats such as cyber-attack, terrorism, as well as
natural disasters, and continues to secure capabilities required to defend national interests, such
as maintaining international peace and protecting Korean overseas citizens. The ministry is also
expanding its investments in defense R&D and revitalizing the domestic defense industry with
the aim of applying advanced science and technology to the armed forces.

To respond against North Korea’s nuclear, WMD and missile threats, the advanced long

range surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities will be established by deploying military
reconnaissance satellites, ISR UAVs and multi-source imagery convergence systems. It will
also improve and develop the intelligent command and control system’s ability to integrate
and disseminate acquired information and link it with the real-time strike system by securing
the Military Satellite Communication System II, along with the Tactical Information and
Communication System (TICN), and the Joint Firepower Operation System (JFOS-K).
Moreover, the MND will deploy F-X II fighter jets, Jangbogo-III submarines and guided
munitions to reinforce covert long-range precision strike capabilities, and also establish the Korea
Air and Missile Defense System capable of complex, multi-layered defense against ballistic


-----

missile attacks, based on the development of long-range surface-to-air missiles, performance
improvements for medium-range surface-to-air missiles and the Patriot systems, and ship based
long-range surface-to-air missiles.

In terms of ground forces for military restructuring centered on advanced military assets, the

range of surveillance and strike systems will be expanded by securing unmanned ISR UAVs
for each echelon, division-level counter battery radars, 230mm multiple rocket launchers, and
KTSSM-Ⅱ. The fielding of Light Tactical Vehicle II and wheeled command post vehicles
will maximize combatants’ chances of survival as well as their maneuverability and combat
capabilities, while reducing the number of required personnel.

The maritime and amphibious forces include Korean destroyers, Jangbogo-III submarines,

unmanned surface and underwater vehicles, ship-to-air and ship-to-ground guided missiles,
Amphibious Assault Vehicles II, and amphibious helicopters, which are deployed to maintain
maritime superiority around the Korean Peninsula, protect the nation’s maritime rights and
interests, and attain division-level high-speed multi-dimensional amphibious landing operation
capability.

Improved air assets such as the F-X II, the newly improved F-15K fighter jets, and airborne

early warning and control (AEW&C) systems will be deployed to secure air superiority and
obtain covert infiltration and precision strike capabilities within the shortest possible time, while
the introduction of electronic warfare aircraft will secure non-kinetic destruction capability
to neutralize integrated air defense networks and wireless command and control systems. To
actively prepare for non-conventional threats such as space, cyberattacks, terrorism, and natural
disasters, the ROK Armed Forces will deploy space weather forecasting and warning systems,
laser air defense weapons, and Submarine Rescue ship-II to lay the foundations for effective
control of the space domain, expand capabilities to rapidly respond against terrorist attacks, and
improve the transportation and rescue capabilities in the event of a disaster.

The MND will also expand investment in the defense R&D sector and contribute to

promoting the defense industry and economic revitalization by investing heavily in eight
strategic defense technologies and various other cutting-edge technologies related to ultraspeed, high-power, high-precision strike as well as MUM-T combat operations.


-----

**Section**

**6** **Development of Elite Reserve Forces**

The MND aims to improve military combat capabilities while reorganizing military units in order
to prepare against rapid decline in military manpower resource due to changes in population
structure. To support this goal, the MND is striving to enhance the combat capability of the
reserve force by reinforcing the mobilization units, introducing and expanding the part-time
reserve force system as well as improving the reserve force training program by incorporating
advanced technologies.

**1. Improving Combat Capability of Mobilization-Oriented Units[17)]**


**Reinforcement of** The MND is developing elite reserve forces to secure its

**Mobilization-oriented Units** deterrence capabilities and strengthen the country’s ability to

sustain war even amidst an environment of rapidly declining

military manpower reserve. To this end, mobilization-oriented units, which were given lower priority

when compared to standing divisions, are being systematically reinforced according to annual plans

by dividing development areas into weapons (equipment),materiel, and personnel.

In the field of weapons, a need to reinforce the combat power of mobilization divisions in

areas such as personal firearms and mortars has been identified and reflected in defense planning

documents[18)]. In the field of material, a plan has been established to secure essential combat materiel

for mobilization-oriented units, such as bulletproof helmets, to ensure personnel survivability and

combat maneuverability, and efforts are being made to secure all necessary supplies and replace

obsolete supplies by 2024. Moreover, in the personnel field, specific plans have been established to

reinforce maintenance personnel and, in particular, part-time reserve forces are being actively utilized

to ensure that mobilization-oriented units can maintain a high level of combat power. The MND will

continue to reinforce the capabilities of mobilization-oriented forces in each field.


**17)**
The term “mobilization-oriented
units” refers to the Mobilization
Division, the Mobilization
Supplementary Battalion, and
the Army Mobilization Resources
Escort Group, which are primarily
composed of reserve forces
and are subordinate units of the
Mobilization Force Command.

**18)**
The Joint Military Strategy (JMS)
and the Joint Strategic Objective
Plan (JSOP).

**19)**
Results of the analysis by the
Army Analysis and Evaluation
Team (September 2018 - January
2019): combat preparation time
was reduced by 16 hours (75 → 59
hours), while combat power was
increased by 13%.


**Introduction and Expansion of the** The MND operates a part-time reserve force to prepare

**Part-time Reserve Force System** for decline in combat power due to reduction in active
duty personnel and to establish a high level of readiness

for mobilization. Part time reserve force refers to members of the reserve who apply and are selected

to fill key positions in the reserve force. Part time reservists are recalled for up to 180 days, in addition

to the compulsory training of two nights and three days, to carry out their missions.

The MND organizes and trains reserve forces selected under the part-time reserve force system

in peacetime and mobilizes them in the same positions in wartime to enable them to perform
their duties immediately.

This system originated from the part-time service system for reserve officers introduced by the

Republic of Korea Army in 2014. According to analysis conducted by the Army Analysis and

Evaluation Team,[19)] operating part-time reserve forces brought about positive effects, such as

shortening combat preparation time and improving combat power. Moreover, with the average annual

reapplication rate of 58%, it has been evaluated that reservists were highly satisfied with the ability

to continue their service to the nation by employing the skills they accumulated during their military


-----

service in parallel with their current occupation.

Despite such positive effects, there were certain limitations in that it is considerably difficult

to acquire the knowhow that is usually obtained during long-term service within a short period
of mobilization and training amounting to fewer than 30 days of training per year, as such, it
was difficult to employ these reservists to positions that requiring high levels of expertise such
as operating combat equipment and management of materiel. Accordingly, the MND amended
the Military Service Act and the Reserve Forces Act in 2021, renamed the Reserve Forces
system as the “Part-time Reserve Force System”, and established legal bases for expanding the
mobilization and training period to a maximum of 180 days per year.

As of December 2022, there are 3,804 part-time reservists in the entirety of the Republic of

Korea Armed Forces, a significant increase compared to 79 in 2014, when the system was first
introduced.[20)] Starting in 2021, this system was expanded to all branches of the military including
the Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps. In 2022, a long-term part-time reserve force system,
in which reservists are mobilized and trained for around 180 days per year, was piloted with
approximately 50 individuals.

In the future, the ROK Armed Forces will continue to analyze the results of operating part
time reserve forces and identify opportunities for improvement with the aim of establishing the
part-time reserve force system by 2024, determine the appropriate size of long- and short-term
part-time reserve forces, and prepare plans to expand the system in phases.


**Increasing the Number of Scientific** The Ministry of National Defense is integrating the

**Reserve Force Training Centers** 208 reserve force training grounds scattered across the

country into 40 scientific reserve force training centers

in order to manage the training sites more effectively and efficiently, while improving reserve forces’

ability to perform missions through practical

training. The first scientific training system was

introduced and tested at the Geumgok Reserve

Forces Training Center in 2014, test results

showed that the new training methods were

highly efficient and that reservists expressed

high satisfaction, leading to an increase in the

number of scientific reserve force training

centers nationwide to 17 by 2022.

Each scientific reserve force training center

consists of five facilities, including a security

training center, an urban combat training

**20)**

2014/2015: 79

2017: 269

2020: 1,769

2022: 3,754 short-term and 50

equipment. Furthermore, the squad team Virtual Reality Video Simulation Shooting Range long-term reserve personnel


-----

training environment will allow reservists to undergo training in an environment similar to that of

actual combat, including a chance to experience weapons noise and shoulder recoil.

In particular, a video simulation field using virtual reality (VR) technology was introduced at the

Seocho Scientific Reserve Force Training Center in 2020, and will be expanded gradually from

now on.

Moreover, a smart training management system for the reserve force has been established by

applying ICT-based mobile and wireless internet technology. This system converts the entire
training process, including admission registration and discharge, real-time evaluation, and
comprehensive control and management of the training center into data that can be verified real
time via mobile devices. Smartwatches are provided to reservists upon entering the scientific
reserve training center so that they may check their progress in real time, such as the number of
people on standby for each training course and whether they have passed the training objectives
for each stage, from admission to training, evaluation, and discharge. This system is expected
to provide benefits such as minimizing wait time for reservist training and improve training
effectiveness, as well as reducing administrative costs by managing training results in the form
of a database.

**[Figure 4-11]** **Smart Reserve Force Training Management System**

|실O외utd형oo rA APP|실I내nd형oor AAPP|
|---|---|

|Col1|Ta교ble관t P용C f or 테in블str릿uc toPrsC|
|---|---|
|Wear예ab비le 군for re웨ser어vis러ts블||

|Facility train|ing|
|---|---|
|시설물 materials||
|훈련Tex물tb자ook||
|U교as me보 o mf재u t nra iti in o|ing n|
|교탄B사ud용get||
|manageme|nt|
|예산관리||

|M급e식al평 ev가alu,a t메ion뉴, m선e호nu도 pr,e f급ere식nc현e, 황an d집 m계eal status aggregation|훈Tra련ini통ng제 co실ntrol room|
|---|---|

|<Tr<ai훈nin련g r결es과ult i입np력ut>> •• 우Exc수el자len,t t조rai기nee퇴, e소arl y등 •• 유d Mis a형c nh a,a gr g e사e m,유 ee ntc별t . by 관 typ리e and reason|Col2|
|---|---|
||국N가at동ion원al 정mo보bil체iza계tio n: i n결fo과rm a수tio신n system: Receive results|


**1. Admission registration and** **2. Real-time evaluation management**

1.입소등록 및 퇴소 관리discharge management 2. 실시간 평가 관리

measurement Breathalyzer체온측정Body temperature 음주측정 신분증 리더ID reader CCTVCCTV 실외형 APOutdoor AP 실내형 APIndoor AP BLE 스캐너BLE scanner

Tablet PC for 교관용

입소 등록Admission DIDDID Wearable for 예비군 테블릿 PCinstructors Training control room훈련통제실
훈련 통제실Training control registration reservists웨어러블

room

**3. Comprehensive control and** **4. Big data management of training results**

3.훈련장 종합관제 및 관리management of training grounds 4. 훈련결과 빅데이터 관리

Facility training

시설물

materials

훈련물자Textbook

Use of training 교보재ammunition 실내사격장(환경측정 센서)(Environmental measurement Indoor shooting range

교탄사용managementBudget sensor) Training control room: Real-time 훈련통제실 : 실시간 결산settlement

예산관리

<Training result input><훈련결과 입력>

- 우수자, 조기퇴소 등• Excellent trainee, early

- 유형, 사유별 관리• Management by type and discharge, etc.

reason

훈련통제실Training control room

Meal evaluation, menu preference, and meal 급식평가, 메뉴선호도, 급식현황 집계 국가동원정보체계 : 결과 수신National mobilization information
status aggregation system: Receive results


**Revitalization of Digital Administrative** In keeping with the spread of contact-free culture

**Services for Reserve Forces** due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the rapidly

changing digital environment, the MND is

expanding digital administration services to enhance convenience for members of the reserve forces.

In August 2021, the authentication process for logging onto the reserve forces website was

simplified by adding private certificates in addition to the mobile phone identity authentication
and public certificates. By doing so, the identity authentication process for accessing the reserve


Mobile delivery
of call-up notice
for reserve forces
education/training


-----

forces website was streamlined, thereby improving access to training information, enhancing
convenience for service users, and reducing costs associated with the identity verification
process.

In addition, an electronic document delivery system was established in December 2021 to

notify reservists of their recall notice for reserve force training via smartphone. This system
allows reservists to check their recall notice securely and efficiently without worrying about
losing the notice or exposing their personal information. The adoption of this system was
beneficial for the respective units as well as they could reduce the administrative cost associated
with printing the paper notices and sending them out through postal delivery. In the future,
the MND will continue to develop digital administration services by improving the reservists’
website and mobile call-up notice delivery service system, to enable members of the reserve
forces to use these services more conveniently and efficiently.


**Increasing Benefits for Reservists** The MND is improving the reservist system to

ensure effective training by providing appropriate

compensation to boost the moral of reservists and increase their participation in training
activities. Compensation for reservist training was raised substantially from 10,000 KRW in
2017 to 62,000 KRW in 2022.Improvements will be made to ensure that compensation is also
paid for regional reserve training, for which compensation was provided only for incidental
expenses such as transportation and lunch.

Moreover, during the COVID-19 pandemic, efforts were made to maintain the health of

reservists and their ability to carry out missions effectively, even under challenging conditions,
via flexible employment of trainings. No in person training was conducted from 2020 to 2021
when the COVID-19 pandemic was at its height, while only a reduced form of reserve training
resumed in June 2022, after the government relaxed its guidelines and restrictions regarding the
epidemic. The existing two-night, three-day training period was changed to one day of in person
training and one day of remote education, and the number of participants in the in person training
program was limited to an appropriate scale in view of social distancing conditions. In addition,
individual reservists were subjected to rapid antigen tests before entering the training center to
prevent viral infections, and thorough preparations were made, such as periodically disinfecting
training grounds and personal equipment, and installing partitions in cafeterias.

In the future, the MND will respond to new infectious disease situations and review training

methods accordingly in order to maintain reservist capabilities.

**2. Readiness for Mobilization**


**Development of the National Defense** The MND is developing the national defense

**Mobilization System** mobilization system on a continuous basis, such

as filing mobilization requirements, establishing

execution plans for mobilizing troops and wartime workers, establishing operational plans
for technical personnel and physical resources, and streamlining the operation of the national
defense mobilization information system, so that all human and material resources available


-----

in times of war or emergency may be mobilized to support military operations in an effective
and timely manner. In the field of troop mobilization, measures have been prepared to organize
reserve forces on the scale required for the military to deploy them effectively in the event of
war, major incident or emergency; measures have also been made to expand the mobilization
pool to minimize problems caused by the ongoing decrease in military manpower resource. To
this end, the ROK Armed Forces are collaborating with the Military Manpower Administration
to explore more efficient human resource management methods, such as concentrating the
mobilization of qualified personnel to key combat units in the early stages of conflict.

In addition, in the field of materiel mobilization, the ROK Armed Forces are collaborating

with eleven resource management agencies (ministries), including the Ministry of Public
Administration and Security, to ensure that appropriate materiel and equipment, as required
for wartime, are mobilized throughout the entire process, which includes verification of
requirements, deliberations, survey of resource, and designations. For items that are restricted
from mobilization, the MND has designated ‘substitute items’ or ‘similar items’.


**Management of Reserve Resources** Reserve forces are organized and managed to

prepare for war, major incidents and equivalent

national emergencies. Reserve forces carry out missions for regional defense and disasters in
peacetime and serve as supplementary source of manpower for creating and expanding active
units and loss of personnel during wartime. Based on the Reserve Forces Act and the Military
Personnel Management Act, officers and NCOs are designated as reservists up to retirement
age for their respective ranks, while conscripted service members are designated as reservists
up to eight years after discharge.

The number of reservists in 2022 stood at 2,730,000, with 6,000 female reservists and

special forces reserves assigned to the volunteer reserve forces[21)]. 2,995 regional reserve
military units have been set up in administrative districts and796 workplace reserve military
units in workplaces, these units are managed by each delegated military unit[22)].


**21)**
Personnel selected among ROK
citizens over 18 years of age who
apply for the reserve forces, as
prescribed in Article 3 of the
Reserve Forces Act.

**22)**
Military units entrusted with
the authority of the Minister of
National Defense regarding the
management and operation of
reserve forces, as prescribed
in Paragraph 1, Article 14 of the
Reserve Forces Act and Paragraph
1, Article 28 (1) of the Enforcement
Decree of the same Act.


-----

**Section**


###### Fostering the Defense Industry into a National Strategic Industry

The Ministry of National Defense and the Defense Acquisition Program Administration are
improving the defense acquisition system by simplifying the acquisition procedures in a bid
to facilitate the prompt application of rapidly changing advanced science and technology to
weapons systems. The MND and the DAPA are increasing investment in defense R&D and
strengthening cooperation between military, industrial, academic and research organizations
in order to apply innovative technologies to the field of defense, which may change the
paradigm of future battlefields. Furthermore, they have expanded various types of support to
foster the defense industry as a national strategic industry, as well as establishing the legal
basis for strengthening its competitiveness. As such, the MND and the DAPA are striving to
consolidate Republic of Korea as a global leader in this field by achieving quantitative growth
in defense industry exports and qualitative improvements, such as diversifying the list of
products and customer base.

**1. Advancing Defense R&D Innovation**


**Improving the Defense R&D System** The MND and the DAPA are seeking innovative

means of improving the defense R&D system to

prepare for the unpredictable nature of future battlefields and strengthen national competitiveness.

They are currently striving to secure advanced defense science and technology, shifting from

a “fast-follower” strategy focused on developing weapons system technologies needed by the
military to a “first-mover” strategy of acquiring advanced defense science and technology. The
principal goal of the leading defense R&D strategy is to create a challenge-driven defense R&D
environment in which future innovative technologies can be developed by adding technologypush method to the demand-pull type R&D, even in cases where the requirements for weapons
systems are undecided or unplanned.

In March 2020, the MND and the DAPA enacted the Defense Science and Technology

Innovation Promotion Act with the aim of promoting groundbreaking system improvements in
defense R&D. This Act has established the basis for “Future-leading Defense Technology R&D”
whereby new technology requirements can be created by conducting R&D with a challenging
spirit even when the requirements for weapons systems have yet to be determined. Furthermore, a
system that can promote defense research and development according to an “agreement” method
rather than under a “contract” between the government and research institutes was introduced to
ease the financial burden on companies and enable flexible project management. In addition, the
scope of applying the “Recognition of Conscientious Performance” system, which was previously
applied only to core technology development projects led by industry, academia, and research
institutes, was expanded so that it can be applied to all defense R&D projects pursued under
respective agreements.

By reducing the penalty imposed on research and development projects that fail to produce

satisfactory results, despite diligent effort by the participants, due to issues such as technical


-----

limitations, “Recognition of Conscientious Performance” aims to establish an environment where
innovative R&D can be carried out without fear of failure.

In April 2021, the MND and the DAPA enacted the Enforcement Decree and the Enforcement

Rules specifying the details delegated by the Defense Science and Technology Innovation
Promotion Act. Since then, the DAPA has revised the Intellectual Property Management
Guidelines, Public Notice on the Methods of Calculation and Collection and the Procedures
for the Collection of Defense Science and Technology Fees, and the Defense Technology
Research and Development Business Processing Guidelines related to the Defense Science and
Technology Innovation Promotion Act, in order to lay the institutional foundation for enhancing
the nation’s defense science and technology capabilities.

In 2023, the MND will focus on developing innovative and breakthrough technologies by

vitalizing research on future-breakthrough defense technologies, and will prepare the Base Plan for
Defense Science and Technology Innovation 2023-2037 according to a five-year cycle in order to
present the mid- to long-term development goals and directions for defense science and technology
as well as provide the basic guidelines for future defense technology development projects.

In the future, the MND and the DAPA will continue to focus their policy capabilities on

introducing advanced science and technologies, characterized by openness and convergence, to
the defense sector in an efficient and timely manner. To that end, they plan to expand the scope of
the defense science and technology beyond weapons system to include capability development
and formulate R&D strategies by strengthening the linkage amongst weapons system, force
support system and information systems. Furthermore, the plan will introduce the Loonshots
Project[23)] from 2023 onwards, which consists in identifying and developing innovative ideas and
technologies through private sector competition, to respond to the challenges posed by the future
battlefield environment. This project will also apply the superior technical capabilities of the
private sector to national defense while facilitating the development of breakthrough technologies
that exceed pre-existing boundaries for potential use in future battlefields. Furthermore, the MND
will continue to introduce new private-sector technologies into the defense sector and create an
transparent defense R&D environment, by identifying tasks with high defense utilization among
national R&D outcomes in the private sector and executing follow-up research.


**Expansion of Strategic Investment in** In the future, along with changes in the paradigm

**Defense R&D** of war, battlefields will become multi-layered

and diversified, even extending into outer space.

As competition for technological hegemony intensifies, leading nations are accelerating the
development of advanced technologies and strengthening policies for protecting technologies
associated with their national security strategy.

The MND and the DAPA have increased defense R&D expenditure significantly in a bid to

secure the capability to indigenously develop advanced weapons systems. The 2023 defense
R&D budget amounted to approximately 5.08 trillion won (KRW), representing an average
annual increase of 12% compared to the 2.9 trillion won (KRW) spent in 2018. Defense R&D
currently accounts for 8.8% of defense spending, although the figure will be increased to 10%
in the long term.

In the future, military power based on advanced science and technology will be the overriding


**23)**
This concept is mentioned in Safi
Bahcall’s book Loonshots and
refers to an innovative idea or
project that changes the rules of
war, medicine, or business, which
is generally considered to be
impossible.


-----

factor that determines victory or defeat in war. Accordingly, in the field of “game changer”
technologies that will change the future battlefield, such as space, artificial intelligence, quantum,
and energy, the MND is making efforts to secure original technologies early on based on the
principles of selection and concentration. In particular, preemptive effort is being made to develop
strategic parts entailing high costs and long-term investment, such as the domestic development
of core components necessary for next-generation reconnaissance, communication satellites, and
technological advances. In the future, the MND and the DAPA plan to invest heavily in strategic
research and development such as artificial intelligence, MUM-T, quantum physics, space, and
energy and focus their efforts on R&D aimed at securing super gap technologies that can provide
ROK with technological edge over its competitors.


**Strengthening the Link between Technology** The MND and the Defense Acquisition

**Development and Defense Requirements** Program Administration are pursuing

defense R&D in close cooperation with

the military and are working to support the military’s future strategic and tactical development
and the creation of new concepts of weapons systems.

First, the participation of the respective armed forces in the major decision-making process,

from the defense R&D planning stage to the selection of tasks, is being expanded. In particular,
the participation of each service is guaranteed not only in the core technology development
projects required for weapons systems, but also in carrying out challenging development
projects for future defense technologies that are not based on weapons system requirements.
Furthermore, the link between technology developments and weapon system requirements
has been strengthened so that the military can use the results of research and development by
matching defense R&D agencies with the relevant departments within the military.

Next, efforts will be made to strengthen the military’s R&D capabilities by improving the

organization and personnel of each service responsible for handling R&D. The plan is to
implement various measures aimed at establishing favorable conditions that allow each service
to actively conduct R&D, such as establishing systematic utilization and personnel management
plans through specifying the organizational structure and direction for securing personnel of
each service based on the results of a diagnosis of research and development phenomena in each
service, and conducting pilot civilian-military convergence R&D projects.


**Strengthening the Civil, Government and** The MND and the DAPA are working to con
**Military Cooperation System** centrate civil, government and military capa
bilities on fostering Armed Forces with

strong foundation in AI science and technology based on the National Defense Science and
Technology Innovation Promotion Act enacted in March 2020.

Participation and expansion of civilian experts play an important role in introducing rapidly

developing advanced science and technology into the military in an effective and timely manner.

Accordingly, in April 2021, the Korea Research Institute for Defense Technology Planning and

Advancement under the Defense Agency for Technology and Quality established a permanent
advisory system related to defense R&D by forming a Defense Technology Innovation Council
composed of civilian experts. In this Council, experts from government-sponsored research


-----

institutes, universities and defense industries actively participate in identifying projects and
planning research in cutting-edge new technology fields such as AI, virtual reality, advanced
materials, and new sources of energy. In the future, the Council will continue to increase its pool
of civilian experts, while extending the scope of its functions to include technology evaluation,
performance dissemination, and defense industry support.

Furthermore, since 2019, the MND and the DAPA have been promoting R&D in cooperation

with the Ministry of Science and ICT, in order to secure core defense technologies by
exploring and utilizing R&D results from the private sector. In the future, they will plan tasks
in consideration of military applications and further strengthen civil, government and military
collaboration to jointly apply the R&D results to weapons systems.

**2. Reinforcing Defense Industry Competitiveness**


**Establishing Foundations for Leapfrogging** Since declaring the policy to foster the

**Growth of the Defense Industry** defense industry to bolster the nation’s

capability to pursuit self-reliant national

defense in the 1970s, Republic of Korea has today become a leading nation capable of
indigenously developing and exporting cutting-edge weapon systems. The development of
the defense industry is not only directly linked to the strengthening of the nation’s defense
capabilities, but also has economic merit in terms of import substitution, job creation, as well as
development of associated science and technology.

To create a new growth engine by fostering advanced defense industries, the MND began

process of selecting 100 innovative defense enterprises in May 2022, and has carried out defense
venture incubation projects providing total package support to qualified defense enterprises
and new small and medium-sized ventures since July of the same year. In November 2022, it
established a strategy for fostering companies specializing in defense and space to create an
ecosystem for the domestic space industry, and also created an advanced defense department
dedicated to training professional personnel. It also engaged in on-site communication with
defense industries to listen to their difficulties, and introduced key policies aimed at improving
business conditions in the defense sector.

Meanwhile, the MND established the Defense Technology Innovation Fund in September

2022, in a drive to increase private sector investment in the defense industry, and has maintained
the financial support systems designed to ease the barriers to obtaining business loans for small
and medium-sized ventures, provided emergency business stabilization funds, and strengthened
practical loan support. It has also established a customized strategy for selecting crucial items for
economic security in the defense sector and stabilizing supply and demand in order to respond
proactively to instability in the global supply chain.

The support measures designed to promote the entry of qualified small and medium-sized

ventures to the defense sector and to expand their growth potential are also being strengthened,

and, as a part of this policy, the Defense Innovation Cluster project to construct a regional defense

industry ecosystem is being carried out. The Gyeongnam/Changwon Defense Innovation Cluster,

established in April 2021, achieved significant results, such as supporting the establishment of


-----

five start-ups in the region and contracts worth of 21.2 billion won (KRW). In July 2022, in a
bid to create an innovative growth ecosystem for the drone industry and lead the future market,
Daejeon Metropolitan City was newly designated as a defense innovation cluster specializing
in drone technology, and there are now plans to expand this project by gradually designating
other regions to foster region-specific advanced defense industries by 2026, and to establish
them as the foothold for promoting the defense industry into a national strategic industry.


**Strengthening Government-wide Cooperation** It is essential to pursue and promote

**to Foster the Defense Industry** defense exports by broadly considering

not only the potential economic

benefits but also the prevailing diplomatic and security situation, political stability, and the
need to provide economic support. Recently, customers are requesting industrial cooperation
and financial support when negotiating contracts. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare
comprehensive support measures at the government level in order to vitalize defense industry
exports.

Accordingly, the MND has formed the Defense Industry Development Council to discuss

government-level support measures to foster the defense industry and boost defense exports.
Created in 2011, the Council was reorganized according to the Defense Industry Development
and Support Act, and held regular meetings on a semiannual basis. Co-chaired by the Minister
of National Defense and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Energy, its members include
the Minister of Defense Acquisition Program Administration and the Deputy Ministers of
the relevant ministries, including the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy, the Ministry of
Planning and Finance, the Ministry of Science and ICT, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The MND will continue its efforts to improve the global competitiveness of the Korean
defense industry by increasing the scope of participation to the Ministry of SMEs and Startups,
the National Intelligence Service, the Korea Defense Industry Association, and each military
service within the Defense Industry Development Council so as to better identify the interests of
purchasing countries in advance and strengthen the cooperation system between the ministries
and organizations concerned.


**Establishment of a Rational and Efficient System** The MND and the DAPA have formed

**of Decision Making and Collaboration** the Defense Acquisition Program

Council to resolve issues arising from

project implementation promptly and efficiently. The Defense Acquisition Program Council is
a consultative body co-chaired by the Vice Minister of National Defense and the Minister of
Defense Acquisition Program Administration, in which all relevant organizations including the
JCS, each military service, the Agency for Defense Development, and the Defense Agency for
Technology and Quality participate. The MND has tasked the Council with the rapid deployment
of major weapons systems and the improvement of acquisition systems, and will continue to
strengthen communication and collaboration with the relevant agencies to establish an efficient
business execution system.


-----

**Improvement of the Weapons System Acquisition** The MND and the DAPA aim to im
**Process based upon Speed and Efficiency** prove the speed and efficiency of the

weapons system acquisition procedure

in order to quickly respond to the rapidly changing security environment and apply Industry 4.0
technology to weapons systems. First, in 2020, they initiated the Rapid Demonstration Acquisition
Project, which allows the military to promptly procure suitable weapons systems that incorporate
advanced civilian technology after operating them on a trial basis, and then expanded the system to
include R&D projects in addition to the existing procurement project from 2021 onward.

Furthermore, the defense acquisition process has been made more efficient by simplifying the

requirement verification procedure and the prior research procedure. The required verification
period was reduced from 6 to 4 months, the scope of the verification target was raised from
KRW 100 billion or more to KRW 200 billion or more, and the number of prior research
analysis items was reduced from 32 to 14 to ease the rigidity of the existing acquisition system
and shorten the administrative period. In addition, during the development of the system, portion
of the mass-production volume was produced to perform field operation tests (FT), significantly
shortening the preparation period for mass production, which took two years or more after
development was complete. In the future, the ROK will continue to eliminate unnecessary
administrative procedures and integrate redundant tasks to streamline the weapons acquisition
process to field advanced technology in a timely manner.


**Strengthening the Professional** In 2021, the MND and the DAPA established the

**Capabilities of Defense Acquisition** Defense Acquisition Program Training Institute, a

professional institute in the acquisition field, to train

**Personnel**

defense professionals and key talents of the Fourth

Industrial Revolution and the new era of space in the defense domain. The Defense Acquisition
Program Training Institute has established a systematic education system for all defense
projects, ranging from requirements, fielding, operation and maintenance, from the perspective
of the total life cycle of the weapons systems. The curriculum encompasses all areas including
training and instruction related to defense industry policies, such as the fostering of the defense
industry, the promotion of defense exports and the protection of technologies, the provision
of education courses on future advanced technologies such as AI, space, and robots based on
rapidly changing technological and industrial trends, as well as fundamental education in the
field of weapons system acquisition.

Since its establishment, the Institute has developed a training course designed to enable

personnel to diagnose and analyze problems and situations and present solutions in the project
sites, and will further develop it from 2023 by adding practical job training and strengthening the
comprehensive educational support for participants in civil, government, and military projects.

In addition, it plans to expand the sharing of academic resources through joint workshops and

faculty exchanges with leading domestic and international educational institutions, such as the
U.S. Defense Acquisition University (DAU), in order to advance expertise in acquisition.

Furthermore, the relevant laws and regulations are being revised to improve the professional

qualification process for defense acquisition managers organized by the Defense Acquisition
Program Training Institute, and policy support is being prepared to ensure that professionals


-----

who have obtained qualifications and certifications can demonstrate their capabilities in the
relevant industrial fields.

**3. Revitalization of Defense Exports**

Because it is difficult for the Republic of Korea to maintain and develop the foundations of its
defense industry based on domestic demand alone, defense exports are essential to maintain the
defense industry infrastructure. In addition, when defense exports increase, the defense industry
is revitalized; not only does it contribute to economic revitalization by creating high-quality jobs,
but it also reduces the cost of acquiring, operating and maintaining weapons systems due to the
economies of scale achieved by mass production, as well as enabling timely military support. For
this reason, the ROK government, including the MND, is paying close attention and making every
effort to establish high-level channels for cooperation, operate a defense export support system,
establish a multi-ministry defense export support mechanism, and promote the excellence of ROK
weapons systems.

Further efforts to increase defense exports by applying the government’s firm support policy, on

the back of the most significant defense export performance in the country’s history in 2022, will
help to strengthen the foundations of the ROK defense industry, which will in turn create a solid
foundation for the construction of advanced military force as well as establishing a virtuous cycle
of advanced military force construction and defense exports that drive additional defense exports.

**[Figure 4-12]** **] Strategy for Building a Virtuous Cycle between High-tech Military Force Construction and**

**Defense Exports**


**Defense Industry**

**Accumulated Technology**
**Foundation**

**Robust**

**Government Support**


Increase Defense

Industry Exports

Strengthen the

Build Foundations

Advanced of Defense

Military Force Industry


-----

**Strengthening Export Competitiveness** Because defense cooperation is closely related

**through Government Support** to security, politics and diplomacy with partner

countries and is based on trust between nations,

government-level support is critical. Accordingly, the MND and the DAPA have signed MOUs
for defense industry cooperation with key partners such as Australia and the UAE, and have
established and operated continuous cooperative channels, such as the Joint Committee on
Defense Acquisition, to promote defense exports.

In addition, high-level meetings such as the Korea-Poland Defense Ministerial Meeting in May

2022 are held frequently to discuss ways of promoting defense cooperation.

Despite the global COVID-19 pandemic that began in late 2019, international exhibitions

such as the Seoul International Aerospace and Defense Industry Exhibition (Seoul ADEX),
Korea Defense Industry Exhibition (DX-Korea), and International Maritime Defense Industry
Exhibition (MADEX) were successfully held under strict social distancing, providing a venue
for international defense cooperation and promoting the excellence of our weapons systems. In
particular, 188 companies from 40 countries participated in DX-Korea 2022, which led to orders
of more than USD 82 million and developed
K-Defense’s sales diplomacy by exhibiting
twenty-one types of military and commercial
export equipment, including K2 tanks. The
venue also showcased the excellence of
Korea’s weapons systems, including a mobile
firepower demonstration utilizing a MUM-T
combat system.

To improve the global competitiveness of

ROK companies, the government continues 2022 Korea Defense Industry Exhibition
to operate customized export support
programs, such as remodeling and developing weapons systems for export and supporting
overseas market development. From 2019 to 2022, the export technical fees payable to the
government were temporarily exempted, and the measures for alleviating the financial burden on
companies, such as the reduction of royalties, are under continuous review. Also, since 2020, the
ROK Armed Forces implemented the Military Demonstration Operational System for Exports
of Weapons Systems to improve the credibility of products made by the ROK defense industry
by having the ROK military pilot run weapons systems developed for export purposes. In 2021,
the MND conducted a pilot run of the Redback Infantry Fighting Vehicle for export to Australia,
in the future this will be expand to include not only weapons systems but also weapon support
systems, and the scope of pilot operations will be expanded to provide continuous support to
strengthen the export competitiveness of the ROK defense industry.


**Diversification of Defense** Up to this point, the majority of defense exports have been

**Industry Export Methods** made up of finished weapons systems. However, with the

ongoing development of the domestic defense industry,

the number of export target countries has increased and the requirements of each target country
have diversified, and exports now include advanced weapons systems such as the FA-50 and


DX KOREA 2022


-----

the Cheongung (M-SAM)-II. As a result, there is a growing need to establish various export
methods by including joint R&D, local production, and industrial cooperation in defense export
negotiations.

To this end, the MND and the DAPA are researching export strategies customized for each

country and business in order to identify the interests of diverse countries in advance, and are
proactively building a cooperative system under a business agreement signed with the Korea
Atomic Energy Research Institute in July 2022 to jointly promote exports in the defense and
nuclear power plant field. Furthermore, through consultation is being made with the Ministry
of Trade, Industry and Energy on defense and civilian industry export packages to link major
defense export projects with the private sector; furthermore, effort is being made to provide
urgently required financial support to potential customers through close cooperation with the
Export-Import Bank of Korea. In the future, the MND will seek to establish mutual trust and
cooperation with purchasing countries by preparing a defense cooperation package that includes
follow-up military support, such as education, training, and maintenance, so as to minimize the
problems that may arise after delivery of such weapons system.


**Expansion of Defense Industry Exports** As a result of the government effort to vitalize

defense exports, export orders, which amounted

to about USD 3 billion in 2010, increased significantly to USD 7.25 billion in 2021 and again
to USD 17.3 billion in 2022, a fivefold increase over the average figure for the previous five
years, creating 130,000 jobs and generating KRW 46 trillion in terms of effect on production
inducement. Meanwhile, the export destinations have expanded to include Asia, the Middle
East, North America, Europe, Oceania, and Africa, and the range of products is also expanding
from firearms and ammunition to major weapon systems for army, navy, and air forces, as well
as advanced weapons systems such as guided munitions.

Notably, the ROK exported the Cheongung-II, an advanced complex weapons system

combining high-precision guided missiles, multi-function radars, launchers and engagement
control stations, to the UAE for the first time in 2022; furthermore, a large number of the ROK
military’s leading weapons systems, including K2 tanks, K9 self-propelled howitzers, FA50, and Chunmoo Multiple Rocket Launchers were exported to Poland. In addition, various
cooperative projects were carried out, showcasing the excellence and advanced technology of
the ROK weapons systems internally and externally.

In the future, the ROK government will continue to make concerted efforts to become the

fourth largest defense industry exporter after the U.S., Russia, and France in the global defense
industry market by fostering a technology-innovative defense industry with a global competitive
advantage and maintaining growth in defense export through a market entry strategy tailored to
the characteristics of each client country.


-----

**[Figure 4-13]** **Defense Export Orders by Year**


**Fivefold increase compared**

**USD 17.3 billion**

**to the average figure for the**
**previous 5 years**

**USD 7.25 billion**

Approx. USD 3 billion

2017’17 2018’18 2019 ’202020 2021’21 2022’


**Deepening and Expanding ROK-U.S. Defense** The first generation of defense industry

**Industry Cooperation** cooperation between the Republic of

Korea and the United States which

lasted from 1950 to 1990, was weapons being unilaterally introduced to Republic of Korea
from the U.S. From 1990 to the present, this relationship developed into the second generation,
when greater cooperation on the supply of parts was achieved through offset trade. In the
future, the ROK and the U.S. will move forward to a third-generation phase of defense industry
cooperation in which the two countries jointly carry out everything from early-stage R&D to
production and marketing.

The capabilities of the ROK’s defense industry have grown significantly to the point that

it now actively exports weapons systems to the global market, having advanced far beyond
meeting the needs of its domestic requirement. The Republic of Korea is the world’s eighth
largest arms exporter, accounting for 2.8% of the global export market share from 2017 to
2021,[24)] and ranks ninth in the world in terms of defense science and technology.[25)] Based on
these technological developments, the ROK and the U.S. agreed to strengthen their partnership
in the supply chain, joint development, and manufacturing in the defense industry through the
ROK-U.S. Leaders’ Joint Statement issued in May 2022, in order to pave the way for further
expansion. Meanwhile, the MND plans to expand the opportunities for ROK companies to
participate in the U.S. global supply chain and jointly develop advanced technologies by signing
the ROK-U.S. Reciprocal Defense Procurement (RDP Agreement). The two countries will
work together to construct the ROK-U.S. Defense Science and Technology Center with the
aim of establishing a future-oriented partnership that enhances the efficiency and timeliness
of technical cooperation. In the future, the MND and the DAPA will strive to transform the
ROK-U.S Alliance from the current military and security alliance into a comprehensive security
and technology-oriented alliance.


**24)**
SIPRI (Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute), 2022
SIPRI Arms Transfers Database.

**25)**
Defence Science and Technology
Laboratory, 2021 Defense Science
and Technology Level Survey.


-----

-----

**Chapter**
# 5

**A Leap Forward in the ROK-U.S.**
**Alliance and Deeper and**
**Broader Defense Cooperation**

**Section 1. Developing the ROK-U.S. Alliance into a**

Global Comprehensive Strategic Alliance

**Section 2. Strengthening the Alliance’s Deterrence**

and Response Capabilities against North
Korean Nuclear and Missile Threats

**Section 3. Establishing a Robust ROK-U.S. Combined**

Defense Posture

**Section 4. Conditions-based Wartime OPCON**

Transition

**Section 5. Deeper and Broader Defense Cooperation**

and Exchange

**Section 6. Participation in International**

Peacekeeping Operations and Protection
of Overseas Citizens


54 h ROK U S S i C l i M i (N b 2022)


-----

**Section**


###### Developing the ROK-U.S. Alliance into a Global Comprehensive Strategic Alliance

As a defense partnership founded on the shared values of human rights and democracy,
the ROK-U.S. Alliance has been the bedrock of peace, security, and prosperity for the
Korean peninsula, as well as the region, for the past seven decades. Today, in the face of
increasingly diverse and complex challenges to global security, the ROK and the U.S. are
steadily deepening and broadening their bilateral alliance for more effective joint response
to threats. The two countries are expanding the scope of alliance cooperation beyond the
Korean peninsula to Indo-Pacific and other regions around the globe. Going forward, bilateral
defense cooperation will be further intensified in domains including space, cyberspace, and
defense technology, and industry. Moreover, in light of grave security concerns presented
by advancing North Korean nuclear and missile threats, the credibility of the U.S. extended
deterrence will be enhanced and the two countries will closely coordinate with each other to
bolster the combined defense posture. Meanwhile, based on the ironclad ROK-U.S. Alliance,
the ROK will also seek to strengthen ROK-U.S.-Japan trilateral security cooperation.

**1. Deeper and Broader ROK-U.S. Alliance Cooperation**

Resting on the pillars of common values of freedom, democracy, human rights, and the rule
of law and founded on mutual trust, the ROK-U.S. Alliance has been the linchpin of peace,
stability, and prosperity on the Korean Peninsula and the region for more than 70 years. Its
contribution during this period has not been limited to the domain of defense. The Alliance
has also played a crucial role for the political, economic, social, and cultural development of
the Republic of Korea. More recently, a new vision for the future of the ROK-U.S. Alliance
has been unveiled during the bilateral summit held in May 2022. To more effectively
respond to the rapidly evolving strategic environment and growing challenges to global
security, the leaders of the two countries agreed to develop the bilateral alliance into a “global
comprehensive strategic alliance.” Under this new vision, the scope of the ROK-U.S. Alliance
will expand to a global level, while the level of cooperation deepens in domains including
space, cyberspace, defense science and technology, and defense industry.


**Expanding Global Cooperation** Carrying on the momentum from the bilateral summit

and successive rounds of ministerial-level talks,

the two countries’ defense leaders agreed during the 54th Security Consultative Meeting
(SCM), that the ROK-U.S. Alliance must play a key role in promoting security, stability,
and prosperity in the Indo-Pacific and decided to continuously expand defense and security
cooperation in the region as well as at a global level. It was further agreed that as the ROK
established its Indo-Pacific Strategy areas of convergence in national interest between the two
countries will be expanded and methods of cooperation in these areas will be continuously
explored.


54th ROK-U.S.
Security
Consultative
Meeting (SCM)


-----

Meanwhile, in November 2022, during a presentation of the ROK Indo-Pacific Strategy at

the ASEAN-Republic of Korea Summit, President Yoon announced the vision of promoting
freedom, peace, and prosperity in the region and vowed to increase cooperation with regional
partners based on the principles of inclusiveness, trust, and reciprocity.

In December, the Yoon administration issued the “Strategy for a Free, Peaceful, and

Prosperous Indo-Pacific Region” based on this vision. Nine core lines of effort were
proposed as part of this strategy, of which three were related to defense, including fostering
a regional order based on internationals rules and norms in Indo-Pacific, strengthening
cooperation against nuclear proliferation and terrorism, and increasing comprehensive
security cooperation, in a clear demonstration of the administration’s commitment to
contributing to the security of the region. The Ministry of National Defense will concretize
implementation tasks for defense sector based on the ROK Indo-Pacific Strategy by the end
of the first half of 2023.

The Ministry of National Defense plans to engage in wide-ranging efforts to expand

defense cooperation with ASEAN countries based on the Korea-ASEAN Solidarity Initiative
(KASI)[1)], recently announced by the government. As part of these efforts, strategies will be
customized to meet defense cooperation demands in various areas that exist among ASEAN
countries. Support will be provided to strengthen their maritime security capabilities to
help them better respond to security challenges facing the region. Given that the Biden
administration’s “Indo-Pacific Strategy” lays out a strong emphasis on cooperation with
ASEAN countries, increasing defense cooperation with these countries can be a good way
for the ROK to coordinate its Indo-Pacific Strategy with the U.S. The ROK and the U.S.
will enhance interoperability through joint participation in multinational exercises involving
ASEAN countries and improve joint response capabilities against transnational, nontraditional threats through minilateral cooperation with them.

The Ministry of National Defense takes part in the efforts of allies and partners to combine

multilateral resources to assist Ukraine by providing humanitarian aid in conflict zones, in
the form of humanitarian assistance such as emergency medical supply and food.

Going forward, it will explore ways for the ROK and the U.S. to cooperate with the Pacific

Island Countries in the defense domain to respond to non-traditional security threats, while
also seeking to increase cooperation with European countries. The Ministry of National
Defense will strive to effectively support the government’s vision for a “global pivotal state,”
playing a larger role on the international stage and making greater contributions to the global
community, in defense-related areas.


**1)**
The ROK government’s
presentation on its ASEAN
policy during the 23rd ASEANRepublic of Korea Summit
(November 11, 2022):
1. Promotion of a rule
based international order,
contribution to peace and
prosperity in the region;

2. Pursuit of shared prosperity

and growth;

3. Strengthening joint response

to regional and international
challenges.

**2)**
A subcommittee of the
SCM that meets annually to
discuss ROK-U.S. cooperation
in defense industry and
technology.


**Increasing Cooperation in** The ROK and the U.S. are expanding the scope of bilateral

**Diverse Areas** cooperation beyond the traditional domains of defense

and security to other diverse areas, including space and

cyberspace. In addition to cooperation carried out through existing defense technology
consultative bodies such as DTICC (Defense Technological & Industrial Cooperation
Committee)[2)], the two countries have decided to put efforts in various other fields, ranging
from space and quantum technology to AI and autonomous technology.

Meanwhile, to enhance the Alliance’s comprehensive capabilities, it was further decided


-----

that the two countries will continuously expand cooperation in space and cyber domains.

Based on the accomplishments of the Space Cooperation Working Group (SCWG)

and the Joint Space Policy Research Agreement[3)], the two countries will explore ways of
strengthening cooperation in broad-ranging areas related to space technology. Moreover, to
ensure a safe and sustainable space environment, the ROK and the U.S. are bolstering the
alliance’s space capabilities, for instance, by setting up a space situation awareness (SSA)
information sharing system, at the same time as increasing the size and scope of combined
exercises and training and through more frequent exchanges for the development of skilled
manpower.

In the cyber domain, the ROK and the U.S. will ramp up cooperation to respond to a

wide spectrum of cyber threats, including state sponsored cyberattacks. In May 2022, the
Cyber Cooperation Working Group (CCWG) was held to discuss growing cyber security
threats. The two allies are increasing cooperation for a combined response to cyber threats
by conducting bilateral cyber exercises and training events and closely communicating and
coordinating with each other on issues in diverse areas of cyber security.


**Close Policy Coordination between** Amid a rapidly evolving security environment,

**Defense Authorities** the ROK and the U.S. defense authorities

have deepened the regular high-level security

consultative mechanisms[4)] and are in close collaboration through continuous policy
discussions. Since the recent summit in May 2022, the two countries’ defense chiefs held
two successive talks in May and July, generating new momentum for alliance cooperation.
Later, during the 54th Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) convened in November 2022,
the U.S.’ unwavering commitment to guaranteeing the security of the Korean peninsula
was reaffirmed and a range of measures to reinforce the combined defense posture were
discussed. An important outcome of this meeting was the creation of a policy framework to
improve the credibility of U.S. extended deterrence to effectively deter and strongly respond
to North Korean nuclear and missile threats. To enhance the credibility of U.S. extended
deterrence, the ROK and the U.S. have increased the frequency and intensity of deployment
of strategic assets such as aircraft carriers, nuclear-powered submarines, and strategic
bombers. Moreover, in deploying U.S. strategic assets in and around the Korean peninsula,
the two sides agreed to deploy them in a timely and coordinated manner. The ROK and
the U.S. plan to identify additional measures that may be required to counter North Korean
threats to further strengthen the alliance’s deterrence and response posture.

The ROK and the U.S. defense officials repeatedly expressed their strong support for the

ROK government’s “Audacious Initiative” and stressed the importance of the united efforts
of the international community to promote peace on the Korean peninsula by reminding the
fact that 2023 marks the 70th anniversary of the Armistice Agreement of the Korean War.
They also agreed that in order to ease military tensions on the Korean peninsula and build
trust, the two Koreas need to make an effort to comply with the Armistice Agreement and
other existing agreements.


**3)**
About the accomplishments of
the 54th SCM SCWG and the
details of the agreement on
joint space policy research, see
pp 123-124 herein.

**4)**
Including SCM, MCM (Military
Committee Meeting), and KIDD
(Korea-U.S. Integrated Defense
Dialogue).


-----

**Development of ROK-U.S.-Japan** As part of the continuing effort to deter and respond

**Security Cooperation** to advancing North Korean nuclear and missile

threats, the Ministry of National Defense is making

progress on trilateral security cooperation with the U.S. and Japan. Based on the enduring
ROK-U.S. Alliance, the ROK government pursued high-level ROK-U.S.-Japan policy
consultations, information sharing, trilateral exercises, and personnel exchanges.

2022 showed meaningful developments in ROK-U.S.-Japan trilateral exercises in response

to the ongoing North Korean provocations. In September 2022, ROK-U.S.-Japan AntiSubmarine Warfare (ASW) exercise, suspended since 2017, was resumed and held in the
international waters of the East Sea to improve the capability to respond against North
Korean submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM). In October, 2022, a ROK-U.S.-Japan
maritime missile defense exercise[5)] was carried out for the first time in the international
waters of the East Sea, in response to North Korea’s intermediate range ballistic missile
(IRBM) launch, to showcase the firm trilateral response posture.

In 2022, following the Shangri-La Dialogue in Singapore, the ROK-U.S.-Japan defense

ministerial talks was also resumed after a hiatus of nearly two and a half years since 2019.
The ROK-U.S.-Japan Defense Trilateral Talks (DTT)[6)], suspended after 2020, is also set to
resume sometime during the first half of 2023. During the trilateral summit in November
2022, an agreement was reached to share North Korean missile warning data in real time.
The three countries will closely work together to iron out the details of the information
sharing mechanism.

Going forward, to increase the deterrence effect against North Korean nuclear and missile

threats and enhance response capabilities in the event of a provocation, ROK, U.S., and
Japan will continue defensive exercises such as ASW, maritime missile defense, and missile
warning exercises. In addition, exercises that were discontinued since 2018, including search
and rescue, anti-piracy, and maritime interdiction, will be resumed and expanded. However,
any increase in security cooperation between the ROK and Japan will be pursued in phases
based on the improvement of relations between the two countries and in full consideration of
the ROK public sentiment.


**2. Guaranteeing Stable Stationing Conditions for USFK**


**Relocation of USFK Bases** The relocation of U.S. military bases is a major government

project aimed at promoting a balanced development of

national territory and guaranteeing stable stationing conditions for USFK troops. Under this
project, U.S. military bases that are currently scattered across the ROK will be relocated to
two principal hubs in Pyeongtaek and Daegu, which will strengthen the ROK-U.S. Alliance
and prevent armed conflicts on the Korean peninsula.

The construction of new bases began in November 2007. Since then, the Ministry of

National Defense has been pursuing relocation of USFK units as new bases become ready.
In 2022, the relocation of key command facilities and headquarters of the Combined
Forces Command was completed. Despite numerous challenges, including those posed by


**5)**
An exercise combining missile
warning exercise and ballistic
missile detection and tracking
exercise (Pacific Dragon)
to familiarize procedures
for detecting, tracking, and
intercepting North Korean
ballistic missiles.

**6)**
Deputy Minister level meeting
among the ROK, the U.S., and
Japan.


-----

the COVID-19 pandemic, the project was successfully carried out thanks to the efficient
coordination between the ROK and the U.S. defense authorities through bilateral consultative
mechanisms and active management of the construction process.

Under this project, the tracts of land in Seoul and other urban areas that have been returned

to civilian use are being developed into parks or for other suitable purposes. The efficient use
of these properties has contributed to local development, economic growth, and created large
number of jobs. The project has had a tremendously positive economic impact, particularly
on the domestic construction industry, by providing contract opportunities to local companies
and increasing the use of domestically-produced construction materials.

When the relocation of USFK bases comes to full completion, this is expected to

significantly improve stationing conditions for U.S. troops, providing them with a better
environment to carry out their mission of preventing armed conflict on the Korean peninsula
and contributing to peace and stability in Northeast Asia and around the world.


**7)**
Article 5 of the SOFA states the
following:

-  Paragraph 1: The U.S. will

bear all expenditures incident
to the maintenance of the
U.S. armed forces in the ROK
without cost to the ROK.

-  Paragraph 2: The ROK will

furnish all facilities and areas
of the U.S. without cost to the
U.S.

**8)**
The full title of this agreement
is “Agreement between the
United States of America
and the Republic of Korea
concerning special measures
relating to article V of the
Agreement under article IV
of the Mutual Defense Treaty
between the Republic of
Korea and the United States of
America, regarding facilities
and areas and the status of
United States Armed Forces in
the Republic of Korea.”

**9)**
Prior to 1991, the U.S. not
only bore the full cost of the
maintenance of U.S. troops in
Korea, pursuant to Article 5
of the SOFA, but also covered
the cost of constructing
facilities, which should have
been normally borne by the
ROK, in consideration of
the fiscal conditions of the
ROK government. However,
worsening U.S. fiscal
conditions and the growing
size of the ROK economy led
to the signing of the SMA
in 1991, under which the
ROK government agrees to
cover a portion of the cost of
maintaining U.S. troops.


**USFK Defense Cost-Sharing** To guarantee stable stationing conditions for U.S.

troops in the ROK and sustain a robust combined

defense posture, the ROK government shares the cost incidental to stationing USFK. The
ROK contribution to the maintenance of the U.S. armed forces in its territory constitutes an
exception to Article 5 of the ROK-U.S. Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA)[7)], which states
that the U.S. bears all associated expenditures. However, since 1991, in accordance with the
Special Measures Agreement (SMA)[8), 9)], the ROK Government has contributed financially
toward the upkeep of U.S. troops.

The defense contribution is composed of three components, labor cost sharing, Republic

of Korea-funded construction, and logistics cost sharing. According to the procedures agreed
upon under the SMA, the total amount of defense contribution by the ROK is determined
annually through negotiations with the U.S. and by allocating funds to each of the three
expenditure categories as appropriate. The total amount of contribution is decided in close
consultation between the two countries and is set to a level that is deemed fair and reasonable
based on the contribution of U.S. troops to the defense of the Korean peninsula and in
consideration of requirements necessary to provide suitable conditions for their stationing,
the ROK government’s cost-sharing capabilities, and the security situation.

The 11th Special Measures Agreement and associated implementation rules were finalized

through nine rounds of official meetings, starting in September 2019. The two countries’
defense authorities also consulted and coordinated with each other via diplomatic channels.
The 11th Special Measures Agreement, ratified in September 2021, is valid for six years until
2025. The ROK and the U.S. agreed to raise the total Korean defense contribution to KRW
1.0389 trillion for 2020 and KRW 1.1833 trillion for 2021 and increase the amount for the
subsequent four years between 2022 and 2025 by the previous year’s rate of change in the
ROK defense budget. Meanwhile, noting that Korean employees of USFK were for the first
time put on unpaid leave in 2020 while the negotiations for the 11th SMA were underway,
a clause was added to state that in the absence of an agreement, salaries and wages may
be paid in amounts equivalent to the previous year’s amounts so that the employment and
livelihood of Korean workers are not unduly affected by SMA negotiations.


-----

Most of the defense contribution paid by the ROK government is returned to the ROK

economy by creating new jobs, stimulating domestic demand, and promoting the growth of
the local economy. The full amount of contribution toward wages and compensation is used
to pay salaries to Korean workers employed by USFK, while 88% of contribution toward
military construction costs, excluding design and inspection costs, and the full amount
of contribution toward logistics support costs are provided in-kind (facilities, equipment,
services, etc.) through Korean firms.



**[Figure 5-1]** **Defense Contribution by Year**


unit: hundreds of millions of USD

|SMA|1st & 2nd|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|3rd|Col8|Col9|4th|Col11|Col12|5th|Col14|Col15|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Year|1991|1992|1993|1994|1995|1996|1997|1998|1999|2000|2001|2002|2003|2004|
|Amount|1.5|1.8|2.2|2.6|3.0|3.3|3.6|3.9|3.3|3.9|4.4|4.7|5.5|6.2|



unit: hundreds of millions of USD

|SMA|6th|Col3|7th|Col5|8th|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|9th|Col12|Col13|Col14|Col15|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Year|2005|2006|2007|2008|2009|2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|
|Amount|6,804|6,804|7,255|7,415|7,600|7,904|8,125|8,361|8,695|9,200|9,320|9,441|9,507|9,602|
|SMA|10th||11th||||||||||||
|Year|2019||2020||2021||2022||2023||2024||2025||
|Amount|10,389||10,389||11,833||12,472||Amounts calculated by applying the prior year’s rate of increase in the Korean defense budget||||||


*During the 6th SMA, it was decided that all contributions will henceforth be made in Korean won.

The ROK-U.S. SMA has undergone numerous changes over the past 30 years. The

governments of the two countries have made sustained efforts to improve the defense costsharing system to bring it in line with ROK’s maturing democracy and civil society. The ROK
government has a greater say over the way its defense contribution is spent than in the past
and is allowed to make adjustments to the list of military construction projects proposed by
the U.S. or limit additional projects. This change has measurably increased transparency and
accountability in the cost-sharing process. Meanwhile, steps have been taken to prevent the
future occurrence of unpaid furloughs and the minimum portion of the defense contribution
that goes to wages and compensation was set to a higher amount to protect the rights and
interests of Koreans working for USFK and guarantee stable employment conditions for them.

In addition to the defense cost-sharing contribution, the ROK government also provides

other types of direct and indirect support[10)] to USFK in various areas. The level and details of
direct and indirect support have varied over time depending on the security environment. For
example, the ROK government funds projects to improve the environment in the surrounding
areas of U.S. military bases and covers costs associated with the use of the U.S. communications
line and combined C4I system, while continuously providing indirect support in the form of
tax reduction and exemption. The ROK government will continue to maintain dialogue with
the U.S. government to ensure that its defense contribution is fair, reasonable and acceptable
for both sides.


**10)**
Direct and indirect support are
defined as follows:

-  Direct support: Types of

support that directly entail
government expenditures.

-  Indirect support: Types of

support that have the effect
of reducing financial and
resource requirements of U.S.
forces stationed in the ROK
without entailing government
expenditures.


-----

**[Figure 5-2] Allocation of the Defense Contribution (2022)**


**11)**
This award was established in
2013, on the occasion of the 60th
anniversary of the ROK-U.S.
Alliance, to highlight its
significance and importance by
recognizing and honoring the
achievements of U.S. citizens
who have made an outstanding
contribution to its development
and enduring strength

**12)**
In the early days of the Korean
War, General Walker ensured
the success of the Incheon
Landing Operation by defending
the vital Nakdonggang line
(winner of the 2013 award).

**13)**
Colonel Weber was Chair
of the Korean War Veterans
Memorial Foundation and was
actively involved in the effort
to preserve the memory of the
Korean War (winner of the 2014
award)

**14)**
General Van Fleet fought in
the Korean War as commander
of the U.S. Eighth Army. After
the war, he made continuous
efforts to contribute to the
advancement and development
of Korea, among others by
improving the training system
of the ROK Armed Forces in
post-war years (winner of the
2015 award)

**15)**
General Singlaub played a
central role in containing
the crisis on the Korean
peninsula in the aftermath of
the Panmunjeom axe murder
incident and made a major
contribution to the creation of
the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces
Command (winner of the 2016
award).


**40.8%**

Salaries and wages of Korean
workers employed by USFK (100% **14.6%**
cash contribution **Wages**

**KRW 508.4 billion** Services and materials

including ammunitions

**Logistics support** storage, aircraft maintenance,
**KRW 182.7billion** and railway and ground

**44.6%** transportation support

(100% in-kind)

Construction of facilities for USFK, **Military construction**
including barrack facilities (in-kind **KRW 556.1 billion**
contribution except for project design
and construction oversight cots)


**Efforts to Deepen ROK-U.S. Friendship**


**Efforts to Deepen ROK-U.S. Friendship** Amid the prolonged pandemic, starting in 2021, Landing Operation by defending

the vital Nakdonggang line

most programs and activities of ROK-U.S.fri- (winner of the 2013 award).

endship associations were shifted to small tours and visits. Nevertheless, these programs

**13)**

provided U.S. service members stationed in the ROK and their family members with a Colonel Weber was Chair
valuable opportunity to better understand and appreciate their host country, boosting their of the Korean War Veterans

Memorial Foundation and was

morale and helping them develop positive feelings about their service. In 2021-2022, an actively involved in the effort

to preserve the memory of the

array of events were organized for U.S. service personnel and their families, including visits Korean War (winner of the 2014
to the Korean Folk Village, the JSA (Joint Security Area), Dora Observatory, and Seoul award)
ADEX (Aerospace and Defense Exhibition). By helping to cement the bond between those **14)**
serving on the frontlines of the ROK-U.S. Alliance, these friendship events also helped General Van Fleet fought in the Korean War as commander
bolster the strength of the Alliance itself. of the U.S. Eighth Army. After

the war, he made continuous

In December 2021, in connection with the 53th Security Consultative Meeting, the efforts to contribute to the

Ministry of National Defense organized “ROK-U.S. Alliance Night,” which was attended advancement and development of Korea, among others by
by some 200 guests, including members of the two countries’ delegations, key government improving the training system

of the ROK Armed Forces in

officials, service members of USFK and the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command, post-war years (winner of the
and KATUSA soldiers. During this event, former U.S. Congressman Charles Rangel was 2015 award)
honored with the 9th Paik Sun-yup ROK-U.S. Alliance Award. The Paik Sun-yup ROK-U.S. **15)**

General Singlaub played a

Alliance Award[11)] was established in 2013 by the Ministry of National Defense to recognize central role in containing
the outstanding contributions of American the crisis on the Korean

peninsula in the aftermath of

citizens to the ROK-U.S. Alliance and the Panmunjeom axe murder

Command (winner of the 2016

Van Fleet[14)], Retired Major General

**16)**

Commander-in-Chief of the

he played a decisive role in the

Forces Command (winner of the

are the past recipients of this award. Paik Sun-yup ROK-U.S. Alliance Award (October 2022) 2017 award)


-----

In 2022, the 10th Paik Sun-yup ROK-U.S. Alliance Award was given to U.S. Senator Dan

Sullivan, co-chair of the Congressional Study Group on Korea[20)] and member of the Senate
Committee on Armed Services, who led legislative efforts related to U.S. forces in the ROK.

During the Trump administration, when the issue of reducing U.S. troops in the ROK was

brought up on the Senate floor, Senator Sullivan was one of the lawmakers who pushed for
adding a clause requiring consultations with the legislature for any drawdown or withdrawal
of U.S. troops in the ROK in the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA). Senator
Sullivan also proposed the resolution to dedicate a new Wall of Remembrance[21)] to Korean
War Veterans.


**17)**
General Clark served as the
third Commander-in-Chief of
the United Nations Command
and negotiated and signed a
military armistice between the
United Nations Command and
the North Korean Army (winner
of the 2018 award).

**18)**
General Tilelli was the eighth
Commander-in-Chief of the
ROK-U.S. Combined Forces. He
led the initiative of dedicating
a “Wall of Remembrance”
to Korean War veterans and
contributed to ensuring the
continuous strength of the
ROK-U.S. Alliance (winner of
the 2019 award).

**19)**
During his term as the 26th
U.S. Secretary of Defense,
James Mattis contributed
to the defense of the Korean
peninsula by stressing the
importance of an unwavering
security commitment to the
ROK based on strong trust in
the ROK-U.S. Alliance (winner
of the 2020 award).

**20)**
A group on Korea policy within
the U.S. Congress

**21)**
A new monument added to the
Korean War Veterans Memorial
in Washington D.C. on June 26,
2022, displaying the names of
43,808 soldiers who died during
the war, including 36,634 U.S.
service members and 7,174
Korean Augmentation Troops
to the U.S. Army (KATUSA),
arranged by unit, rank and
alphabetical order.


-----

**Section**


###### Strengthening the Alliance’s Deterrence and Response Capabilities against North Korean Nuclear and Missile Threats

To effectively deter and respond against advancing North Korean nuclear and missile threats,
the ROK and the U.S. are enhancing the credibility of extended deterrence and developing
strategies to respond to this threat. The ROK and the U.S. have made clear that any nuclear
attack by North Korea would be met with an overwhelming and decisive response and are
continuously strengthening coordination to deter and respond against the North Korean
nuclear and missile threats.

**1. Enhancing the Capability to Execute U.S. Extended Deterrence and Upgrading**

**the Tailored Deterrence Strategy (TDS)**


**Enhancing the Credibility of** “Extended deterrence” refers to the U.S. policy of

**U.S. Extended Deterrence** providing deterrence to its allies by operating the full

range of its military capabilities, including nuclear,

conventional, missile defense and advanced non-nuclear capabilities. Enhancing the
capability to execute U.S. extended deterrence means improving the effectiveness and
feasibility of the deployment and operation of military means provided by the U.S. to deter
and respond against North Korean nuclear threats.

The U.S. commitment to provide its military capabilities to the ROK was first mentioned

in the Mutual Defense Treaty between the United States and the Republic of Korea, signed
in 1953. In 1978, during the 11th Security Consultative Meeting (SCM), the U.S. stated its
commitment to provide a nuclear umbrella[22)] for the ROK. Until then, military capabilities
provided by the U.S. were to deter against conventional threats from North Korea.

“Extended deterrence” was brought up for the first time in 2006, in the joint communiqué

that followed the 38th SCM, which was convened right after North Korea’s first nuclear
test.[23)] In 2009, the joint communiqué for the 41st SCM, which was held on the heels
of the second nuclear test by North Korea, helped strengthen Alliance confidence in
responding against North Korean threats by
mentioning concrete means for providing
extended deterrence.[24)] In 2022, in the
face of advancing North Korean nuclear
threats, the joint communiqué for the
54th SCM reaffirmed the unwavering
U.S. commitment to “providing extended
deterrence to the ROK utilizing the full
range of U.S. defense capabilities, including
nuclear, conventional, and missile defense Joint Press Conference for the ROK-U.S. Summit (May 2022)


**22)**
Nuclear capabilities provided
by a nuclear state for the
protection of a non-nuclear ally
in the event of an attack.

**23)**
“Secretary Rumsfeld offered
assurances of firm U.S.
commitment and immediate
support to the ROK, including
continuation of the extended
deterrence offered by the U.S.
nuclear umbrella, consistent
with the Mutual Defense
Treaty” (38th SCM Joint
Communiqué)

**24)**
“Secretary Gates reaffirmed
that U.S. commitment to
provide extended deterrence
for the ROK, using the full
range of military capabilities,
to include the U.S. nuclear
umbrella, conventional
strike, and missile defense
capabilities” (41st SCM Joint
Communiqué).


-----

capabilities and advanced non-nuclear capabilities.”[25)]

This signifies that, while means of extended deterrence were limited to nuclear,

conventional, and missile defense capabilities in the past, the U.S. will now leverage the full
range of its military capabilities, including advanced, cutting-edge non-nuclear capabilities
such as space, cyberspace and electromagnetic capabilities. The ROK and the U.S. operate
a range of policy consultation mechanisms, including the Deterrence Strategy Committee
(DSC) and the Extended Deterrence Strategy and Consultation Group (EDSCG) to enhance
the effectiveness of extended deterrence. The DSC, which is a deputy-minister level
consultative body between the two countries’ defense authorities, meets twice a year, once
during the first half and once during the second half, at the same time as the Korea-U.S.
Integrated Defense Dialogue (KIDD). The ROK and the U.S. maintain sustained dialogues,
focusing on various ways to deter and respond against the North Korean nuclear and missile
threats. The 13th DSC in August 2022 confirmed that the ROK-U.S. Tailored Deterrence
Strategy (TDS) is being revised into an effective and robust document in responding against
North Korean nuclear and WMD threats. It was also agreed during the meeting that the
Counter Missile Working Group (CMWG) will be established in order to reinforce the
alliance’s counter-missile capabilities and posture.

The EDSCG is a vice minister level consultative body jointly operated by the two countries’

diplomatic and defense authorities. By expanding the horizons of means of extended
deterrence beyond the military (M) domain to diplomatic, information, and economic (DIE)
domains,[26)] the EDSCG discusses ways to deter and respond against North Korean nuclear
and missile threats. In particular, following the agreement in May 2022 by the ROK and
the U.S. presidents to reactivate the consultative body, the 3rd EDSCG was convened in
September 2022 after a pause of four years and eight months.[27)] During the meeting, both
sides decided to further expand cooperation to enhance the capability to execute U.S. extended
deterrence. Through a joint statement issued at the end of this meeting, they reaffirmed the
further strengthened U.S. commitment to providing extended deterrence and agreed to deploy
and operate U.S. strategic assets in the region in a timely and effective manner, and develop
concrete ways to respond against all possible North Korean provocation scenarios. It was also
agreed that the EDSCG will meet henceforth on a regular basis, once a year.

3rd Extended Deterrence Strategy & Consultation Group 54th Security Consultative Meeting (November 2022)

(September 2022)


**25)**
“Advanced non-nuclear
capabilities” refers to space
and non- kinetic capabilities
including cyberspace or
electromagnetic capabilities.

**26)**
DIME: Diplomacy, information,
military, economy.

**27)**
EDSCG, the vice minister-level
meeting between the ROK and
the U.S., has not been held
since the second meeting in
January 2018 (first meeting in
December 2016).


-----

The 54th SCM in November 2022

marked an unprecedented step forward
in the alliance’s efforts to increase the
effectiveness of U.S. extended deterrence.
In the face of both direct and indirect North
Korean threats in 2022 against the ROK
territory, including a series of ballistic
missile launches, legislation of an offensive
nuclear weapons policy, and preparation ROK Minister of National Defense and U.S. Secretary of
for its seventh nuclear test. The ROK and Defense Visiting Joint Base Andrews (November 2022)
the U.S. issued the strongest warning yet
against North Korean provocations through the joint communiqué.

The joint communiqué included unusually stern warnings such as “any nuclear attack

against the United States and its allies, including the use of non-strategic nuclear weapons,
is unacceptable and will result in the end of the Kim regime,” which was a first of its kind.
Focusing on the possibility of nuclear weapons use by North Korea, the two sides agreed
to build a policy framework to enhance the capability to execute extended deterrence by
strengthening cooperation across multiple areas including information sharing, consultative
mechanisms, and joint planning and execution. They also decided on a variety of concrete
steps for its implementation, including the timely completion of the revision of the TDS and
conducting the “DSC Table-top Exercise” (hereafter, the “DSC TTX”) annually. Moreover,
both sides agreed to bolster the deterrence capabilities and posture against North Korean
threats by increasing the frequency and intensity of U.S. strategic assets deployment and
through close coordination on the scope, movement, deployment and training of strategic
assets. Following the 54th SCM, the ROK Minister of National Defense and U.S. Secretary
of Defense visited Joint Base Andrews to observe U.S. strategic assets’ capabilities and their
operation, putting the ironclad alliance between the two nations on display for the world to see.

In October 2022, the U.S. released its Nuclear Posture Review (NPR).[28)] From the early

stages of drafting the 2022 NPR, the ROK and the U.S. had close mutual consultations,
through which both sides exchanged their views on messaging against North Korea and U.S.
policy on its allies, and discussed the writing directions. In the 2022 NPR, the U.S. clearly
states that “Any nuclear attack by North Korea against the United States or its allies and
partners is unacceptable and will result in the end of that regime.” Also, while maintaining
calculated ambiguity on the role of nuclear weapons, the U.S. reaffirmed the commitment to
continue its nuclear modernization efforts to assure strong and credible extended deterrence
for its allies. To this end, the U.S. announced it will continue pursuing ways to enhance
extended deterrence that raises the visibility of U.S. strategic assets, such as strategic
nuclear submarine port calls and the deployment of strategic bombers. Going forward, the
two nations will continue to further their efforts to enhance the U.S. extended deterrence
commitment and shore up the alliance’s deterrence and response capabilities through regular
and systematic operation of bilateral consultative bodies.


**28)**
As the fifth NPR, it contains
President Biden’s guidance on
nuclear policy, strategy, forces,
and posture building.


-----

**Upgrading the ROK-U.S. Tailored** In 2013, following the 45th SCM, the ROK and the

**Deterrence Strategy** U.S. established the Tailored Deterrence Strategy

(TDS) to deter and respond against North Korean

nuclear and other WMD threats, optimized for the situation on the Korean Peninsula as
well as considering the characteristics of the regime’s leadership and its nuclear and missile
threats. The TDS is the highest-level strategic guidance by the ROK Minister of National
Defense and U.S. Secretary of Defense on deterring and responding against North Korea’s
nuclear and other WMD threats. The document includes military and non-military responses
that may be implemented by each phase of crisis, from North Korean threats of nuclear use
to the actual use of nuclear weapons by North Korea.

The TDS is the first bilateral deterrence strategy the U.S. established with a non-NATO ally

which contributed to deterring North Korean nuclear threats and developing the ROK and
the U.S. posture and capabilities, and served the key role of demonstrating the U.S. extended
deterrence commitment. The ROK and the U.S. are pursuing the revision of the TDS to
comprehensively reflect changes in the environment on the Peninsula since 2013, including
advanced North Korean nuclear threats and enhanced ROK and U.S. forces capabilities.
Through the joint communiqué of the 54th SCM, the two nations agreed to pursue the
revision of the TDS by the 55th SCM to be held in 2023 to prepare against various North
Korean nuclear use scenarios.

To enhance the capability to implement the TDS guidelines, the ROK and the U.S. conduct

the DSC TTX. In the face of the evolving nuclear strategy and capabilities of North Korea,
the two countries pledged, in the joint communiqué of the 54th SCM, to regularize the DSC
TTX to discuss military response measures involving North Korean nuclear use scenarios.
The goal is to seek more effective response measures in line with changes in the North
Korean nuclear strategy and its operation. The two countries are set to conduct the 8th DSC
TTX in early 2023, at a nuclear-related facility in the U.S. Going forward, the two nations
will explore ways to improve the capability to execute extended deterrence and continuously
strengthen the Alliance’s capabilities to provide effective ways to deter and respond against
North Korea’s nuclear use threats.


Combined maritime
exercise in the East
Sea by the ROK and
U.S. Naval Forces

Redeployment of U.S.
strategic bombers
(B-1B) to the Korean
Peninsula, ROK-U.S.
combined air training


**Deployment of U.S. Strategic Assets** U.S. strategic assets, among the military capa
bilities provided by the U.S., assure an effective

deterrence and overwhelming response against external attacks and provocations. They
include the U.S. nuclear triad[29)] and select conventional forces[30)] which assure strategic
effects.

Strategic assets have been deploying to the Korean Peninsula during armistice and crisis,

to showcase the strength of the ROK-U.S. Alliance and enhance the capability to execute
U.S. extended deterrence. Strategic assets, including strategic bombers and aircraft carriers,
were deployed during past periods of heightened tensions on the Korean Peninsula caused by
North Korea’s nuclear tests and ICBM launches.

The deployment of U.S. strategic assets to the Korean Peninsula was resumed in 2022,

the first in about five years since the ROK-U.S. combined exercise in December 2017.
In September 2022, amid the heightened nuclear threats caused by various North Korean


**29)**
Intercontinental ballistic
missiles (ICBM), strategic
bombers (B-2A,
B-52H), strategic nuclear
submarines (SSBN)

**30)**
Carrier strike groups, B-1B
bombers, nuclear-powered
cruise missile submarines
(SSGN)


-----

ROK-U.S. Combined Maritime Exercise (September 2022) Vigilant Storm (November 2022)

ballistic missile launches and the legislation of an offensive nuclear weapons policy, ROK-U.S.
combined maritime exercise as well as ROK-U.S.-Japan ASW exercise were conducted
involving the Ronald Reagan Carrier Strike Group deployed over the East Sea.

Between late September and late November 2022, U.S. carrier strike group was deployed

again to the Korean Peninsula in response to various North Korean missile provocations
including intermediate-range ballistic missile launches. In November 2022, two B-1B
strategic bombers were deployed to participate in Vigilant Storm, which is a ROK-U.S.
combined flying training exercise. Through the deployment of U.S. strategic assets that is
more timely and coordinated than in the past, the ROK and the U.S. demonstrated their
resolute determination to firmly respond against any provocation or threat by North Korea.
The two allies have also decided to increase the frequency and intensity of deployment of
U.S. strategic assets.

**2. Strengthening the Alliance’s Counter-Missile Posture**


**31)**
A counter-missile strategy of
the alliance aimed at enhancing
a full spectrum of capabilities
in the 4D areas, including
“detect,” “disrupt,” “destroy,”
and “defend.” The details of the
4D concepts are as follows:

-  Detect: Ability to support

disruption, destruction,
and defense, by employing
intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance (ISR) assets

-  Disrupt: Strikes against fixed

infrastructures that support
the North Korean missile
operations

-  Destroy: Direct strikes

against North Korean ballistic
missiles and transporter
erector launchers (TEL)

-  Defend: Interception of North

Korean ballistic missiles
directed at the ROK.

**32)**
The “4D Operational Execution
Concept” is a step in ROK-U.S.
combined operations to
respond against North Korean
ballistic missile threats,
consisting of four areas
including “detect,” “decide,”
“defeat,” and “defend.”


**Revamping the Alliance’s** The alliance’s counter-missile capabilities and posture

**Counter-Missile Strategy** are continuously being developed based on the “Alliance

Counter-Missile (4D) Strategy.” The “ROK-U.S. Alliance

Comprehensive Counter-missile Operational Concept and Principles” (4D Operational
Concept)[31)] was adopted in 2014, during the 46th SCM. The 47th SCM, which took
place in 2015, approved the “Implementation Guidelines for the ROK-U.S. Alliance
Comprehensive Counter-Missile Operational Concept and Principles” (4D Operational
Concept Implementation Guidelines), which adds detailed implementation guidelines to the
4D Operational Concept. The 9th ROK-U.S. Deterrence Strategy Committee, convened in
2019, endorsed the “Strategy and Implementation Guidelines for Alliance Comprehensive
Counter-Missile Operations (4D SIG),” including the “4D Operational Execution Concept” [32)]
to implement the “4D Operational Concept” at an operational level.

Moving forward, the ROK Armed Forces will seek to make continuous improvements

to the alliance’s “4D Strategy” based on a comprehensive consideration of evolving North
Korean missile threats and the latest policy focus of the two countries, as well as promote
cooperation in wide-ranging areas, including decision-making and planning at the alliance
level, training and exercises, and capability building.


-----

**[Figure 5-3] Tailored Deterrence Strategy and 4D Strategy**

ROK Counter-Missile

ROK Capabilities Capabilities

ROK Capabilities (M element) U.S. Counter-Missile
(DIE elements) U.S. Capabilities Capabilities

(M element)
U.S. Capabilities
(DIE elements)


-  DIE : Diplomacy, information, economy

-  M : Military


**4D Strategy**

**Tailored**
**Deterrence**
**Strategy**


**Increasing ROK-U.S. Missile Cooperation** In addition to efforts to hone the “Alliance

Counter-Missile (4D) Strategy,” the ROK

and the U.S. are continuously broadening policy coordination to effectively deter and
respond against the North Korean missile threats.

During the 21st KIDD in August 2022, the allies recognized the need for an expeditious

and more precise Alliance response in the face of rapid changes in the North Korean missile
threat both in terms of quantity as well as quality, and agreed to establish the Counter
Missile Working Group (CMWG) as a mechanism to support such efforts. The CMWG will
operate as a working group under the DSC to serve a platform for dynamic discussions on
a variety of agendas for cooperation that are related to strengthening the alliance’s countermissile capabilities and posture. The results of discussions by the CMWG will be reported
to the KIDD and the SCM on a regular basis, and will lead to high-level coordination efforts
to deter and respond against North Korean missile threats. In tandem, in order to support
these policy efforts, the ROK and the U.S. have decided to carry out the Program Analysis
Working Group for ROK-U.S. Missile Defense (PAWG), starting in October 2022. In this
joint analysis, the ROK and the U.S. will conduct a precise analysis of threats presented by
novel North Korean missiles and explore an optimal missile defense structure for the Korean
Peninsula. The results of the PAWG are expected to provide an important basis for policy
coordination between the ROK and the U.S. to further fine-tune the Alliance’s Countermissile (4D) Strategy and bolster the combined counter-missile capabilities and posture. The
ROK Armed Forces will continue to support and assist the alliance’s efforts to build effective
deterrence and response capabilities and robust posture against North Korean missile threats
in broad-ranging areas.


-----

**Section**


###### Establishing a Robust ROK-U.S. Combined Defense Posture

During the ROK-U.S. summit in May 2022, the leaders of the two countries agreed to resume
talks on increasing the scope of combined exercises and trainings. Following the summit, the
ROK and the U.S. military and defense authorities closely consulted with each other to change
the name of the theater-level combined exercise to ‘Ulchi Freedom Shield’ (UFS), integrating
the government military exercise (Ulchi Exercise) and the ROK-U.S. combined military exercise
(Freedom Shield). Moreover, the combined field training exercise was conducted in parallel
with combined exercise in second half of 2022 to enhance deterrence against North Korea
and solidify the combined defense posture. The ROK and the U.S. are restoring combined
exercises and training events, which have been downsized and reduced in frequency in
recent years, to their previous level to strengthen and reinforce the ROK-U.S. Alliance and
bolster the combined defense posture.


**1. Improving the Theater-level Combined Exercise System**


**A New Name for the ROK-U.S.** The ROK-U.S. combined exercise is a defensive exercise

**Combined Exercise** carried out biannually, in the first and second half of the

year, to maintain a solid combined defense posture. The

combined exercise is an important symbol of the ROK-U.S. Alliance and has played a crucial role
in defending the Republic of Korea.

Since second half-year of 2019, the ROK-U.S. combined exercise has been designated as

‘Combined Command Post Training’ (CCPT). However, it has been suggested that this name,
which is a literal reference to ‘the act of training conducted by the Combined Battle Staff at the
command post’, is not suitable to represent a large-scale, theater-level combined exercise, carried
out to deter North Korea and strengthen the combined defense posture. In order to better reflect
the significance and purpose of this exercise and the guiding values of the ROK-U.S. Alliance, its
name was changed to ‘Ulchi Freedom Shield (UFS) Exercise.’

The name ‘Ulchi Freedom Shield (UFS) Exercise,’ in use Since second half-year of 2022,

highlights the fact that the Ulchi Exercise, a ROK government exercise, and Freedom Shield,
a theater-level ROK-U.S. combined exercise, are now carried out in an integrated manner. The
word ‘Freedom’ refers to the ROK’s strong will to protect the ‘Freedom’, which is the immutable
value of the ROK-U.S. alliance, and ‘Shield’ implies the defensive nature of the exercise in pursuit
of peace. Meanwhile, the name of the combined exercise in the first half of 2023 will be called
the ‘Freedom Shield (FS) Exercise.’ Unlike the combined exercise in the second half, which is
carried out in an integrated manner with the government-wide exercise, this will be conducted
in conjunction with Command Post Exercise (CPX) and Field Training Exercise (FTX) at the
military level.

Renaming the combined exercise marks a renewed resolve to further solidify the ROK-U.S.

Alliance. While maintaining and preserving the Alliance’s exercise tradition, the ROK and the


-----

U.S. will restore the realistic, theater-level exercise system to further strengthen the combined
defense posture.

**[Figure 5-4] Name Changes of the ROK-U.S. Combined Exercise**


**1st Half Exercise**

Combined

FE Alliance

RSOI / FE KR / FE Command Post Freedom Shield (FS)

(Foal Eagle) Exercise

Training (CCPT)


1976~2001 2002~2007 2008~2018 2019 2020~2022 2023~


**2nd Half Exercise**

Combined

Ulchi-Freedom Ulchi Freedom

Ulchi-Focus Lens (UFL) Command Post

Guardian (UFG) Shield (UFS)

Training (CCPT)


1976~2007


2008~2018


2019~2021


2022~


**Integration with the Government Exercise** The government exercise began in 1969

under the name, ‘Ulchi Exercise,’ with

the goal of testing and improving the Chungmu Plan, the government’s wartime operations
plan, and protecting the lives and property of Korean citizens. In subsequent decades, when
the need to establish a total war posture arose amid the changing security environment, this
exercise was integrated with the theater-level combined ROK-U.S. exercise and was carried
out under the name ‘Ulchi-Focus Lens (UFL, 1976~2007) Exercise’ which was later updated
to ‘Ulchi-Freedom Guardian (UFG, 2008~2018) Exercise’. Through this integration, the
government exercise tested the government-wide total war and readiness posture against a
full-scale war by realigning the Chungmu Plan under the larger framework of the ROK-U.S.
combined defense system.

However, in 2019, the government exercise was separated from ROK-U.S. combined

exercises and was conducted in parallel with the Taegeuk Exercise, the unilateral exercise
of the ROK Armed Forces, under the name ‘Ulchi Taegeuk Exercise.’ This limited the
proficiency of government-wide total war procedures related to supporting wartime
combined operations. Moreover, as the government exercise during the Ulchi Taegeuk
Exercise was focused mainly on responding to disasters and non-military crises, it had
limited effect on enhancing the wartime ability to execute total war through integration of the
nation’s capability.

To address these issues, the ROK and the U.S. decided to reintegrate the government

exercise into the combined exercise system from the second half of 2022 under the name
‘Ulchi Freedom Shield (UFS) Exercise’ and continue to do so every year for all exercises
conducted in latter half of the year. The 2022 UFS Exercise, conducted in the wartime
command bunker (B-1), notably deployed the war capabilities of all government agencies for
the first time since 2017, for an intensive training on the total war system through a realistic


-----

Visiting the Wartime Command Bunker (B-1, August 2022)

exercise that lasted for four days and three nights.

Meanwhile, to help simulate actual combat environments, a complex and realistic scenario,

involving attacks on key industrial facilities, drone and cyber-attacks on civilian, public and
military facilities, and the outbreak of infectious disease were used. The scenario took into
consideration North Korea’s advancing nuclear and missile capabilities and the growing
diversity of its weapons systems and complex attack patterns to test the response system
against evolving threats.

Moreover, to test the stability of rear areas and war sustainment capabilities, the exercise

was coupled with a joint civilian-government-military field training exercise (FTX) for
protection and recover operations under a scenario in which critical national infrastructures
and industrial facilities, including harbors, airports, and semiconductor plants sustained
damages.

The training on the government-wide crisis management protocol and combined

operational support procedures under the new UFS Exercise provided an opportunity for
the government and the military to enhance their total war capabilities against localized
provocations as well as an all-out war. The ROK and the U.S. will continue to make
improvements to the combined exercise and government exercise system to further solidify
the Alliance and strengthen the combined defense posture.

**2. Enhancing Combined Operational Capabilities**

To enhance the war capabilities of the combined forces under the combined defense
framework, the ROK and the U.S. are conducting combined exercises and training, focusing
on improving combined operations and operational sustainment capabilities.

The scope of application of the Joint Training System (JTS), which is a theater exercise

and training system, has been expanded to include the headquarters of all service branches,
operations commands, and joint formations, in addition to a comprehensive exercise and
training management system. A variety of war game models have also been developed
for joint and combined exercises in a continuous effort to upgrade the combined exercise
capabilities of our Armed Forces and increase the efficiency of exercises and training.

The Freedom Shield (FS) Exercise, newly begun in the second half of 2022, is a theater
level command post exercise, which tests the combined defense posture and trains troops


-----

on the conduct of war under a computer-simulated battlefield environment. The goal of this
exercise is to maintain a robust combined defense posture and improve the ROK Armed Forces’
operational capabilities and their ability to lead combined exercises. Moreover, in an effort to
meet the conditions necessary for the transition of wartime OPCON (operational control), the
assessment of the future command structure will be conducted in parallel with the FS exercise.

The suspension of Foal Eagle (FE) after the last exercise in March 2019 has reduced the scale

and frequency of ROK-U.S. combined exercises, hindering the effort to build theater operational
capabilities and limiting the alliance’s ability to display deterrence against North Korea. Starting
in the second half of 2022, more field training events have been held to enhance combined
operational capabilities. In 2023, the size and scope of combined field training exercises will
be expanded to ensure the continued strength of the combined defense posture by increasing
training on combined operations and interoperability. Field training exercises for regiments and
larger formations (carrier strike groups, Ssang Yong combined amphibious exercise) will be
resumed and large-scale exercises will be held during Spring-time.


-----

**Section**


###### Conditions-based Wartime OPCON33) Transition

While maintaining a steadfast combined defense posture against North Korea’s threats, the
ROK and the U.S. are pursuing the Conditions-based Wartime OPCON Transition in order to
establish a new combined defense framework led by the ROK Armed Forces. With a clear
understanding of the principle the ROK and the U.S. will push forward the transition of the
wartime OPCON when the bilaterally agreed-upon conditions are met, the ROK military is
systematically and stably pursuing for the wartime OPCON transition through measures such
as the acquisition of key defense capabilities and regular readiness assessment.

**1. Background and Progress**

Since the return of armistice operational control (OPCON) to the ROK Armed Forces in
December 1, 1994, a combined command structure has been in place in which operational
control authority is retained by the Chairman of the ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff during
peacetime, while it is exercised by the Commander of the Combined Forces Command
in wartime, over the units of ROK and U.S. forces designated through the SCM and the
Military Committee (MC),[34)] based on the orders of the two countries’ heads of state.

During the ROK-U.S. summit held in September 2006, the leaders of the two countries

agreed on the basic principles of the transfer of wartime operational control (hereafter,
“wartime OPCON”). In June 2007, the Strategic Transition Plan (STP),[35)] a roadmap for the
transfer of wartime OPCON from the Combined Forces Command to the ROK Joint Chiefs
of Staff, was approved.

However, in light of new developments that occurred in the security situation since then,

including the second nuclear test by North Korea in 2009 and the sinking of the ROKS
Cheonan in 2010, during the bilateral summit in June 2010, the ROK and the U.S. leaders
decided to postpone the date of OPCON transition from the initially planned April 17,
2012 to December 1, 2015. During the same year, the two countries’ defense chiefs signed
the Strategic Alliance 2015 (SA 2015),[36)] containing military measures necessary for the
transition of OPCON along with a plan for the development of key alliance issues.

In April 2014, in consideration of the fact that North Korea’s threats are becoming

increasingly real and advanced, including its third nuclear test, the ROK and the U.S.
decided to carry out the transition of wartime OPCON whenever the mutually agreed-upon
conditions are met[37)] without setting a specific time frame. In November 2015, the two
countries’ defense chiefs signed the Conditions-based OPCON Transition Plan (COTP).

Three years later, in October 2018, the two allies agreed on the maintenance of the

Combined Forces Command even after the wartime OPCON transition and a future
command structure in which the duties of the Commander of the Combined Forces
Command will be carried out by a four-star General/Admiral of the ROK Armed Forces and
signed a revised COTP that reflected these changes.

During the bilateral summit in May 2022, the leaders the ROK and the U.S. reaffirmed


**33)**
Operational control (OPCON)
refers to the authority to
perform functions of command
over designated forces in order
to carry out specific operations
within a limited time frame
and space and is divided
into peacetime and wartime
OPCON.

**34)**
A consultative body between
ROK and U.S. Joint Chief of
Staff Chairmen.

**35)**
A strategic Alliance document
setting out tasks to be
completed before the transition
of wartime OPCON and the
timeline of their completion.

**36)**
A new document replacing the
STP as a reference document
for the transition of wartime
OPCON.

**37)**
Conditions for the transition of
wartime OPCON, agreed upon
by the ROK and the U.S.:
① Military capabilities required

to lead the combined
defense

② Comprehensive Alliance

response capabilities
against North Korean
nuclear and missile threats

③ Security environment on

the Korean peninsula and in
the region that is conducive
to a stable transition of the
wartime OPCON.


-----

their commitment to the conditions-based transition of wartime OPCON. In close
coordination with the U.S. side, the ROK Armed Forces are currently working on key tasks
including acquiring capabilities required to lead the combined defense, developing the
Alliance’s comprehensive response capabilities against North Korean nuclear and missile
threats, and the three-stage assessment of the mission execution capability of the Future
Combined Forces Command[38)]; steady and systematic progress is being made.

**2. Steady Progress toward the Conditions-based Wartime OPCON Transition**


**Annexes and Appendices to the Conditions-** After signing the Revised Conditions
**based Wartime OPCON Transition Plan** based OPCON Transition Plan (COTP)

during the 50th SCM in October 2018,

the ROK and the U.S. have made joint efforts to revise the Annexes and the Appendices to the
COTP, which set forth general rules related to the pursuance of wartime OPCON transition.

The revision of the COTP Annexes and Appendices was completed in August 2022

through close collaboration and mutual consultation between the two countries. During
the process of revising these documents, the list of all capabilities mentioned in the COTP,
namely the critical military capabilities of the ROK Armed Forces and response capabilities
against North Korean nuclear threats, was finalized and an objective and systematic
framework for the transition of wartime OPCON was created by defining the method and
criteria for assessing each type of capabilities.


**Three Conditions of Wartime** The Conditions-based OPCON Transition Plan (COTP)

**OPCON Transition** lists three conditions to be met for the transition of

wartime OPCON.

The first condition is to acquire military capabilities required to lead the combined defense.

To meet this condition, the ROK Armed Forces are working on the improvement of selected
critical military capabilities and the theater operational capabilities of the Future Combined
Forces Command. To strengthen combined defense capabilities, the U.S. is providing
“Bridging Capabilities” and “Enduring Capabilities.”

The second condition is to acquire comprehensive Alliance response capabilities against

North Korean nuclear and missile threats. The ROK and the U.S. are jointly building 4D
capabilities – “detect, decide, defeat, and defend.”

The third and last condition is the security environment on the Korean peninsula and in

the region that is conducive to a stable transition of the wartime OPCON. The intelligence
authorities of the ROK and the U.S. conduct regular assessments of North Korea’s nuclear,
missile, and conventional capabilities, its intention, the stability of its regime, as well as the
regional situation and environment, and factors of influence, through bilateral consultative
bodies.

In accordance with the criteria and standards mutually agreed upon by the two countries, the

ROK Armed Forces’ progress toward meeting the three conditions is assessed annually based
on detailed indicators under each category of capabilities. The results of the annual assessment


**38)**
Stage 1 -Initial operational
capability (IOC) → stage 2 - Full
operational capability (FOC) →
stage 3 Full mission capability
(FMC).


-----

are reported to consultative bodies, jointly operated by the two countries’ defense authorities,
including the Military Committee Meeting (MCM) and the SCM.


**Building Capabilities to Lead Combined Defense** The ROK and the U.S. share

the view that strengthening the

ROK forces’ defense capabilities is the single-most important prerequisite for meeting the
conditions for the transition of wartime OPCON. Following the official decision by the
two countries’ government to pursue the transition of wartime OPCON, the ROK Armed
Forces have made steady efforts to acquire critical capabilities to lead combined defense
and necessary response capabilities against North Korean nuclear and missile threats, such
as Kill Chain and the Korea Air and Missile Defense (KAMD), in a timely manner.

The ground force of the ROK military has fielded world-class tanks and artillery,

including K-2 tanks, K-9 self-propelled howitzers, as well as Chunmoo and have a
substantial number of Apache attack helicopters at their disposal. The air force includes
cutting-edge aviation forces, such as F-35A stealth fighters, Global Hawks, tanker aircraft,
and airborne early warning and control systems, as well as high-performance fighter
planes. The naval force has fielded Aegis destroyers, 3,000t-class submarines, LPHs, shipto-surface, ship-to-ship and submarine-to-surface missiles. Moreover, in a continuing
effort to expand response capabilities against North Korean nuclear and missile threats, a
Patriot system and a ballistic missile early warning radar system have been fielded and the
Cheongung System and Hyunmoo missiles have been indigenously developed.

The Ministry of National Defense has recently established the “Medium-term National

Defense Plan 2023-2027,” providing the roadmap for building, operating, and maintaining
military capabilities for the next five years, and allocated KRW 107.4 trillion toward the
improvement of defense capabilities in active support of the ROK Armed Forces’ plan to
acquire military capabilities in preparation for the transition of wartime OPCON.

With such efforts, during the 54th SCM in 2020, the two nations assessed that substantial

progress have been made in meeting the conditions for the transition of wartime OPCON.
Going forward, while maintaining a steadfast combined defense posture, the ROK and the
U.S. will strive to make the combined defense system more forward-looking and mutually
beneficial to the two countries through continuous efforts to advance the COTP.


**Assessment of the Mission Execution Capability** The COTP sets out procedures for

**of the Future Combined Forces Command** a three-stage assessment of the

mission execution capability of the

future Combined Forces Command, which will lead theater operations after the transition
of wartime OPCON.

In August 2019, the ROK and the U.S. successfully completed the assessment of initial

operational capability (IOC), which found that the future Combined Forces Command
possesses the basic required capability. Thereafter, the allies focused on preparing
conditions needed for the assessment of full operational capability (FOC), including
practical requirements and rehearsals. In 2021, during the 53rd SCM, it was decided that an
FOC assessment will be conducted in 2022.


-----

In August 2022, the FOC assessment was carried out in conjunction with the Ulchi

Freedom Shield (UFS) exercise, which was recently restored to a theater-level combined
exercise, and the results confirmed that measurable progress has been made in the capacity
to perform the wartime tasks of the Future Combined Forces Command, led by a four-star
General/Admiral of the ROK Armed Forces.

The ROK and the U.S. will stably pursue the assessment of the Future Combined Forces

Command in accordance with the respective procedures of each stage, including the second
stage of FOC certification, during which the results from the FOC assessment will be
considered together with the results of a bilateral evaluation of capabilities of the first and
second conditions.


-----

**Section**


###### Deeper and Broader Defense Cooperation and Exchange

The ROK Armed Forces are making continuous efforts to strengthen military trust with regional
neighbors, including Japan, China, and Russia, and expanding defense cooperation and
exchange as part of a sustained commitment to ensure peace and stability on the Korean
peninsula and across Northeast Asia. Meanwhile, in light of the growing strategic importance
of the Indo-Pacific region, the ROK military is carrying out mutually-beneficial defense and
defense industry cooperation projects with ASEAN and Oceanic countries, and India, which
are tailored to specific needs of each country. While continuously increasing cooperation and
exchange with traditional friendly nations such as European countries and Canada, the ROK is
also seeking to diversify defense partnerships by engaging with countries in the Middle East
and Central and South America.

**1. Promoting Military Trust and Defense Cooperation and Exchange with Japan,**

**China, and Russia**


**ROK-Japan Defense Exchange** As two neighbors that share common values, Japan

**and Cooperation** is a close neighboring country that the ROK should

cooperate to establish a forward-looking cooperative

relationship that is mutually beneficial. The two countries’ defense authorities have held
regular ministerial talks since 1994. In 2009, during the 14th ROK-Japan Defense Minister
Talks, the two sides signed a “Letter of Intent on Defense Exchanges,” providing a framework
for bilateral cooperation and exchange between them in the defense domain. In 2015, the ROK
and Japanese defense chiefs met for bilateral talks and continued their dialogue during the Asia
Security Summit and other multilateral meetings that followed. In November 2019, during
the bilateral talks held on the sideline of the ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus, the
ROK and Japan agreed to seek to develop defense exchange and cooperation between the two
countries in a forward-looking direction.

However, the defense relationship between the two countries experienced difficulties, due to the

distorted perception of history and claims of sovereignty over Dokdo by select Japanese political
leaders, as well as the Japanese MPA incident.[39)] The export control measures against the ROK in
July 2019 under the pretext of security concerns is a barrier to the future oriented development of
defense relationship between the two countries.

Amidst such environment, the ROK government notified Japan of its decision to terminate the

GSOMIA (General Security of Military Information Agreement). However, the ROK government
suspended the termination in November 2019 and information sharing between the two countries’
defense authorities resumed and is taking place normally since then. The ROK and Japanese
defense authorities intend to continuously increase the scope of cooperation in the information
domain, while striving to resolve the issues and improve relations between the two countries.

The Ministry of National Defense is aware of the importance of ROK-Japan and


**39)**
Japan claimed that the
provocative behavior of a
Japanese patrol plane, which
flew dangerously close to an
ROK Navy vessel, carrying
out a rescue operation, was a
normal flight and announced
the completion of a unilateral
investigation without
confirming the facts, although
the ROK made numerous
accounts that the ROK vessel did
not illuminate the aircraft with
its tracking radar.


-----

ROK-U.S.-Japan security cooperation in
responding to North Korean nuclear and
missile threats and has made steady workinglevel efforts.

As a result of these efforts, during the

recent bilateral defense ministers’ talks, held
on the sideline of the Asia Security Summit
in June 2022, the two sides reaffirmed their ROK-U.S.-Japan Trilateral Ministerial Meeting (June 2022)
shared view that ROK-U.S.-Japan security
cooperation is important in responding to security challenges posed by North Korean nuclear
and missile threats. During the vice minister level defense talks at the Seoul Defense Dialogue
in September 2022, the two sides vowed to make joint efforts to normalize the defense
partnership between the ROK and Japan from a forward-looking perspective.

Moreover, in November 2022, the ROK Navy sent the logistics support ship Soyang

to the international fleet review, hosted by the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force, and
attended the Western Pacific Naval Symposium (WPNS), an ancillary event organized in
conjunction with the fleet review, cementing ties with the navies of countries the world over.
These accomplishments are likely to serve as a stepping stone for further progress in defense
cooperation and exchange between the ROK and Japan.

Moving forward, even as the Ministry of National Defense will firmly defend the ROK

position on issues such as the Japanese distortion of history and territorial claim over Dokdo,
it will continue to seek to develop a forward-looking relationship of cooperation with Japan
concerning common security issues in an effort to ensure peace and stability on the Korean
peninsula and in Northeast Asia.


**ROK-China Defense Exchange** Diplomatic ties between the Republic of Korea and

**and Cooperation** People’s Republic of China were first established in

1992, as a “friendly and cooperative relationship.”

Since then, the two countries have cooperated in wide-ranging areas including economic,
social, and cultural domains. In 2008, the two countries’ relationship was elevated from a
“comprehensive cooperative partnership” to a “strategic cooperative partnership.”

During the ROK-China summit convened in December 2017, the two heads of state

vowed to expand the scope of cooperation between their two countries into areas including
politics, diplomacy, and security as
well as strengthen bilateral exchange
at a comprehensive level. In December
2018, the defense authorities of ROK and
China agreed on normalization of defense
exchanges and cooperation. Since 2020, due
to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic,
the two countries’ defense officials have
maintained communication and exchange
through non face to face measures ROK-China Defense Ministers’ Talks (April 2022)


-----

including two telephone calls between the ROK and Chinese defense ministers.

In June 2022, at the Asia Security Summit in Singapore, the two countries’ defense ministers

held in-person talks for the first time in three years, during which they decided to open official
hotlines between the ROK and Chinese navies and air forces to facilitate communications.
On November 23, 2022, they sat down for another round of bilateral talks on the sideline
of the ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus, reconfirmed their will to promote defense
cooperation on various issues between the two countries, including exchanges between highranking military officials, the resumption of the strategic defense dialogue, exchanges between
the armed forces, and the repatriation of the remains of Chinese service members.

Meanwhile, to reduce the risk of accidental clashes between ROK and Chinese forces in

neighboring international sea and air space, the two countries’ defense authorities maintain
regular communication with each other, through various consultative channels. The ROK
and Chinese operational forces share information using a hotline in an effort to prevent the
escalation of tensions.

In 2022, which marks the 30th anniversary of diplomatic relations between the Republic of

Korea and People’s Republic of China, the two governments pledged to bring the relationship
between their two countries to a new stage of development. As two key partners in the effort
to achieve and maintain prosperity and peace in Indo-Pacific, the ROK and the PRC agreed
to move toward a healthy and mature partnership of mutual respect and benefit, founded
on international norms and rules, for the pursuit of common interests. In accordance with
this vision, the ROK and the PRC defense authorities will join efforts to promote the stable
development of the two countries’ relations and contribute to peace and stability on the
Korean peninsula and in the region by strengthening military trust through increased strategic
communication and sustained cooperation and exchange.


**ROK-Russia Defense Exchange** Russia is a key partner nation in the security of the

**and Cooperation** Korean peninsula. To encourage Russia to play a

constructive role in resolving Korean peninsula issues

including the North Korean nuclear issue, the ROK government has made consistent efforts,
in recent years, to increase strategic communication and cooperation with the country as a
“strategic cooperative partner.” Bilateral summits were held in 2017, 2018, and 2019, in 2021,
the two countries’ foreign ministers have met as well. In the area of defense, cooperation and
exchange with Russia have been expanded through variety of consultative mechanisms and
communication channels, including the Republic of Korea-Russia Strategic Defense Dialogue,
Joint Chiefs of Staff Chief Director level Meeting, Joint Military Committee, and consultative
mechanisms at the level of individual branches of the armed forces. In March 2021, during
the Russian Deputy Minister of Defense’s visit to Korea, the ROK-Russia Agreement on
Defense Cooperation was signed, providing a solid framework for cooperation between the
two countries in the defense area. In November 2021, the two sides signed a Memorandum of
Understanding Between the Ministry of National Defense of the Republic of Korea and the
Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation on the Installation and Operation of the Air Force
to Air Force and Navy to Navy Direct Communication Channels to prevent accidental clashes,
which was a project that has been in discussion since 2003.


-----

However, defense cooperation and exchange with Russia have been tentatively put on hold

since February 2022 with the Russian invasion of Ukraine. The government of the Republic
of Korea has declared its support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine
and has condemned the actions by Russia, calling it a direct violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. As a responsible member of the global community,
the ROK government has promptly joined the international efforts to resolve the Ukraine
crisis. Resenting ROK’s position on the issue, Russia has included ROK in the list of
“unfriendly states,” which has limited the realistic prospects regarding defense cooperation
and exchange between the two countries.

Recent events such as Russian warplanes entering the KADIZ (Korea Air Defense

Identification Zone) and China and Russia carrying out combined maritime and air exercises
have increased the risk of accidental clashes around the Korean peninsula. Therefore, there
is a need to maintain communication with Russia in the defense domain.

Going forward, the Ministry of National Defense will foster a gradual and steady

development in defense cooperation with Russia in accordance with the Agreement between
the Government of the Republic of Korea and the Government of the Russian Federation on
Defense Cooperation and by taking into consideration of the progress in the effort to build a
rule-based international order as well as other relevant domestic and external conditions.

**2. Expanding Cooperation with Key Regional Partners**


**Southeast Asia** The Ministry of National Defense has continuously expanded bilateral

and multilateral cooperation with countries in Southeast Asia, aimed

at enhancing joint response capabilities against threats to the security of Indo-Pacific, in a
sustained effort to promote and ensure security in the region. In accordance with its “Strategy
for a Free, Peaceful, and Prosperous Indo-Pacific,” unveiled in December 2022, the ROK
government will seek comprehensive strategic partnerships, focused on mutually beneficial
and practical cooperation, with ASEAN countries, which it considers key partners in this
strategy. This goal is also well reflected in the “Korea-ASEAN Solidarity Initiative” (KASI),
a cooperation plan designed specifically for the ASEAN, recently released by the government.
To help advance the government’s vision articulated in its Indo-Pacific Strategy and the KASI,
the Ministry of National Defense is carrying out a series of cooperation tasks in the defense
domain that are tailored to the special needs
of ASEAN countries.

ROK is actively engaging in defense and

defense industry cooperation with Indonesia
under a “special strategic partnership.” The
two countries are jointly developing nextgeneration combat aircraft (KF-21/IF-X:
KF-21/Indonesian Fighter eXperimental),
frequently consult with each other at high
levels, and conduct combined anti-terrorism ROK-Indonesia Defense Ministers’ Talks (January 2022)


-----

training exercises. During the bilateral defense ministers’ talks in April 2021, the two sides
reached a common understanding on the need to strengthen defense cooperation between
them and the Indonesian side confirmed their interest in participating in the next-generation
combat aircraft development project by ROK. In August 2021 and October 2022, the two
countries held the “2+2” working-level defense and foreign affairs talks, assessing the progress
and discussing the way forward in combined exercises and maritime security and defense
industry cooperation. Later in November 2022, the two countries defense ministers met for
bilateral talks on the sideline of the ADMM-Plus (ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus)
and agreed to develop defense cooperation between them in a forward-looking direction by
continuing cooperation projects including the joint development of next-generation combat
aircraft, expanding the scope of combined bilateral exercises, and strengthening multilateral
cooperation between the ASEAN and the
Republic of Korea.

**Vietnam is a key player in ROK-ASEAN**

cooperation as well as an important maritime
security partner for Korea. Since diplomatic
relations between the two countries were first
established in 1992, they have cooperated
in wide-ranging fields, including military
education and training and high-level
exchanges. ROK-Vietnam Defense Ministers’ Talks (January 2022)

In 2022, the two countries exchanged

their views on the security situation in the region during the annual vice minister-level meeting
(September) and the ADMM-Plus (November) and pledged to increase high-level exchanges
and boost defense industry cooperation between them. The two defense chiefs furthermore
agreed on a series of measures to reinforce maritime security cooperation such as the Korean
donation of retired navy ships and joint participation in multilateral combined exercises. In
December 2022, on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the two countries’ diplomatic ties,
their relationship was elevated to a “comprehensive strategic partnership,” opening a new
chapter in their cooperation, including in the defense area.

**Philippines fought in the Korean War alongside the Allies and was the first ASEAN country**

to establish diplomatic relations with the Republic of Korea. In recent years, there has been a
surge in the two countries’ cooperation in the field of defense industry. In October 2021, on
the sideline of the Seoul Aerospace and
Defense Exhibition (ADEX 2021), the two
countries’ vice defense ministers sat down
for a discussion on the bilateral cooperation
agenda. This meeting, led to the signing
of a purchase order for two corvettes
from the ROK shipbuilder in December
2021. Meanwhile, the defense ministers’
talks in June 2022, during which the two ROK-Philippines Defense Ministers’ Talks (January 2022)
sides agreed to further strengthen defense ROK-Philippines Defense Ministers’ Talks (January 2022)


ROK-Philippines Defense Ministers’ Talks (January 2022)


-----

industry cooperation between their two countries, resulted in the Philippine Navy’s purchase
of six offshore patrol vessels from ROK. The high-level exchanges between the two countries
have also created a new momentum for defense cooperation as well. In October 2022, a vice
minister-level defense cooperation committee was convened to explore ways of deepening
defense cooperation between the two countries, including increasing the scope and frequency
of combined exercises, boosting educational exchanges, and broadening defense industry
cooperation. In November, the two countries’ defense chiefs held bilateral talks during the 9th
ADMM-Plus to discuss the latest accomplishments in their bilateral cooperation, including
the ROK Navy’s first-ever participation in KAMANDAG, the U.S.-Philippines combined
exercise. The two officials agreed to further ramp up defense industry cooperation between the
ROK and Philippines, particularly in shipbuilding and aircraft construction.

**Singapore is a traditional friendly partner**

of the Republic of Korea, which shares with
it the experience of accelerated economic
growth and upholds the common values of
freedom, prosperity, and peace. The ROK
and Singapore have closely cooperated with
each other to respond to non-traditional
security threats such as cyberattacks and
terrorism, which have recently emerged as
serious challenges to the global community. Amendment of the ROK-Singapore Defense MOU (June 2022)
In June 2022, the “Memorandum of Understanding on Defense Cooperation” was revised to expand the scope of cooperation to include
non-traditional security threats. To increase cooperation in defense public relations, the two
countries signed a new “Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Defense Public
Relations.” In September 2022, during the bilateral talks held on the sideline of the Seoul
Defense Dialogue, the two countries’ vice defense ministers agreed to broaden cooperation in
defense technology to promote the application of fast-evolving Fourth Industrial Revolution
technologies in the defense field.

The ROK-Malaysia defense ministers’ talks in April 2022 led to the long-anticipated

signing of the “Memorandum of Understanding on Defense Cooperation” between the two
countries. Malaysia is the latest addition in the list of ASEAN countries that have entered
into a cooperation arrangement with the ROK, which has now signed an MOU or agreement
with all ten members of ASEAN. This has given the the ROK a solid framework for defense
cooperation in the region. Meanwhile, the ROK and Malaysia have been elected to serve as cochairs for the Cyber Security Sub-committee of the ADMM-Plus for a four-year term between
2021 and 2024, which has provided them with a further opportunity to tighten cooperation
between them, in the fight against transnational, non-traditional security threats.

**Thailand is rapidly becoming a key partner of the ROK in the field of defense industry**

since its purchase of the T-50, the Korean jet trainer, in 2015. During the bilateral defense
ministers’ talks held in December 2021, the two countries discussed options for increasing
mutually-beneficial defense industry cooperation between them regarding projects to enhance
the performance of frigates and aircraft, while also agreeing to strengthen defense cooperation


-----

in areas including military medicine and set
up consultative mechanisms at the level of
individual branches of the two countries’
armed forces.

**Cambodia is a key ASEAN diplomatic**

and trade partner of the ROK. Since the
re-establishment of diplomatic relations
between the ROK and Cambodia in 1997,
the two countries have progressively

ROK-Cambodia Engineering Equipment Donation Ceremony

expanded bilateral cooperation in the defense (January 2022)
domain. In May 2022, the ROK Armed
Forces donated 26 pieces of logistics equipment of 17 types, including mobility equipment, to
Cambodia, ramping up logistics cooperation between the two countries. In November 2022,
the two countries defense ministers held bilateral talks on the sideline of the ADMM- Plus
and signed the “ROK-Cambodia PKO Memorandum of Understanding.” An agreement was
also reached during this meeting that the ROK will donate military engineering equipment to
Cambodia to support its PKO activities. In 2023, an education program for the ROK officers
will take place for the first time at Cambodia’s National Defense University, in a sign of
deepening cooperation in the field of military education.

As the only landlocked member of the ASEAN, Laos serves as a geopolitical hub for the

region. Efforts are currently ongoing to establish regular consultative processes for bilateral
defense cooperation and increase military education exchanges between Laos and the Republic
of Korea. The Lao People’s Armed Forces (LPAF) is in the process of setting up a Defense
Attaché Office in the ROK, which is expected to give a new impetus to defense cooperation
between the two countries.

ROK’s defense cooperation with Brunei is mediated primarily through multilateral security

consultative meetings such as the ADMM-Plus. In 2021, the Ministry of National Defense
worked with Brunei, which served as the ASEAN chair for the year to organize a ROK-ASEAN
defense ministers’ meeting for the first time. For further progress in defense cooperation, the two
countries are carrying out projects to create bilateral consultative mechanisms.

ROK’s cooperation with Myanmar has been centered on military education exchanges

(commissioned educational programs). However, since the declaration of a state of emergency
by the Myanmar military in February 2021, defense ministry-level cooperation and exchange
with Myanmar has been suspended. As a responsible member of the global community, the
government of the Republic of Korea is continuously cooperating with the international effort to
put a stop to military violence in Myanmar and restore democracy in the country. The Ministry
of National Defense is also actively participating in this effort.

The Ministry of National Defense will explore and identify additional ways of cooperating

with ASEAN countries in diverse fields, in accordance with the ROK government’s Indo-Pacific
Strategy and the KASI initiative.


**Oceania**


Australia and New Zealand are two major countries in Oceania, which
fought in the Korean War alongside the allies. They are traditional allies of


-----

the Republic of Korea, closely involved in
the surveillance of North Korean violations
of the UN Security Council’s resolutions
as well as in the activities of the United
Nations Command. In its “Strategy for a
Free, Peaceful, and Prosperous Indo-Pacific,”
the government has stated the intention to
strengthen strategic communication and
cooperation with Oceanic states, saying ROK-Australia Defense Ministers’ Talks (August 2022)
that these countries share common values
and interests with the ROK and holds
similar stances to it on international issues.
In line with the government’s Oceania
policy, the Ministry of National Defense
is seeking to expand defense cooperation
with Australia and New Zealand through
regular consultative processes and combined
exercises, into new and more diverse fields.

Visit to the K-9 Production Plant in Australia (August 2022)

The ROK and Australia have regularly

held Foreign and Defense Minister's talks
through the “2+2” meeting, convened annually since July 2013. Regular consultative processes
have been in place between the two countries, both at the levels of defense ministries and
armed forces. In September 2021, the 5th Republic of Korea-Australia Foreign and Defense
Ministers’ 2+2 Meeting was held in Seoul to discuss the security situation in the Korean
peninsula and the Indo-Pacific region and future directions for bilateral cooperation in the area
of defense and security. This meeting led to the signing of the amended “Memorandum of
Understanding Concerning Mutual Logistics Support and Cooperation between the Republic
of Korea and Australia” and the “Terms of Reference for the Trilateral Framework for
Cooperative Opportunities in Defense Research, Development, Testing and Evaluation Among
ROK, Australia, and U.S.” laying a solid foundation for defense industry and military logistics
cooperation between the two countries. During the diesel exhaust fluid shortage in November
2021, the two countries’ defense ministries actively cooperated with each other to allow the
emergency airlifting of urea from Australia, using the transport aircraft of the ROK Air Force,
to minimize strains in the domestic market.

In December 2021, marking the 60th anniversary of diplomatic ties between the Republic of

Korea and Australia, the government opened a new chapter in the two countries’ relationship by
upgrading it to a “comprehensive strategic partnership.” In addition to the bilateral combined
exercise, Haedori-Wallaby, conducted since 2013 between the two countries’ navies, the ROK
and Australia have also strengthened multilateral exercise-based cooperation with the objective
of enhancing interoperability. In July 2021, the ROK Navy participated in Exercise Talisman
Sabre for the first time. In August 2022, the ROK Air Force made its first participation in
Exercise Pitch Black. Meanwhile, in addition to the enhancement interoperability between the
two countries’ armed forces, a remarkable progress has also been made in terms of defense


-----

industry cooperation. The “Memorandum of
Understanding concerning Cooperation in
the Field of Defense Industry and Defense
Material” was signed during the bilateral
summit in December 2021. The two
countries also entered into an export contract
for the K-9 self-propelled howitzer (close to
KRW 1 trillion in value). In June 2022, the
bilateral defense ministers’ talks, held during ROK-New Zealand Defense Ministers’ Talks (June 2022)
the 19th Asia Security Summit (Shangri-La
Dialogue), the Australian side invited the ROK defense minister to visit Australia to continue
their discussions on defense and defense industry cooperation in further depth. Some 50 days
later, in August 2022, the two countries’ defense ministers met again in Australia for bilateral
talks. On the day after the talks, they visited the site slated for the construction of a K-9
production plant, while carrying out in-depth discussions on increasing combined exercises
between the two countries’ militaries, expanding new types of security cooperation in areas
including cyberspace and space, and deepening defense technology and industry cooperation.

The ROK and New Zealand actively communicate and coordinate with each other through

regular consultative mechanisms, including the Defense Policy Talks, and also hold high-level
talks on the sideline of multilateral meetings. In 2022, the 60th anniversary of the diplomatic
relations between the two countries, bilateral vice minister-level defense talks (March, Seoul)
and defense ministers’ talks (June, Singapore) were held back-to-back. These successive
rounds of talks gave a new stimulus to exchanges between the two countries’ militaries,
leading to the ROK-KIWI Bilateral Combined Exercise in October 2022 and Aotearoa, the
New Zealand Navy’s logistics support ship, entering in the naval base in Busan. The Ministry
of National Defense will continue to engage in high-level exchanges with Australia and New
Zealand and broaden and increase the scope and frequency of combined exercises to improve
interoperability with allies in the Oceanic region, while stepping up support for Korean defense
firms to strengthen defense industry cooperation with the region.


**Southwest Asia** In its “Strategy for a Free, Peaceful, and Prosperous Indo-Pacific, the

ROK government identified countries in South Asia, as partners of

critical importance, located in a strategic region where the Asian continent meets the Indian
Ocean, stating the intention to increase engagement with this region. The government is
currently broadening cooperation with Southwest Asian countries and is making particular
efforts to more closely cooperate with India, with which the ROK is under a “special strategic
partnership.” Meanwhile, using the momentum from the success of “Operation Miracle,” the
government is also taking steps to tighten cooperation with Pakistan. Defense cooperation with
Southwest Asian countries is focused on military education and training based on multi-level
personnel exchanges, including high-level exchanges, peacekeeping operations (PKO), and
cyber security threats and other non-traditional security threats.

**India is a key partner nation of the Republic of Korea with which the government is**

continuously deepening cooperation to advance the common goal of achieving peace and


-----

stability in the Indo-Pacific region. In March
2021, the ROK Minister of National Defense
visited India to attend the opening ceremony
for the Indo-Korean Friendship Park and
the unveiling ceremony for a memorial in
remembrance of the Indian contributions in
the Korean War. India dispatched the largest
contingent of medical personnel of all Allies
during the Korean War. These friendship Indo-Korean Friendship Park
events have provided a new catalyst to
further strengthen the relationship between the two countries.

During this visit, the ROK and Indian defense chiefs sat down for an in-depth discussion on

cooperation projects that are currently in progress between the two countries, in areas including
human exchange, space, cyberspace, and defense industry cooperation. The two sides have
also discussed and coordinated on issues related to their ongoing cooperation projects during
the Indian Chief of Army Staff’s visit to Korea in December 2020, as well as during Seoul
ADEX 2021 in October 2021, to which India sent a delegation. In February 2022, the ROK
Navy participated for the first time in MILAN, the multilateral naval exercise hosted by
India in a further step to increase maritime security cooperation between the two countries.
The Republic of Korea and India will continue to cooperate in diverse fields to contribute to
peace in the region.

**Pakistan is a friend of the ROK that helped it during the Korean War by sending**

humanitarian aid. The ROK has repaid the kindness by providing humanitarian aid to Pakistan,
in its turn, in times of natural disasters and crisis. Pakistan’s assistance was also instrumental to
the success of “Operation Miracle,” a rescue operation carried out in August 2021 to evacuate
Afghan special contributors and their families and fly them to the ROK. Based on the bond of
trust formed through Operation Miracle, the two countries have recently increased cooperation
between them in the defense area. During the vice minister-level talks, held in October 2022,
a memorandum of understanding was signed on defense cooperation in broad-ranging fields
including human exchange, education exchange, and cooperation in military medicine.

The Ministry of National Defense is also looking to expand defense cooperation with other

Southwest Asian countries such as Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri Lanka in the form of personnel
exchange at the working-level, education and training, and PKO cooperation.

To support the government’s vision of “broadening the horizons of Korean diplomacy

to Southwest Asia,” the Ministry of National Defense will work to progressively push the
boundaries of its defense diplomacy in this region and conduct cooperation in more diverse fields.


**Central Asia** The Ministry of National Defense has conducted cooperation with

countries in Central Asia, a key Eurasian region at the crossroads of Asia,

Europe, and Africa, in a sustained manner. During the Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD) 2018
and 2019, the ROK-Central Asia Plus Defense Vice-Ministerial Talks (2018) and the ROKCentral Asia Defense Vice-Ministerial Talks (2019) were successively held, discussing the
security situation in the region and defense cooperation between ROK and regional states.


-----

In 2019, ROK-Uzbekistan relations were elevated to a “special strategic partnership.”

Since then, defense cooperation has actively taken place between the two countries in areas
including military medicine and education. In January 2022, a defense policy working group
was convened through VTC to exchange information about the security situation in the region
and discuss key issues in defense cooperation such as military medicine exchanges and antiterrorism combined training exercises. In June 2022, the two countries signed an MOU on
field medicine cooperation and pledged to promote cooperation in military and field medicine
between them.

**Kazakhstan and the Republic of Korea are “strategic partners” that have consistently**

maintained a significant level of cooperation in the defense field. In August 2021, During
Kazakh President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev’s visit to the ROK, the ROK and Kazakhstan
leaders issued the “Joint Declaration on Cooperation in Defense and Veterans Affairs” and
vowed to strengthen defense industry cooperation between their two countries. In September
2021, a program for ROK military officers was created at Kazakhstan’s National Defense
University for the first time, providing an important turning point in the two countries’
expanding military education cooperation. In November 2022, an in-person Defense Policy
Working Group was convened to exchange information related to the security situation in the
region and discuss cooperation in areas including defense industry and PKO. In times ahead,
the Ministry of National Defense will work to build a comprehensive framework for defense
cooperation with Central Asian countries by creating regular consultative processes and seek
diverse opportunities for cooperation and exchange.


**Middle East** As a major source of the world’s energy supply, the Middle East is a region

of strategic value. The Ministry of National Defense continues to make

significant efforts to boost defense and defense industry cooperation with countries in this region.

The relationship between the Republic of Korea and the United Arab Emirates (UAE),

which established diplomatic ties in 1980, has developed into a broad-based partnership,
encompassing economic cooperation, trade, and cultural exchanges. Since the signing of the
ROK-UAE Military Cooperation Agreement in 2006, the two countries have also cooperated
on various defense-related issues. From January 2011, the Akh Unit has been dispatched to the
UAE with approval from the National Assembly. The two countries’ defense ministers have
regularly met and discussed issues of common interest through annual bilateral talks since 2011.

In March 2018, during the bilateral summit held in the UAE, the two leaders agreed to

upgrade the relationship between their two countries from a “strategic partnership” to a “special
strategic partnership” and further strengthen cooperation by establishing a 2+2 Foreign and
Defense Minister’s consultative mechanism. The Foreign and Defense Vice-Ministerial (2+2)
Meeting were held for the first time in October 2018. In February 2021, the two countries’
defense ministers convened in the UAE and pledged to more closely cooperate with each other
on defense and defense industry-related issues. In January 2022, the ROK and the UAE signed
the “Memorandum of Understanding on Medium and Long-term Cooperation in the Fields
of Defense Industries and Technology” and discussed methods of cooperation to bolster the
competitiveness of the two countries’ defense industry, including conducting joint research
and development and increasing technological cooperation. In March 2022, the UAE defense


-----

minister paid an official visit to the ROK and held talks with his Korean counterpart. The two
defense chiefs positively assessed ROK-UAE cooperation in defense and defense industry,
saying that it has developed in a mutually-beneficial direction, and resolved to make sustained
efforts to further strengthen practical cooperation between the two countries. During the ROKUAE Vice Defense Ministers’ Steering Committee held in September 2022, the two sides
agreed to expand cooperation in information-sharing, cyber space, and combined exercises
and provide active support to the UAE Armed Forces for timely acquisition of operating
capabilities for the Cheongung II (KM-SAM).

There has also been a major stride in defense cooperation between the Republic of Korea

and Egypt. In August 2021, the ROK Minister of National Defense traveled to Egypt. After
meeting with President Abdul Fatah al-Sisi, the ROK Minister of National Defense held
bilateral talks with his Egyptian counterpart. The two sides pledged to broaden cooperation
in the fields of defense and defense industry. In October 2021, the ROK Minister of National
Defense also held bilateral talks with the Egyptian Minister of Military Production, on a visit to
the ROK to attend Seoul ADEX, assessing the status of defense cooperation between the two
countries and discussing measures to ramp up cooperation in defense and defense industry. The
exports agreement for the K-9 self-propelled howitzer, concluded in February 2022, has given
a particularly sizeable momentum to defense industry cooperation between the two partners.

Positive progress is being made with Oman. In September 2021, the ROK Minister

of National Defense visited Oman for bilateral talks and conveyed the ROK’s desire to
expand cooperation in defense industry to his counterpart, while also asking for the Oman
government’s support and assistance to allow the Cheonghae Unit to safely carry out their
operations. In October 2021, the ROK Minister of National Defense also held bilateral talks
with Oman’s Secretary General of Defense, visiting the ROK to attend Seoul ADEX, to
discuss the future direction of defense cooperation.

ROK defense cooperation with Saudi Arabia has been focused mainly on high-level

exchanges. In October 2021, the ROK Minister of National Defense sat down for bilateral
talks with the Saudi Chairman of the General Staff, on a visit to Korea to participate in Seoul
ADEX. The 2nd ROK-KSA Defense Cooperation Committee was also held on the sideline
of this event, providing an opportunity to explore ways in which the two countries can
cooperate in areas related to the defense industry and cement cooperative ties between them. In
November 2022, Crown Prince and Prime Minister Mohammed Bin Salman visited the ROK
and held a summit with President Yoon, during which they vowed to expand defense industry
cooperation between the two countries.

To increase defense cooperation with Qatar, steps have recently been taken, including

the establishment of the Defense Attaché Office in the Embassy of the State of Qatar to the
Republic of Korea. Meanwhile, for the successful hosting of the 2022 FIFA World Cup by
Qatar, the ROK Armed Forces dispatched its military police instructors to provide security and
anti-terrorism training support.

The Ministry of National Defense will pay continuous attention to the security situation in

the Middle East and changing power dynamics in the region and seek to develop defense and
defense industry cooperation with countries in this region, including the UAE, Egypt, Saudi
Arabia, through regularly military consultations, both at high and working levels.


-----

**Europe and Canada** European countries that are ROK’s traditional friendly partners

and have supported its efforts to denuclearize the Korean peninsula

and bring peace prosperity to it constitute an important pillar of our defense diplomacy. In June
2022, President Yoon became the first Korean leader to participate in the NATO Summit. This
was an opportunity for the ROK to reaffirm its solidarity with European nations that share its
liberal democratic values, which also helped solidify the basis for security cooperation with
the NATO to respond to emerging threats and other transnational threats. In its “Strategy for a
Free, Peaceful, and Prosperous Indo-Pacific,” the government recognized European countries
as crucial partners for the success of ROK’s Indo-Pacific Strategy and stressed the importance
of actively cooperating with the European Union which shares our core values, at practical
levels. The Ministry of National Defense has continuously sought to strengthen cooperation
with European countries in the areas of defense and defense industry both through bilateral and
mini-lateral consultative processes.

In July 2021, the defense ministers of ROK and UK held talks, comparing notes about their

respective Indo-Pacific strategies and exchanging views about ways to expand bilateral defense
cooperation between the two countries. In August 2021, HMS Queen Elizabeth and her Carrier
Striker Group conducted a joint humanitarian aid and disaster relief exercise with the ROK
Navy in waters off the ROK. Moreover, in order to implement the “Bilateral Framework for
Closer Cooperation,” adopted during the summit held in June 2022, in the defense domain,
the ROK-UK Strategic Defense Dialogue, a vice minister level consultative process, was
convened for the first time in July, 2022. The ROK and the UK have also agreed to regularly
consult and coordinate with each other through consultative mechanisms between the defense
ministries and armed forces of the two countries.

The ROK maintains strategic communication with France both through a regular deputy

ministerial-level strategic defense dialogue and high-level talks during multilateral meetings
such as the Asia Security Summit. In February 2022, the defense ministers of the two countries
met for bilateral talks to exchange views on the security situation in the Korean peninsula and
Europe. During the bilateral summit, held in 2018, the ROK and French leaders discussed
concrete approaches to promote defense cooperation between the two countries and pledged
to develop their relationship into a “comprehensive partnership” by increasing cooperation in
new security domains, such as space, cyberspace, and AI.

**Belgium is a traditional friendly partner of the Republic of Korea. Efforts are currently**

underway to open a new chapter in the two countries’ friendship through active defense
cooperation. In August 2022, the ROK Vice Minister of National Defense met with the Belgian
Chief of Defense for a conversation, during which they exchanged views on the security situation
of the Korean peninsula and ways of expanding defense cooperation between the two countries.

During the ROK-V4 (Visegrad Group) summit[40)] organized in November 2021, the ROK and

the Visegrad Group agreed to explore pathways to deepen cooperation in the field of defense
and defense industry. Meanwhile, the bilateral summits between the ROK leader and the leaders
of the four member states of the Visegrad Group, Hungary, Czech, Slovakia, and Poland, led to
discussions on concrete methods of cooperation in defense and defense industry-related areas.

**Poland and the ROK are actively conducting bilateral exchanges in addition to multilateral**

consultations through the V4+Korea deputy defense ministers’ talks. In September 2021, the


**40)**
A regional alliance of four
Central European countries
including Czech, Poland,
Hungary, and Slovakia, named
after Visegrad, the city where
the group held its inaugural
meeting in 1991.


-----

two countries’ vice defense ministers got together for a discussion on their respective security
situations and options to strengthen defense cooperation in areas including cyber security,
PKO, and military education as well as joint defense industry research and development.
In May 2022, a ROK-Poland defense ministers’ meeting was convened when the Polish
defense minister visited Korea. The two defense chiefs exchanged views on the security
situation in their respective regions and defense and defense industry cooperation between
their two countries. Two of the highlights of this meeting were Poland’s acquisition plan for
large quantity of Korean-manufactured weapons systems and a new plan for research and
development cooperation between the two countries.

**Germany and the ROK convened for defense minister’s talks in May 2021. During this**

meeting, they discussed topics including support measures for ASEAN countries and the
guidelines for Germany’s Indo-Pacific policy. In December 2021, the German frigate Bayern
made a call at Korea as part of an effort to strengthen cooperation with partners in the IndoPacific region and friendship events were held between the two countries’ navies, including the
tour of each other’s ships. In June 2022, the Minister of State of the German Federal Foreign
Office paid an official visit to the ROK and met with the ROK Vice Minister of National
Defense to discuss cooperation between the two countries on their Indo-Pacific strategies. This
meeting has also provided confirmation that Germany supports the ROK government’s effort
to denuclearize North Korea and achieve peace on the Korean peninsula.

**Sweden and the ROK regularly organize director general level defense policy meetings**

to discuss bilateral cooperation on defense issues. In October 2021, the Foreign Affairs and
Security Deputy Minister of the Swedish Prime Minister’s Office visited Korea and sat down
with the ROK Vice Minister of National Defense for a discussion on deepening defense
cooperation between the two countries. The two sides decided to closely coordinate on defense
issues at the same time as actively communicating with each other to promote the development
of multilateral cooperation.

**Norway and the ROK regularly conduct high-level exchanges and are making joint efforts**

to increase cooperation in the area of defense industry. In February 2022, the two countries’
defense chiefs met for bilateral talks in Norway, for the first time in nine years since the last
ministerial talks in 2013. This was also the first time the ROK Minister of National Defense
paid an official visit to Norway. The two ministers shared their assessments of the security
situation in the Korean peninsula and Northern Europe and compared notes on the way
forward in defense and defense industry cooperation between the two countries.

The ROK is also seeking to more closely cooperate with the North Atlantic Treaty

**Organization (NATO) both in traditional and emerging security fields. In April 2022, the**
Chairman of the NATO Military Committee visited the ROK and met with the ROK Minister
of National Defense to exchange views on the Ukraine crisis and the security situation in the
Korean peninsula.

Noting how the ROK has maintained close cooperation with NATO ever since it became its

global partner, the two officials discussed the road ahead for ROK-NATO security cooperation.
In June 2022, President Yoon attended the NATO Summit, this was the first time the President
of the Republic of Korea attended a NATO Summit. After the NATO Summit, the ROK
and the NATO are working on revising the document, which will pave the path for a more


-----

comprehensive security partnership.

The ROK and Canada, its friendly part
nering nation in North America have carried
out defense exchanges in a sustained manner
by regularly holding high-level talks on the
sideline of multilateral meetings. To search
and recover the remains of missing Canadian
service members who fought in the Korean
War, the two countries signed a “ROK- ROK-Canada Defense Ministers’ Talks (June 2022)
Canada Memorandum on Cooperation in the
Recovery of Missing Service Personnel” in June 2021. In June 2022, the ROK and Canadian
defense ministers held bilateral talks in Singapore during which they shared the fact that the
two countries were each designing an Indo-Pacific strategy and vowed to continue to cooperate
with each other to achieve peace in the region.

Going forward, the Ministry of National Defense will keep up its efforts to strengthen

cooperation in the fields of defense and defense industry with European partners and Canada that
share our values to fulfill Korea’s role as a responsible member of the international community.


**Central and South America** The ROK actively cooperates economically with countries

in Central and South America. The government’s “Strategy

for a Free, Peaceful, and Prosperous Indo-Pacific Region” describes Central and South
America as a region with many traditional friendly nations and recognizes it as a key partner
of the Republic of Korea. In the defense domain, the government is continuously exploring
opportunities to cooperate with this region on diverse issues as part of an effort to broaden the
horizons of defense diplomacy and build international support for the ROK’s defense policy.

In August 2021, Colombia and the Republic of Korea held a bilateral summit on the

occasion of the 70th anniversary of the Colombian participation in the Korean War. During this
summit, the two leaders signed the “Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation Related
to Missing Personnel During Korean War” to facilitate the timely repatriation of the remains
of Colombian service members killed in the Korean War. Moreover, in October 2021, the
two countries’ Vice Defense Ministers held bilateral talks on the sideline of the Seoul ADEX
and discussed ways of bolstering cooperation in the areas of defense and defense industry. In
January 2022, ROKS Suncheon, the second retired navy ship donated by the ROK after the
donation of ROKS Gyeongju in 2016, arrived in Peru. This has forged a strong bond between
the two countries, which are closely cooperating with each other on defense-related issues. The
Ministry of National Defense plans to increase high-level military exchanges with partners
in Central and South America to promote friendship and actively seek opportunities for
cooperation in defense and defense industry.


-----

**Africa** Africa is a region of growing

strategic importance. Its

wealth of natural resources and young
population makes Africa an economic
partner with significant potential and strategic
importance. In the “Strategy for a Free,
Peaceful, and Prosperous Indo-Pacific,” the
ROK government has provided an extended
definition of the geographic scope of Indo- ROK-Ghana High-level Talks (January 2022)
Pacific to include African nations bordering
the Indian Ocean, stressing the importance of cooperating with these countries. In its effort
to expand the horizons of ROK’s defense diplomacy, the Ministry of National Defense has
increasingly engaged with African countries to promote cooperation in diverse defense-related
fields, from high-level military and educational exchanges to defense industry cooperation.

In July 2021, the ROK Minister of National Defense had a phone conversation with his

Ghanaian counterpart to discuss coordinated efforts to stop the spread of COVID-19 among
the personnel of the Cheonghae Unit in operation in the Gulf of Guinea. In October 2021, vice
minister level defense talks were held between the ROK and Côte d'Ivoire on the occasion of
Seoul ADEX. In September 2022, the ROK Vice Minister of National Defense sat down with
his South African, Ghanaian, and Ugandan counterparts, who were visiting Korea to attend
the Seoul Defense Dialogue, for bilateral talks on defense and defense industry cooperation.
In November 2022, the ROK Vice Minister of National Defense held talks with the Ghanaian
defense minister on a visit to Korea to attend the Defense Industry Conference, organized
by the Defense Acquisition Program Administration. During this discussion on the way
forward in defense and defense industry cooperation between the two countries, the Korean
side expressed gratitude to the Ghanaian side for the support and assistance provided by the
Ghanaian government to the Cheonghae Unit.

Moving forward, the Ministry of National Defense will make sustained efforts to lay a strong

groundwork for defense cooperation with countries in Africa and identify cooperation projects
of mutual interest that can be jointly carried out with our African partners.


**3. Strengthening Multilateral Security Cooperation**

Rising security threats facing the global community, both traditional and non-traditional, have
made multilateral cooperation more important than ever before. In 2020, as governments
around the world responded to the outbreak of COVID-19, which rapidly evolved into a
pandemic, it became apparent that a coordinated international response is the only viable
solution to challenges of global proportions. To grapple with an increasingly unpredictable
global security situation and continue to fulfill its role as a responsible member of the
international community, the ROK is actively engaging in bilateral and multilateral cooperation
with nations around the world.

Since 2012, the Ministry of National Defense has annually organized the Seoul Defense


-----

Dialogue (SDD), a multilateral platform for global security dialogue, attended by vice
minister-level defense officials and private-sector security experts from around the world.
In December 2021, the ROK became the first Asian country to host the UN Peacekeeping
Ministerial Conference, one of the highest-level UN consultative mechanisms. The “Seoul
UN Peacekeeping Ministerial,” jointly organized by the Ministry of National Defense and the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, provided the global community with an opportunity to define a
new roadmap for cooperation in international peacekeeping operations.

During this event, the Republic of Korea presented its six pledges to contribute to

peacekeeping operations, including the operation of a “Smart Camp,” strengthening medical
capabilities and capabilities to handle infectious diseases, supplying MD500 reconnaissance
helicopters, sharing the experience of the ROK engineering forces, broadening women’s
participation in peacekeeping operations, and sending more police officers to support PKO.

Major multilateral security consultative platforms in which the Ministry of National Defense

participates are listed in [Figure 5-5]:

**[Figure 5-5] Participation in Multilateral Security Dialogue Platforms**

|Track1 multilateral security dialogue41)|Track1.5 multilateral security dialogue42)|
|---|---|
|• ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting- Plus (ADMM-Plus) • ASEAN Regional Forum(ARF) • Tokyo Defense Forum(TDF)|• Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD) • Asia Security Summit (ASS) • Halifax International Security Forum (HISF) • Northeast Asia Cooperation Dialogue (NEACD) • Sherpa Meeting|


**Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD)** The Seoul Defense Dialogue is a platform for dialogue

and discussions on the security situation in the Korean

peninsula and Asia-Pacific, as well as other global issues of common interest, organized by
the Ministry of National Defense since 2012, to contribute to building international trust in the
defense domain and promote multilateral cooperation. Bilateral and minilateral talks held on
the sideline of the SDD provide countries with opportunities to form partnerships for defense
cooperation and forge ties. In recent years, the platform has gained importance as a key highlevel multilateral consultative mechanism for the region, due to the growing participation of
members of the broader global community, including North America, Europe, the Middle East,
and Africa, in addition to the Asia-Pacific.

In 2021, the 10th SDD on the theme of “Borderless Security Crises and Multilateral

Responses” was attended by participants from 43 countries around the world. Despite the
COVID-19 pandemic, the event was successfully carried out through a combination of video
conferencing and small in-person conferences. The 10th SDD was noted for the first-ever
participation of high-level defense and foreign affairs officials from all four countries that are
key players in the security of the region, including the U.S., Japan, China, and Russia. The
range of topics covered was also broadened to include new security fields such as climate
change and space security, which helped enhance the relevance of the platform and the quality
of the dialogue. The 2021 event was coupled with a special conversation to examine the


Seoul Defense
Dialogue (SDD) 2022

**41)**
Multilateral platforms for
security dialogue between
governments to promote
regional and global peace and
stability.
※ ADMM-Plus (ASEAN

Defense Minister’s MeetingPlus), ARF (ASEAN
Regional Forum), TDF (Tokyo
Defense Forum)

**42)**
Multilateral platforms for
dialogue on security issues
of common interest between
governments and privatesector organizations and
experts to promote regional and
global peace and stability.
※ SDD (Seoul Defense

Dialogue), ASS (Asia
Security Summit), HISF
(Halifax International
Security Forum), NEACD
(Northeast Asia Cooperation
Dialogue)


-----

accomplishments of the SDD on its 10th
anniversary and explore the path forward.

The 11th SDD in 2022 had as its theme

“Complex Security Threats: Fostering
International Solidarity.” This event, attended
by high-level defense and security officials
and private-sector security experts from 54
countries and 3 international organizations,
gave rise to in-depth discussions on ensuring 11th Seoul Defense Dialogue (September 2022)
peace and stability in the Korean peninsula
and Asia-Pacific amid a rapidly evolving security environment, redefined by back-toback missile launches by North Korea and the war in Ukraine. One of the highlights of the
2022 SDD was the “Indo-Pacific Security Session,” aimed at kindling interest in the ROK
government’s Indo-Pacific Strategy among domestic and external stakeholders, identifying
common security challenges for the region, and gaining insights into the role expected of the
ROK by countries in the region.

Meanwhile, the “SDD Cyber Working Group,” established in 2014 was followed up by a

new working group on another type of non-traditional security threat, the “Space Security
Working Group,” to further awaken interest in emerging threats among the regional partners
and enhance the relevance and breadth of topics covered by it.


**Republic of Korea-ASEAN** The ROK-ASEAN Defense Vice-Ministerial

**Defense Vice-Ministerial Meeting** Meeting was first held during the 2017 Seoul Defense

Dialogue. Since then, it was convened annually in

the ROK, except in 2020 during the early stage of the COVID-19 pandemic.

During the first meeting in 2017, ROK and the ASEAN recognized the need to cooperate

with each other and reached a common ground on the direction of development in their
cooperation. In 2018, the discussions were focused on the defense industry, reflecting the “New
Southern Policy”. The Korean experience of defense industry development was shared and
the two sides discussed ways of expanding mutually-beneficial defense industry cooperation.
In 2019, which marked the 30th anniversary of official relations between the Republic of
Korea and the ASEAN, the two sides carried out comprehensive discussions about areas in
which they could further increase their
defense cooperation. During the 2021 talks,
conducted through video conferencing amid
the spread of COVID-19, the two sides
built further policy consensus. During the
2022 meeting, the “Implementation Plan
for Republic of Korea-ASEAN Defense
Cooperation,” adopted during the ADMMPlus, was shared with the member states and
discussions were held on maritime security,

2022 ROK-ASEAN Defense Vice-Ministerial Meeting

cyber security, military medicine, and other (September 2022)


-----

areas in which ASEAN countries wish to cooperate with the ROK.

The ROK-ASEAN Defense Vice-Ministerial Meeting, convened five times so far, is fast

becoming an authoritative consultative process for the region, serving as a platform for
communication and policy exchange and providing new visions.


**ASEAN Defense Ministers’** The Ministry of National Defense participates every

**Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus)** year in the ADMM-Plus, a defense dialogue platform for

the ASEAN launched in 2010. During the 8th ADMM
Plus in 2021, the ROK Minister of National Defense called attention to the need to establish
a global order based on international norms and rules and founded on universal human values
and stressed the importance of digital cooperation in building mutual trust in the region.

Meanwhile, during the 9th ADMM-Plus, the first in-person meeting in three years, since

the start of the pandemic, the Minister of National Defense presented the highlights of ROK’s
Indo-Pacific Strategy, which was first discussed during the ROK-ASEAN summit (November
2022). The defense chief provided the details of the Korean vision to contribute to peace
and stability in the region as a “global pivotal state” and the “Audacious Initiative” for the
denuclearization of North Korea, building support from the regional partners.

9th ADMM-Plus (November 2022)


**Asia Security Summit** Since 2004, the Ministry of National Defense has annually

attended the Asia Security Summit, the largest multilateral

consultative platform on security and defense in Asia-Pacific. In 2022, the Asia Security
Summit was held for the 19th time in an in-person setting after a pause of three years since
2019 due to the pandemic. During the 2022
summit, the ROK Minister of National
Defense delivered a presentation on the
“Denuclearization of North Korea and
Security in the Indo-Pacific Region.”
Emphasizing the importance of peace on
the Korean peninsula for the stability of the
broader region, the Minister of National
Defense asked for the support of the
international community for his country’s 19th Asia Security Summit (June 2022)


-----

efforts to deter North Korean nuclear and missile threats. In addition to ROK’s policy towards
North Korea, the Minister’s presentation covered its new external policy and plan to become
a global pivotal state. The audience showed a particularly keen interest in the ROK policy for
security cooperation with the ASEAN, Europe and other countries outside the region.


**43)**
Diplomatic efforts to prevent
the proliferation of WMD and
their means of delivery and
other types of armaments
including conventional
weapons.

**44)**
An international organization
founded in 1957 to provide
technological support to
promote the peaceful use of
nuclear energy and inhibit its
use for military purpose (171
member countries).

**45)**
An export control regime to
regulate the export of nuclear
materials, technologies, and
dual-use items. Unlike the
Zangger Committee (ZC), which
only controls exports to nonnuclear states that are party to
the NPT (established in 1978,
48 member countries), the NSG
regulates exports to all nonnuclear states, including those
that are not party to the NonProliferation Treaty (NPT).

**46)**
A treaty prohibiting the
development, production,
and stockpiling of biological
weapons, including biological
agents and toxins (established
in 1975, 183 signatory
countries).

**47)**
A treaty prohibiting the
development, production,
stockpiling, use and transfer of
chemical weapons, requiring
its signatories to destroy 100%
of the chemical weapons
stockpiles within 10 years
(established in 1997, 193
signatory countries).

**48)**
Act on the Prohibition of
Chemical and Biological
Weapons and the Control
of the Manufacture, Export
and Import, etc. of Specific
Chemicals and Biological
Agents (Chemical and
Biological Weapons Prohibition
Act), etc.


**Other Multilateral Security** The Ministry of National Defense also participate every

**Consultative Mechanisms** year in the Sherpa Meeting, a security dialogue platform

for Asia-Pacific, attended by high-level defense officials

and security experts, as well as the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), the Tokyo Defense Forum
(TDF), a director general level security consultative body, and the Xiangshan Forum in China.
The Ministry of National Defense also attends the Northeast Asia Cooperation Dialogue
(NEACD), a consultative platform for members of the Six-party Talks to explore solutions
to build military trust and promote cooperation between countries in Northeast Asia. The
Ministry of National Defense will continue to increase its involvement in multilateral security
cooperation to share our government’s position in guaranteeing peace and stability in the
Korean peninsula and Northeast Asia and raise support for ROK’s security policy.


**4. International Non-proliferation and Counter-proliferation Activities**


**International Non-proliferation Activities[43)]** Following the end of the cold war, the

international non-proliferation system

has been steadily strengthened. To prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass-destruction
(WMD) and their means of delivery, conventional weapons, and related materials and
technologies, international organizations were set up to establish and enforce compliance with
international treaties and export control regimes were put into place to restrict the transfer of
related goods and equipment.

Ever since the Republic of Korea became a member of the United Nations in 1991, the

Ministry of National Defense has actively participated in international non-proliferation
mechanisms and activities, aimed at regulating nuclear weapons, chemical and biological
weapons, missiles, and conventional weapons. Regarding nuclear weapons, as party to the
Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT), the ROK has faithfully abided by the Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement of the IAEA (International Atomic Energy Agency)[44)] and contributed
to the prevention of the cross-border movement of nuclear materials and technologies that
could be diverted to nuclear weaponry by exchanging information with countries that are
members of the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG)[45)]. To support the government’s nuclear
non-proliferation policy, the Ministry of National Defense closely cooperates with relevant
agencies. Concerning chemical and biological weapons, the ROK became a signatory of the
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC)[46)] in 1987 and the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC)[47)] in 1997. A legal framework[48)] is furthermore in place to ensure the safety of
chemical and biological agents. The Ministry of National Defense has its own safeguards in
place against the misuse of chemical and biological agents and conducts regular inspections of
military research facilities.


-----

The ROK also participates in volunteer

export control regimes to stop the proliferation of missiles, which are a means of
delivery for WMD. It became a member
of the Missile Technology Control Regime
(MTCR)[49)] in 2001 and the Hague Code
of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation (HCOC)[50)] in 2002 to join
the international efforts to prevent the RegularChemical Inspection by the Ministry of National Defense

**49)**

indiscriminate proliferation of missiles. The A voluntary multilateral export
Ministry of National Defense dutifully complies with missile launch notification and annual control regime to control the

proliferation of rockets and

reporting requirements to ensure a high degree of transparency in regards to missile-related unmanned aerial vehicles

capable of delivering WMD,

equipment and technology transfer. and related equipment and

Non-proliferation activities by the international community have recently expanded in technologies (established in

1987, 35 member countries).

scope to include conventional weapons. The member countries of the Wassenaar Arrangement

**50)**

(WA)[51)] agree to its guidelines for controls on exports of conventional weapons, dual-use A non-binding legal instrument
goods,[52) ]and technologies and the list of items. Member governments implement these providing export control

guidelines to limit the

controls and share information on the transfer of conventional weapons on a voluntary basis. spread of ballistic missiles
Since becoming a member of the Wassenaar Arrangement in 1996, the Ministry of National and prohibiting member countries from providing
Defense has regularly notified its secretariat of the transfer of conventional weapons and has missile development-related

assistance to state actors that

also actively participated in discussions related to revising the list of items to protect the ROK may develop or acquire WMD
defense industry. The Arms Trade Treaty (ATT),[53)] which came into force in 2014, is the (established in 2002, 143

signatory countries)

first legally binding standalone treaty on international trade in conventional weapons, which

**51)**

regulates the cross-border transfer of seven weapons categories, small arms, light weapons, An export control regime to
ammunition and related parts. The ROK is one of the original signatories of this treaty, limit the export of conventional

weapons and dual-use items

which was ratified in 2017. In the ROK, which is a signatory of all four major international and technologies (established

in 1996, 42 members countries)

export control regimes,[54)] its defense ministry closely coordinates with relevant government
agencies when authorizing weapons exports to determine whether the destination country is in **52)**

Goods that can be used for both

compliance with export control rules, as well as concerning related military issues.[55)] civilian and military uses.

Moving forward, the ROK will continue to actively participate in the international non
**53)**

proliferation efforts to contribute to the stability of the region and global peace and solidify the A treaty aimed at preventing

the illegal trade and

joint response framework to ensure the security of the Korean peninsula. diversion of conventional

weapons, providing common
standards for the control

**International Counter-proliferation** In the aftermath of the 9/11 terrorist attack, of the international trade

**Activities[56)]** amid the strengthening link between WMD and of conventional weapons (established in 2014, 111

terrorism, the world came to the realization that signatory countries).

traditional means such as export controls alone are not sufficient to prevent the proliferation of **54)**
WMD and the need for more proactive counter-proliferation policies was brought to the fore.[57)] The four regimes are the

Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG),

Since 2009, the Ministry of National Defense has participated in “Weapons of Mass the Australia (AG), the Missile

Technology Control Regime

Destruction Proliferation Security Initiative” (PSI) exercises[58)] for 12 times and has dispatched (MTCR), and the Wassenaar
navy ships and search teams to assist with coordinated international response efforts. PSI Arrangement (WA). Currently,

30 countries are party to all

exercises have provided the WMD Search Team of the ROK CBRN Defense Command, four of them (clean countries),

including two Asian countries

which has participated in them since 2017, with a valuable opportunity to develop search (Korea, Japan).


-----

capabilities for suspected chemical,
biological, and radioactive materials. In
2010, 2012, and 2019, the PSI was hosted by
the ROK; tabletop proliferation prevention
and seizing exercises were carried out along
with maritime interdiction and cargo search
exercises.

Since 2014, the ROK, the U.S., Japan,

Singapore, Australia, and New Zealand have Proliferation Security Initiative Training Exercise
taken turns to host PSI exercises. In 2022,
the Ministry of National Defense, the ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff and the ROK CBRN Defense
Command participated in the PSI exercises hosted by the U.S., further strengthening the WMD
proliferation prevention capabilities of the ROK Armed Forces and enhancing the nation’s
status on the world stage.

The Ministry of National Defense intends to continuously expand its cooperation with the

global efforts to stop the proliferation of WMD in close coordination with the international
community and through active participation in counter-proliferation activities, including the
Asia-Pacific Exercise Rotation (APER).

**[Figure 5-6] Proliferation Security Initiative Exercises by APER Host Country**


**55)**
The final authority to
approve the acquisition of
strategic military goods
has been delegated to the
Defense Acquisition Program
Administration by the Ministry
of National Defense.

**56)**
All efforts related to the
reduction or elimination of
WMD threats or the dissuasion
of the enemy’s use of WMD by
a country to protect its territory
and people.

**57)**
Unlike non-proliferation, which
is focused on the prevention
of the transfer of strategic
goods before it occurs, counterproliferation is aimed at
physically blocking a transfer of
resources (goods, funds) that is
already in progress.

**58)**
A multilateral effort to stop
the global spread of WMD,
initiated by the U.S. in June
2003, consisting of information
sharing between member
states, the prohibition of the
export of WMD and their
means of delivery, as well as
illegal weapons, and combined
operations.

**59)**
The Logistics Cooperation
Committee (LCC) is a
subcommittee of the ROK-U.S.
Security Consultative Meeting
(SCM) and the highest-level
consultative meeting that
discusses ROK-U.S. logistics
cooperation. The meeting is
convened annually, alternating
between the two countries.

**60)**
A committee that meets
annually in the ROK to
discuss issues related to the
wartime deployment of U.S.
reinforcement troops based on
Wartime Host Nation Support
(WHNS) signed between the
two countries in 1991.

|Year Country|2014 U.S.|2015 New Zealand|2016 Singapore|2017 Australia|2018 Japan|2019 ROK|2020 N/A (COVID-19)|2021 Singapore|2022 U.S.|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|


**5. Strengthening International Military Logistics Cooperation**


**International Military Logistics Cooperation** The Ministry of National Defense is acti
vely engaging in international military

logistics cooperation to ensure that the ROK Armed Forces’ logistics support capabilities
are sufficient to allow them to flexibly respond to unforeseen threats during both wartime
and peacetime. The ROK military is especially closely cooperating with the U.S. through
bilateral meetings such as the Logistics Cooperation Committee (LCC)[59)] and the WHNS
Combined Steering Committee (WCSC),[60)] as well as multilateral logistics conferences
including the Pacific Area Senior Officer Logistics Seminar (PASOLS).[61)] During the 54th
Logistics Cooperation Committee convened in Washington DC in July 2022, the Republic
of Korea presented its ammunition acquisition plan for ROK-U.S. combined operations. The
two sides agreed to enhance the degree of integration between acquisition and management of
ammunition and continue the discussions on Trans-Korea Pipeline (TKP).

During the 26th WHNS Combined Steering Committee in April 2019, the ROK and the U.S.

discussed ways of improving wartime support plans in 12 crucial areas including engineering,
maintenance, and supply, which are essential for a smooth deployment of U.S. reinforcement


-----

troops. The two sides agreed to make active efforts to upgrade the wartime support plans
and discussed the revision of the guidelines related to scheduling and planning. Although
the WCSC has not convened in the last three years due to the pandemic, the two sides have
maintained dialogue through working-level committees to address key challenges in wartime
support operations and to sketch out future directions. The WCSC is set to meet according
to the normal schedule from 2023. These efforts to strengthen logistics support cooperation
between the ROK and the U.S. are expected to have a positive impact on the ROK Armed
Forces’ readiness posture and combat capabilities.

The Pacific Area Senior Officer Logistics Seminar is the highest-level multilateral

consultative process in the area of military logistics. Attended by some 30 member countries
including the U.S. and the UK, PASOLS is a platform for discussions on the enhancement of
logistics support-related interoperability between countries, humanitarian aid/disaster relief,
and other key military logistics issues. In September 2021, the ROK delegation delivered
a presentation on big data trends in military logistics and shared the highlights of logistics
innovation in the ROK Armed Forces, eliciting a favorable response from member countries
in attendance. In September 2022, bilateral talks were held with eight countries including
the U.S., discussing key logistics issues and laying the groundwork for further progress in
international logistics cooperation.

The ROK military is also continuously cooperating with its Australian and New Zealand

counterparts in areas related to ammunition support, logistics innovation, and military
digitalization through regular consultative processes.


**Mutual Logistics Support Agreements** Mutual Logistics Support Agreements (MLSA)

are bilateral arrangements signed to ensure

speedy and efficient support of logistics, goods, and services needed for military activities.
According to the MLSA, logistics support is provided between two signatory countries within
the limit of available resources, both during wartime and peacetime. Costs associated with the
provision of goods and services are settled afterwards. As international logistics cooperation is
based on Mutual Logistics Support Agreements, countries around the world are increasingly
entering into new agreements or amending existing agreements to better suit their needs. The
ROK military has entered into a Mutual Logistics Support Agreement with 17 countries so
far. In recent years, despite challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic to international
exchanges, continuous efforts have been made to expand the scope of mutual logistics support
by, for instance, amending the MLSA with Australia in September 2021.

**[Figure 5-7] Mutual Logistics Support Agreements**

**Mutual Logistics Support Agreements by Country (year)**

U.S. (1988), Thailand (1991), New Zealand (2007), Türkiye (2008), Philippines (2009), Israel, Australia, Canada (2010),

Indonesia, Singapore· (2011), Cambodia, Spain, UK (2012), Mongolia (2013), Germany (2016), Vietnam (2018), France (2019)


**61)**
A multilateral meeting for
countries in the Indo-Pacific
region to share logistics
information and experiences of
managing logistics operations.
Convened annually and hosted
by one of the member nations
on a rotational basis.


-----

**Donation of Logistics Equipment** The Ministry of National Defense regularly donates

military equipment that is no longer in use by the

ROK military to willing recipient countries. This has not only helped to promote defense
and logistics cooperation and defense exports, but also positively contributed to infrastructure
exports and diplomatic relations. Unlike in the past when the recipients were mainly Southeast
Asian countries, retired military equipment is now also being donated to countries in South
America and Africa. The range of donated equipment has also become more diverse to include
ships, aircraft, mobility equipment, artillery equipment, and engineering equipment. The details
of military equipment donated by the ROK Armed Forces are as follows [Figure 5-8]:



**[Figure 5-8] Logistics Equipment Donations**

|Dates|Region|Items Donated|
|---|---|---|
|1993-1999|Asia|Ships, aircraft, vehicles, tactical gear and equipment, etc.|
|2000-2009|Asia, South America|Ships, aircraft, engineering equipment, mobile equipment, etc.|
|2010-present|Asia, South America, Africa, Oceania|Ships, engineering equipment, mobile equipment, firepower equipment, ammunition, etc.|



To guarantee timely, efficient and coordinated logistics support in a fast-evolving and

increasingly diverse security environment, the Ministry of National Defense will continuously
seek to expand international cooperation. The Ministry of National Defense will actively
participate in bilateral and multilateral logistics consultative processes to boost international
awareness of the advancing capabilities of the ROK Armed Forces and strengthen logistics
support partnerships.


-----

**Section**


###### Participation in International Peacekeeping Operations and Protection of Overseas Citizens

After overcoming the tragedies of the Korean War with the help from the United Nations and
the international community, the ROK underwent a spectacular transformation to become
a prosperous democratic nation with a vibrant economy. Once a recipient of international
aid, the ROK is today a contributing member of the global community, actively participating
in international peacekeeping operations. As of December 2022, nearly 1,000 ROK service
members are stationed in various parts of the world to safeguard international peace. In times
of natural disasters around the world, ROK military assets are actively put to use to protect its
overseas citizens through timely and proactive intervention.


**1. UN Peacekeeping Operations**

**Overview of UN Peacekeeping Operations** UN peacekeeping operations began

in 1948 with the establishment of the

UNTSO (United Nations Truce Supervision Organization) to monitor armistice agreements
in the Middle East. Currently, 12 PKO missions[62)] are stationed in conflict zones in
various parts of the world, carrying out duties including truce supervision, post conflict
reconstruction assistance, and protection of civilians. In 1993, soon after becoming a member
of the UN in 1991, the ROK dispatched engineering units to Somalia. Since then, a medical
support team was sent to Western Sahara, an engineering unit to Angola, the Sangnoksu Unit
to East Timor, and the Danbi Unit to Haiti. Even today, ROK service members are actively
involved in peacekeeping actives in conflict zones around the world. As of December 2022,
577 ROK service members were on peacekeeping missions in five countries, including the
Dongmyeong Unit in Lebanon (278), the Hanbit Unit in South Sudan (276), and dozens of
individual peacekeepers elsewhere in the world. The details of the current ROK participation
in UN peacekeeping operations are provided in [Figure 5-9]:

**[Figure 5-9] Participation in UN Peacekeeping Operations**

As of December 2022, unit: persons, total personnel: 577

staff officers (10)


**62)**
There are six active missions
in Africa (Western Sahara,
Central African Republic, Mali,
Congo Democratic Republic,
Abyei, South Sudan), three
in the Middle East (Lebanon,
Syria, Palestine), two in Europe
(Kosovo, Cyprus), and one
in Asia (India and Pakistan).
Approximately 70,000
personnel from 120 countries
are currently in service.


**UNIFIL**

**MINURSO** Dongmyeong (278)

UNIFIL staff officers (4)

Election observation team (3)

**UNMOGIP**

Truce observation team (6)

**UNMISS**

Hanbit (276)
UNMISS observers and


-----

**Dongmyeong Unit[63)]in UNIFIL** In 1978, in accordance with UN Security Council

Resolutions 425 and 426, the United Nations Interim

Force In Lebanon (UNIFIL) was established to monitor the armistice agreement in Lebanon
and Israel. In 2006, when the situation in the region deteriorated following an armed clash
between Israel and Hezbollah, resulting in more than 1,000 civilian casualties, the UN
Security Council adopted resolution 1701, increasing the number of peacekeeping troops
from 2,000 to 15,000, and called for the participation of member states.

In June 2007, the ROK government formed a 350-strong Lebanon Peacekeeping Mission

(Dongmyeong Unit) and dispatched it to Tyre in southern Lebanon with approval from the
National Assembly. The Dongmyeong Unit conducts reconnaissance and surveillance to
prevent the smuggling of illegal weapons and militant groups in its area of operations in
southern Lebanon. The unit also carries out a multipurpose civil-military operation called
“Peace Wave” and humanitarian assistance activities. The Dongmyeong provides medical
services to local communities, helps with
the improvement of schools and public
facilities and the operation of a plastic
recycling plant, and participates in other
various local projects contributing to the
quality of life among local residents and
creating jobs. The Dongmyeong Unit’s
civil-military operation has been met with
a positive response from local communities
and is playing a big role in maintaining the ROK Peacekeepers on Patrol
stability of southern Lebanon.



**[Figure 5-10] Activities of the Dongmyeong Unit**


As of December 2022


**63)**
The name “Dongmyeong”
means “bright light from the
country in the east,” expressing
hopes for peace and a better
future.

**64)**
Force Commander Reserve


**65)**
Sector Mobile Reserve
**66)**
Coordinated Training Activities
with LAF (Lebanese Armed
Forces)

**67)**
Military Support to UNIFIL
Security Plan

|Operational Activities|• Operate fixed surveillance and combined observatory • On-foot and vehicle (aerial) reconnaissance: unilateral operations or combined operations with the Lebanon Armed Forces and the UNIFIL Command • Combined exercises: familiarization training with the UNIFILFCR64) and the SMR65) • Crew served weapons training (Steel Storm): a drill organized by the UNIFIL Forces Command, conducted twice every year • COTAWL66): training aimed at building the capabilities of the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) and enhancing combined operations capabilities • UN staff and family evacuation exercise (MSUSP)67): an exercise to guarantee the safety of international and Lebanese UNIFIL staff in crisis situations|
|---|---|
|Civil-Military Cooperation and Humanitarian Assistance|• Taekwondo and Korean language classes, sewing and soap art workshops: offered within the immediate area of operations as well as in five villages in its surrounding areas in the form of travelling classes • Medical and veterinary care for local communities: traveling clinic, telemedicine, delivery of medical supplies • Friendship events: regular meetings with local leaders and military officials, participation in local events, host open house events on base, etc. Community improvement projects: installation of solar powered street lamps and water pumps, renovation and construction of schools and public facilities, etc. • Humanitarian aid (goods donation): vehicles, administrative supplies, school suppliers, COVID-19 supplies, etc. 10 Barracuda armored vehicles donated to the Lebanese Armed Forces.|


-----

In August 2020, after a large explosion near the Beirut Airport in Lebanon, which resulted

in large numbers of casualties, the Dongmyeong delivered to the LAF Command an
emergency supply of 6,000 relief packages, including face masks and basic necessities from
the unit’s own reserve, and 4,000 medical packages purchased locally. In November 2021,
they donated 10 Barracuda armored vehicles to the LAF. By regularly conducting combined
exercises, the Dongmyeong is helping to strengthen the LAF’s capabilities. [Figure 5-10]
lists the key activities of the Dongmyeong Unit.


**Hanbit Unit [68)] in UNMISS** In 1955, soon after Sudan was freed from the Anglo
Egyptian rule, under a dual colonial government, the

country became embroiled in a civil war, brought on by political and religious causes. Two
successive peace agreements were signed to end the war, between the Sudanese government
and separatists, which ultimately led to the recognition of independence of South Sudan in
July 2011. On July 8 of the same year, the United Nations established the UNMISS (United
Nations Mission In South Sudan) to support the nation-building process in the newly
independent state, in accordance with UN Security Council Resolution 1996, and called on
member states to support the mission by sending troops.

In September 2012, the ROK government formed an engineering unit named “South

Sudan Reconstruction Support Group” (Hanbit Unit) and dispatched the ROKHMEC
(Republic of Korea Horizontal Military Engineering Company), a 300-strong engineering
company, to South Sudan[69)] on March 31, 2013, with approval from the National Assembly.

The Hanbit Unit is successfully carrying out postwar reconstruction assistance operations

in the war-devastated areas of the Jonglei State of South Sudan, including Bor, Pibor, and
Akobo, by constructing and repairing roads, air fields, and bridges and building curtain
walls along the Nile. The unit also provides humanitarian assistance, protecting refugees and
supplying drinking water. Meanwhile, to teach the locals skills needed to earn a livelihood,
the troops operate a vocational school, offering six programs on subjects including
agriculture, woodwork, and engineering.

Reconstruction assistance provided by the Hanbit Unit has also contributed to the easing

of tensions between the tribes in South Sudan as the expanding infrastructure promotes
exchanges between them. Its civilian-friendly peacekeeping operations have garnered praises
from UN officials and local staff as a model to follow. In 2021, on the occasion of the 30th
anniversary of the ROK joining the UN, the 14th contingent of Hanbit Unit donated to
South Sudan ambulances, motorcycles and
medical equipment including emergency
kits and patient chairs. The contingent,
which previously constructed an outpatient
wing for the Bor Hospital, also set up
negative pressure tents to help prevent the
spread of COVID-19. These activities helped
underscore the importance of missions carried
out by the Hanbit as well as forge a positive
perception about ROK’s pandemic response Construction of the Runway at the Bor Airport


**68)**
The name “Hanbit” means
“great, bright light leading the
world,” which is a reference
to the unit’s work to assist
the reconstruction of South
Sudan and the humanitarian
assistance provided by it.

**69)**
South Sudan is the seventh
region to which ROK troops
were deployed for UN
peacekeeping operations
after Somalia (1993-1994,
reconstruction assistance),
Western Sahara (1994-2006,
medical assistance), Angola
(1995-1996, reconstruction
assistance), East Timor (19992003, security maintenance and
border control), Lebanon (2007, truce supervision), and Haiti
(2010- 2012, reconstruction
assistance).


-----

capabilities. Key activities of the Hanbit Unit are summarized in [Figure 5-11].

**[Figure 5-11] Activities of the Hanbit Unit**


As of December 2022

|Reconstruction Assistance Operation|• Updating of the Bor Airport (runway widened) • Renovation of roads and water and sewer systems in Bor and its environs • 3 repair operations for the main supply route between Bor and Pibor (repair of a 195km section, cumulative total distance of 408km and updating of the water supply system • 2 repair operations for the main supply route between Pibor and Akobo (repair of a 125km section, cumulative total distance of 161km and emergency repair assistance for flooded areas • Construction of a bridge over the Lotilla River|
|---|---|
|Civil-Military Operations and Humanitarian Aid|• Renovation of the access roads to the X-ray room, operating rooms, and emergency room at the Bor Hospital • Renovation of Akobo Elementary School, donation of Red Murrum soil to the Pibor Airport • Operation of Hanbit Farm: 5 acres (6,300 pyeong), 14 varieties of crops • Hanbit Vocational School (Programs on 6 subjects including agriculture): 577 graduates, 14th academic year in 2022 • Education and training in Korea: 85 completed an agriculture technology program over 8 total sessions offered to date. • Community healthcare services: 21,900 patients served • UNMISS taekwondo and Korean classes • COVID-19 response: 20,000 masks and 10,000 test kits provided to the South Sudanese government|
|Protection of Refugees|• Repair of roads inside and outside refugee camps, assistance with draining water in flooded areas during rainy seasons • Repair and maintenance of refugee shelters, reinforcement of protective walls, construction of new guard posts (14)|
|Assistance with the Construction of UN Missions Facilities|• Renovation of the walls and the moat of the Bor base, new guard posts, maintenance of roads inside the base • Construction of UN staff apartments inside the Bor base (25 units) • Maintenance of the drainage system inside the base ahead of rainy seasons, construction of a drainage basin • Maintenance and reinforcement of protective walls, the exterior moat, and the patrol routes (1.8km) in the Pibor and Akobo independent operations bases|


**United Nations Military Observers** Some 20 ROK service personnel, dispatched by

**and Staff Officers** the government, are stationed at UN missions

in conflict zones, located in India and Pakistan,

Lebanon, South Sudan and Western Sahara, as observers, supervising the truce, and staff
officers. Observers are responsible for the surveillance of compliance with truce agreements,
while also carrying out tasks such as reconnaissance, investigation, reporting, and mediation.
Staff officers assist with the activities of the UN Commands, assigned to various staff
offices, including personnel, information, operations, and logistics offices. To increase the
contribution of the ROK forces to the international community, individual participation in
peacekeeping operations has been continuously broadened. In 2022, ROK officers were
dispatched to the Eastern Command of the UNMISS to serve in the capacities of Chiefs of
Staff and observers.


**2. Multinational Forces Peace Operations**

Multinational peace operations are peace operations carried out by multinational forces,
formed either by states or regional organizations and based on grounds such as the UN
Security Council resolution. Along with UN peacekeeping operations, multinational


-----

peace operations play a key role in maintaining stability in conflict zones and post conflict
reconstruction efforts. From 2001, the ROK government has deployed its military for
multinational peace operations in various countries around the world, sending the Haeseong,
Cheongma, Dongui, Dasan, and Ashena Units to Afghanistan and the Seohwa, Jema, Zaytun,
and Daiman Units to Iraq.

The Ashena Unit, dispatched to Afghanistan in 2010 to restore stability and assist with

reconstruction efforts, carried out convoy escort and reconnaissance operations nearly1,800
times until June 2014. By ensuring the safety of local reconstruction teams, the Ashena Unit
has made a remarkable contribution to the stability and postwar recovery of Afghanistan.

As of December 2022, 284 ROK service personnel are deployed for multinational

peace operations in six countries, including 267 members of the Cheonghae Unit and 17
participating in individual capacities. Details of the ROK participation in multinational peace
operations are provided in [Figure 5-12].

**[Figure 5-12] ROK’s Participation in Multilateral Forces’ Peace Operations**

As of December 2022, unit: persons, 284 in total


**70)**
1. The Cheonghae Unit’s area

of operations is north of 11ºS
and west of 68°E.

2. Member states are urged

to send military vessels and
aircraft.

3. Military vessels and aircraft

are allowed to employ all
means permitted under
international law to combat
piracy.

4. The international community

is urged to cooperate
with Somalia’s transition
government to combat piracy.

5. Related countries and

international organizations
provide escort services so
that food shipments sent by
the World Food Programme
(WFP) can be safely
transported.

**71)**
In the Gulf of Aden, one
ROK ship (Cheonghae Unit),
two Japanese ships and
two Japanese maritime
patrol aircraft, two Chinese
destroyers and a Chinese
logistics support ship are
deployed for anti-piracy and
maritime security operations.
Since 2010, ROK officers served
as the CTF-151 Commander on
six occasions.


**Bahrain Combined Maritime Forces**

Headquarters, Staff officers (5)

**U.S. Africa Command (1)**

**U.S. Central Command**
Liaison/staff officers (3) **IMSC**

Liaison officers(2/Bahrain)

**Somali waters**

**CJTF-OIR** Cheonghae Unit (267)
Staff officers (4)
(Iraq 2, Kuwait 2)

**EU CTF-465**

**Djibouti CJTF-HOA** Staff officer (1/Gulf of Aden)
Liaison officer (1)


**Cheonghae Unit in Somalia** Amid the ongoing civil war in Somalia, piracy in the

country’s surrounding waters has increased sharply since

2004. To curb piracy in Somali waters, the UN Security Council adopted resolution 1838[70)]
and called on member states to dispatch ships and aircraft. The sea area near the Gulf of
Aden is a major transportation route for strategic goods, such as crude oil and liquid natural
gas (LNG). The security of this sea area is of critical importance for the ROK as well. About
300 ROK ships travel through the area annually.[71)] In March 2009, the ROK government
dispatched the Cheonghae Unit to the Gulf of Aden with approval from the National
Assembly.

The Cheonghae is a 260-strong unit, equipped with one destroyer, one helicopter, and three

RIBs as of December 2022. The Cheonghae Unit escorts ROK and international vessels for
safe navigation and protects Korean citizens by participating in maritime security operations
by the Combined Maritime Forces and the EU.

In 2023, a ROK Admiral is set to assume command of CTF-151, the counter-piracy

task force under the Combined Maritime Forces Command, further strengthening ROK


-----

cooperation with the international
community in ensuring maritime security.
The Cheonghae Unit successfully carried
out “Operation Dawn of Gulf of Aden” in
January 2011, rescuing a ROK ship that
was hijacked off Somalia and its crew. In
August 2014, the Cheonghae Unit carried
out “Operation Libya – Evacuation of
Korean Citizens,” safely evacuating ROK Cheonghae Unit during an Operation
and foreign nationals trapped in Libya to
a neighboring country. In April 2015, the Cheonghae evacuated six Korean citizens from
Yemen and a shipboard embassy was set up for the first time aboard ROKS Wang Geon to
maintain contact with and protect ROK citizens who chose to stay behind. This operation
set an example of effective coordination between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the
military to protect overseas citizens. Thanks to these efforts, after reaching a peak in 2011,
piracy off the Gulf of Aden has dropped sharply and has no longer been reported since 2020.

Since May 2019, there have been escalating tensions in the Middle East, including the area

near the Strait of Hormuz. In January 2020, in order to protect the freedom of navigation for
Korean citizens and vessels, the ROK government decided to temporarily extend the area of
operations of the Cheonghae Unit from the Gulf of Aden to the Arabian and Persian Gulf,
including the Gulf of Oman and the Strait of Hormuz. In February 2020, during one of its
extended-area operations, the Cheonghae Unit rescued 10 sailors from an Iranian ship that
had been adrift for about a week and provided them with food and fuel. The Strait of Hormuz
is a strategically important sea area, which is the source of over 70% of the ROK crude oil
imports and is transited through by the ROK ships 900 times annually. In the extended area
of operations, the Cheonghae Unit carries out independent missions as well as joint missions
with the IMSC (International Maritime Security Construct) when necessary to protect ROK
nationals and ships. To facilitate collaboration, including information sharing, two liaison
officers of the Cheonghae Unit are stationed at the IMSC.

The Cheonghae has also carried out operations to protect ROK nationals in Middle –

Eastern and West African sea areas. In January 2021 when the ROK tanker, Hankuk Chemi,
was seized and detained by Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard, the unit was dispatched to
the Strait of Hormuz to assist with their release. In June of the same year, when five ROK
sailors were kidnapped by pirates near the Gulf of Guinea in West Africa, the Cheonghae
was deployed to assist with their rescue. Key activities carried out by the Cheonghae Unit are
detailed in [Figure 5-13].


The UDT of the
Cheonghae Unit
during an exercise on
the Marine Day


-----

**[Figure 5-13] Major Activities of Cheonghae Unit**


As of December 2022

|Convoy|Col2|Safe Voyage Escort|Col4|Maritime Security Operations|Anti-Piracy Operations|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|ROK Vessels|Foreign Vessels|ROK Vessels|Foreign Vessels|||
|512|1,882|33,357|3,014|917 operations (1,646 days)|24 operations / 34 ships|

|Col1|Protection of Korean Nationals|
|---|---|
|January 2011|Operation Dawn of Gulf of Aden (rescue of the freighter Samho Jewelry, hijacked by Somali pirates, and its entire crew of 21)|
|March 2011|Evacuation of ROK citizens from Libya (37 ROK nationals evacuated to Malta and Greece)|
|April 2011|Operation to rescue the crew of the Hanjin Tenjin (the entire crew, including 14 ROK and 6 Indonesian nationals, rescued)|
|December 2012|Rescue of the crew of the MT Gemini (escort of four ROK crew members that were kidnapped and later released by the pirates)|
|August 2014|Evacuation of ROK nationals from Libya (assistance with the evacuation of 18 ROK nationals and 86 foreign nationals to Malta)|
|April 2015|Evacuation of ROK nationals from Yemen (assistance with the evacuation of 6 Korean and 6 foreign nationals to Oman)|
|April 2018|Escort of ROK nationals kidnapped in Ghanaian waters (escort of 3 ROK nationals kidnapped by pirates to Ghana)|
|August 2018|Assistance with the rescue of ROK citizens kidnapped by a Libyan armed militant group|
|November 2019|Assistance with the rescue of 2 ROK sailors kidnapped in waters off Yemen|
|January 2021|Assistance with the release of a ROK ship (Hankuk Chemi) detained by Iran|
|June 2021|Assistance with the rescue of 5 ROK sailors kidnapped in waters off the Gulf of Guinea|
|May 2022|Maintaining readiness posture following the report by an Iranian media outlet (Kayhan) on the possibility of blocking the passage of ROK ships through the Strait of Hormuz|


**Multinational Forces Staff** Currently, there are 17 staff and coordinating officers

**and Liaison Officers** dispatched by the ROK Armed Forces to multilateral

forces, including the Combined Maritime Forces Command

in Bahrain, the IMSC, the CJTF-HOA in Djibouti, and the CJTF-OIR (Combined Joint
Task Force–Operation Inherent Resolve) in Kuwait. The officers, assigned to various staff
offices of the Combined Maritime Forces, help with the planning of combined operations,
provide support for the rotation of internationally-deployed ROK troops and operational
continuity, and coordinate cooperation with allied forces. In August 2022, two additional
staff officers were dispatched to the CJTF-OIR (Iraq), a multinational force formed to
defeat ISIS operating within Iraq and Syria, in a continuing effort to increase participation in
multinational peace operations.

**3. Defense Cooperation and Exchange**

The ROK Armed Forces are actively engaging in defense cooperation and exchange in noncombat areas, including education and training, humanitarian assistance, and disaster relief


-----

and recovery, to fulfill its role as a responsible member of the international community.
In November 2013, when the Philippines was severely hit by Typhoon Haiyan, the Araw
Contingent was dispatched to assist with recovery efforts.

The Araw Contingent successfully completed its mission in Typhoon-damaged areas

and left the Philippines in December 2014. In March 2014, the ROK Armed Forces joined
multinational combined search efforts to locate the missing Malaysian passenger aircraft.
Meanwhile to stop the spread of the Ebola virus, the ROK government sent the Korea
Disaster Relief Team (KDRT) to Sierra Leone, one of the West African countries most
seriously impacted by this virus. The team, composed of civilian medical workers and six
military doctors and nine military nurses, provided care to local populations from December
2014 to March 2015.


**Akh Unit[72)]** **in the UAE** In August 2010, to raise the quality of education and training

provided to the UAE forces by benchmarking ROK practices,

Abu Dhabi requested Seoul to dispatch a military instruction team. In January 2011, a
130-strong unit, named “UAE Military Training Cooperation Team” (Akh Unit) was
formed and flown to the Al Ain region of
the UAE with approval from the National
Assembly. The size of the contingent was
increased to 150 starting with Akh Unit
#5. On September 28, 2016, the Akh Unit
was relocated to Sweihan on the request
of the UAE Joint Chiefs of Staff. The cost
of relocation, including construction costs,
amounted to KRW 32 billion, was paid by
the UAE government in its entirety. Akh Unit during a Combined Training

The mission of the Akh Unit is to provide

education and training support to the UAE’s special warfare forces and conduct combine
exercises, while also protecting ROK nationals in crisis situations. ROK troops are
effectively contributing to the enhancement of the education and training system of the UAE
forces and their operational capabilities for special warfare. The training cooperation with
the UAE has also provided the ROK forces with an opportunity to improve their own special
warfare capabilities through realistic training in the dry and hot climate of the Middle East,
using the UAE forces’ cutting-edge equipment and facility. Akh Unit is conducting extensive
training especially in areas in which restrictions are in place in the ROK, such as highaltitude jumps and night air drops and vessel inspection drills using civilian ships. In 2021,
Akh Unit celebrated its 10th anniversary and continues to establish a new model for military
diplomacy. Going forward, in addition to the existing focus on becoming better adapted to
the desert environment of the Middle East and improving the UAE forces’ special operations
capabilities, the Akh Unit will be playing a greater role in protecting ROK nationals living
and working in the region and enhancing the nation’s status on the global stage. The Akh
Unit, whose hard work and dedication have become the symbol of trust and cooperation
between the ROK and the UAE, is widely considered a key contributor to the recent


**72)**
The name “Akh,” means
“brother” in Arabic and intends
to express friendliness toward
the people of UAE.


-----

development of the two countries’ relationship into a “special, strategic partnership.” Today,
the ROK and the UAE are actively cooperating and exchanging with each other in wideranging areas, including defense industry. The two countries have been sending army, navy,
and air force delegations to each other to cooperate on issues related to mountain warfare
training, cyber security and logistics, further solidifying military trust between them. Key
activities of the Akh Unit are described in [Figure 5-14] below:



**[Figure 5-14] Major Activities of Akh Unit**


As of December 2022

|Capacity building for UAE forces|• Contributing to the UAE’s effort to build elite armed forces by helping to enhance their special operations capabilities • Improvement of the UAE’s military education and training system|
|---|---|
|Capacity building for ROK forces|• Enhancing ROK forces’ special operations capabilities through training using the UAE’s cutting-edge facilities and aerial assets • Survival training under severe conditions (hot climate with temperatures above 50-degree Celsius, dry desert environment) • Long-range shooting practices, strategic, high-altitude jump training, mountain warfare training • Strategic training including building and ship inspection, seizing, and personnel rescue exercises|
|Defense cooperation and exchange|• Combined bilateral exercises, observation of ROK troop exercises by UAE troops • Education courses for UAE officers and non-commissioned officers in respective services of the ROK military and education courses for ROK servicemembers • Medical cooperation allowing UAE troops and their family members to receive consultations and treatment from Korean civilian healthcare institutions • Creation of a defense diplomacy hub for the Middle East on areas such as defense export|


**4. Strengthening the Framework for International Peacekeeping Operations**


**Hosting the UN Peacekeeping** The UN Peacekeeping Ministerial is the largest as

**Ministerial and ROK Pledges** well as the highest-level UN consultative process in

the area of global peace and security, discussing issues

related to international peacekeeping operations. An important purpose of the Peacekeeping
Ministerial is to encourage member states to more actively participate in peacekeeping
efforts. The UN Peacekeeping Ministerial, which was first held in 2016, in the UK, met for
the fourth time in December 2021, in Seoul, making the ROK the first Asian country to host
the event.

During this event, the ROK government communicated an intention to play a leading role

in equipping peacekeeping forces with technological and medical capabilities necessary to
respond to current and future threats and announced the “Seoul Initiative,” a concrete plan
for building technological and medical capabilities for PKO. In his keynote speech, the
Minister of National Defense presented six pledges as host in areas that are both ROK’s areas
of strength and areas in which the UN has existing needs, including technology, medicine,
training, assets, women, and police. The 2021 Ministerial was an opportunity for member
states to recognize the importance of sustaining peace based on a spirit of solidarity and
cooperation, as well as the need to increase cooperation, strengthen the capabilities of PKO
agents, and guarantee the safety of the peacekeeping process. Meanwhile, by successfully
hosting the high-profile UN event, the ROK enhanced its international standing as an
advanced nation capable of providing a future vision for peacekeeping operations. The


-----

details of the six pledges made by the ROK during the Seoul Peacekeeping Ministerial are listed
in [Figure 5-15].

**[Figure 5-15] Six Pledges from the Seoul Peacekeeping Ministerial**

|Construction of Smart Camps|Propose a “Smart Camp” model, that incorporates state of the art ROK IT technologies to the on scene UN mission; a pilot project is being pursued at the Hanbit Unit in South Sudan|
|---|---|
|Donation of Helicopters|Transfer reconnaissance helicopters (500MD), the highest priority requirement of the UN to countries operating helicopter units within the UN Mission to Africa|
|Strengthening Medical Capabilities|Dispatch ROK military medical staff to UN medical training centers to support medical training|
|Training Support for Engineering Troops|Provide engineering equipment and training support to countries that are contributing troops to the UN mission; provide training on areas such as demining through bilateral cooperation|
|Capacity Building for Women Peacekeepers|Establish a program for UN female servicemembers in the International Peace Operations Center at ROK National Defense University andincrease women participation in PKO|
|Capacity Building for Police Peacekeepers|Increase the size of ROK police officers sent on PKO missions and utilize the PKO Education Center at Korea National Police University to run special UN police education programs|


The Ministry of National Defense has mapped out a plan for the implementation of the six

pledges and are working with the UN headquarters and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to finalize
their details. “Smart Camp” is a project in an area in which ROK already has a significant
lead over other countries. As the ROK competitiveness in related technologies is increasingly
recognized, the Ministry of National Defense has been continuously invited to present on
Smart Camp at various UN events, including the Partnership for Technology in Peacekeeping
Symposium held in June 2022, in South Africa and the Capacity Building Workshop held
in October 2022, in Uganda. As for the donation of the 500MD helicopters, this project was
carried out through careful planning efforts by the ROK government and in cooperation with
stakeholder countries. Before the delivery of the 16 helicopters to the UN Mission to Africa, site
visits were made in July 2022, in the U.S. and recipient countries (Kenya, El Salvador) to ensure
that they can be delivered as planned and used fulfill its mission.

Training support for engineering troops will also be provided in cooperation with the

Cambodian government and the UN’s Triangular Partnership Programme (TPP). This

The ROK and Cambodia signs a PKO Memorandum of Understanding and an Agreement on the Transfer of Engineering

Equipment (November 2022)


-----

program is aimed at strengthening the capabilities of Cambodian engineering troops within
the UN Mission. In November 2022, the ROK and Cambodian defense ministers signed an
agreement on the transfer of engineering equipment. Both the donation of equipment and
training are set to take place in 2023. All these activities mark a significant step forward in
the ROK efforts to put its technologies and capabilities to the service of UN peacekeeping
operations.


**Co-Chairing the ADMM-Plus EWG on** From 2014 to 2017, the Republic of Korea

**Peacekeeping Operations and** and Cambodia served as co-chair countries for

the ADMM-Plus’s Experts’ Working Group

**EWG on Maritime Security**

(EWG) on Peacekeeping Operations.[73)] In

September 2014 and September 2015, the EWG on Peacekeeping Operations was hosted
in Seoul and led to discussions on concrete methods of cooperation. In September 2019, the
ROK took part in the peacekeeping operations exercise, conducted in Borneo, Indonesia,[74) ]

which proved to be an excellent opportunity to showcase the ROK military’s capabilities
and leadership in international peacekeeping activities. Between 2017 and 2020, the ROK
also co-chaired the ADMM-Plus EWG on Maritime Security with Singapore. In May 2019,
the two countries organized the largest-ever maritime field training exercise,[75)] which was
conducted in waters off the ROK and Singapore. Moreover, an international conference on
maritime security was held to discuss security in international waters and ways to build trust,
during which a presentation was held on the ROK military’s maritime security capabilities
and multilateral cooperation. These events helped shape a positive perception about the
ROK leadership in global maritime security. In 2021 and 2022, the ADMM-Plus EWG
on Peacekeeping Operations was conducted twice a year through VTC due to the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic. During these teleconferences, member states shared their experiences
carrying out peacekeeping operation-related activities amid the pandemic and discussed
concrete ways in which ASEAN countries can contribute to UN peacekeeping operations,
including increasing women’s participating in peacekeeping operations and building the
capacities of women peacekeepers. They also established a detailed plan for the PKO
exercise set to be conducted in Vietnam during the second half of 2023.


**73)**
There are six Experts’ Working
Groups under the ADMM-Plus,
including

-  EWG on Peacekeeping

Operations,

-  EWG on Counter-Terrorism,

-  EWG on Maritime Security,

-  EWG on Military Medicine,

-  EWG on Disaster Relief and

Humanitarian, and

-  EWG on Humanitarian

Demining. The EWGs are
co-chaired by one of the
10ASEAN countries, (Laos,
Malaysia, Myanmar, Vietnam,
Brunei, Singapore, Indonesia,
Philippines, Cambodia,
Thailand) and one of the eight
plus countries (Republic of
Korea, U.S., Japan, China,
Russia, Australia, New
Zealand, India).

**74)**
In this exercise held at the PKO
Center in Bogor, Indonesia
(September 14-September 20,
2019, 370 participants from
18 member states), a training
team and 12 observers of the
International Peace Supporting
Standby Force participated
in training exercises in six
areas (sexual exploitation and
abuse, landmine accidents,
illegal search, child soldiering,
security search, IED).

**75)**
18 Navy ships, 10 aircraft, and
over 3,500 troops participated
in this exercise (April 30-May
13, 2019).


**Signing of MOUs on Peacekeeping** As of December 2022, three countries have

**and Promoting Cooperation** signed a memorandum of understanding on

peacekeeping with the ROK Ministry of National

Defense, which are UK, Vietnam, and Cambodia. The Ministry of National Defense is
also poised to sign a memorandum of understanding on peacekeeping with Indonesia and
Uruguay and is currently in the process of finalizing related details. The ROK and Vietnam
are under a “strategic cooperative partnership” and signed the “ROK-Vietnam Memorandum
of Understanding on Cooperation in International Peacekeeping Operations” in September
2015. In December 2015 and September 2018, the ROK military engineering specialists
were sent to Vietnam to conduct education on force protection and survival skills necessary
during crisis situations in peacekeeping operations. Since September 2016, 10 Vietnamese
officers have attended the UN staff officer and observer programs at the International Peace


-----

Operations Center in Korea, learning essential peacekeeping skills, including observation
and surveillance, inspection and verification, and negotiations and mediation.

Following the dispatch of UK engineering units to South Sudan in March 2017, the

ROK and the UK signed the “ROK-UK Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation
in International Peacekeeping” in January 2018, which provided a formal framework for
cooperation between the two countries in this area. The two countries are sharing related
information as well as conducting educational exchanges. 5 UK officers have attended the
UN staff officer program at the International Peace Operations Center.

Peacekeeping cooperation between the ROK and Cambodia was first discussed during

the ADMM-Plus in November 2022, which led to the signing of a memorandum of
understanding between the two countries. Because Cambodia has substantial experience
in humanitarian demining and the ROK has advanced equipment, cooperation between
the two countries will have a synergy effect and result in the development of a new model
of peacekeeping. The ROK is also working toward entering into a memorandum of
understanding with Indonesia and Uruguay. Indonesia, which has extensive experience in
peacekeeping operations, could cooperate with the ROK in such areas as education, training
and information exchange. Uruguay is another country with vast experience in peacekeeping
operations that the ROK can learn from. Uruguay has a high PKO participation rate relative
to the total size of its armed forces and large portion of its leadership have experience serving
in PKO missions abroad.


**Strengthening the Function of the International** The International Peace Operations

**Peace Operations Center** Center is an educational institution

dedicated to fostering future inter
national peacekeepers, established in August 1995, within the Joint Forces Staff College. In
2015, in accordance with the Enforcement Decree of the Korea National Defense University
Act,” the Ministry of National Defense placed it under the aegis of Korea National Defense
University and strengthened its academic and research functions. Its name was also changed
from “PKO Center” to its current name “International Peace Operations Center” at this time.

As the nation’s only PKO education institution, the Center is responsible for providing pre
deployment education to all troops deploying overseas. In a continuing effort to enhance
the quality of its educational offerings, the Center actively engages in cooperation with
the UN Department of Peace Operations (DPO), the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PKO
centers of other nations, the PKO Education Center of Korea National Police University,
as well as other relevant domestic and foreign institutions. The Center conducts research
on a broad spectrum of subjects, including the concept and principles of PKO, PKO
policy, and conflict zones through programs such as the PKO Development Seminar. The
International Peace Operations Center is also the publisher of a variety of academic journals,
including “PKO Journal.” When troops return from PKO missions overseas, assessments
and reports, detailing accomplishments and lessons learned, are prepared and distributed
to relevant government agencies. In November 2013, the UN staff officer program offered
by the International Peace Operations Center was awarded the “UN Certificate of Training
Recognition” by countries participating in UN peacekeeping operations for the first time.


-----

The program was subsequently recertified in November 2018 and again in November 2022.
The International Peace Operations Center is currently seeking the certification of its UN
observer program. [Figure 5-16] shows the current enrollment in academic programs offered
by the International Peace Operations Center.



**[Figure 5-16] Enrollment at the International Peace Operations Center**


As of December 2022

|Total|UN Peacekeeping Operations|Multinational Peace Operations|Defense Cooperation and Exchange|Other|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|1,891|1,079 in 8 programs|42 in 4 programs|150 in 1 program|620 in 8 programs|


In recent years, the Center has progressively expanded its functions to better support

research, education and training in the field of international peacekeeping. In November
2022, in cooperation with the UN’s Integrated Training Service ITS (Integrated Training
Service), it conducted a capacity building program for instructors of the UN Infantry
Battalion, which was attended by peacekeepers from 14 countries.

Meanwhile, in accordance with the pledge made during the 3rd Peacekeeping Ministerial

in 2019, to host educational programs by UN agencies in the ROK for four years from 2020
to 2024, the Center is annually conducting a UN program related to peacekeeping education.
Moreover, the Center is developing the curriculum for FMOC (Female Military Officers’
Course), a capacity building program for women peacekeepers that the ROK has agreed
to jointly conduct with UN between 2023 and 2027. The Center annually attends the AsiaPacific PKO Centers Conference and the World Conference of PKO Centers and exchanges
with PKO centers in 11 countries. Through activities such as instructor exchanges as well as
education and training programs for foreign troops, the Center is broadening its global reach.


**Operation of a Standby Force** Since December 2009, the ROK Armed Forces have

**for Overseas Deployment** maintained a standing unit of 4,000 troops that is

ready for deployment for international peacekeeping

operations, within a month or two from the notice of deployment. The Standby Force is
comprised of a dedicated deployment unit of 1,000 personnel, a designated reserve unit
of 1,000 personnel and a specially designated unit of 2,000 personnel. The dedicated
deployment unit is the first to prepare for deployment when the need for deployment arises.
In July 2010, the International Peace Support Standby Force (IPSSF), or “Onnuri Unit”[76)]
was established as a unit devoted solely to overseas deployment, which serves as the
dedicated deployment unit. In December 2020, the size of the dedicated deployment unit was
increased with the addition of the “1115 Engineering Group.” The designated reserve unit is
employed to relieve or reinforce currently-deployed troops. The specially designated units
are functional units, created to meet a variety of other deployment needs. Upon a request for
engineering or medical units from UN, a contingent formed by troops from designated units
is dispatched. The composition and size of the standby force are shown in [Figure 5-17] and

[Figure 5-18]:


**76)**
“Onnuri,” a composite word
made up of a word meaning
“all” or “whole” and a word
meaning the “world,” denotes
the global nature of missions
carried out by this unit.


-----

**[Figure 5-17] Composition of the Standby Force for Overseas Deployment**

**Joint Chiefs of Staff**

**Standby Force for overseas deployment**

**Main Unit** **Designated reserve** **Specially designated**

(IPSSF and1115 Engineering Unit)


**Specially designated unit: Engineering, medical, military police, unmanned aerial vehicle platoon (Marines), Navy and Air Force**

transportation units, helicopter units, etc.



**[Figure 5-18] Size of the Standby Force for Overseas Deployment**


December 2010-December 2022

|Dongmyeong|Ashena|Akh|Hanbit|Total|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|8,437 (27 contingents)|1,745 (8 contingents)|2,399 (20 contingents)|4,336 (16 contingents)|16,917|


**5. Establishing a Response System for the Protection of Overseas Citizens**


**Protecting Overseas Citizens** In times of major crisis around the world, such as natural

disasters and acts of terror the ROK Armed Forces take

proactive measures to protect ROK nationals abroad, using military assets such as Navy ships
and transport aircraft. In the past, the ROK Armed Forces focused on assisting the rescue and
transfer of kidnapped ROK nationals as well as evacuation of ROK nationals when civil wars
broke out in Libya and Yemen, in which the tasks were mainly carried out by the Cheonghae
Unit dispatched to the Gulf of Aden. Today, however, the ROK military’s role in ensuring the
safety of ROK overseas citizens has been expanded significantly. Rescue teams and transport
aircraft are now dispatched during the outbreak of infectious diseases, such as COVID-19,
and natural disasters to more actively protect Koreans overseas. Recent major activities by the
ROK military to protect its overseas citizens are provided in [Figure 5-19]:


**Figure 5-19] Major Activities by the ROK Armed Forces to Protect Korean Overseas Citizens**

As of December 2022

|Dates|Description|
|---|---|
|October 2018|• Rescue and evacuation of 799 Koreans trapped in Saipan during Typhoon Yutu (Saipan→Guam) (one C-130 Air Force transport aircraft dispatched)|
|May 2019|• Sea Salvage and Rescue Unit (SSU)dispatched to Hungary after the sinking of the river cruiser Hableany, to assist with the search of missing people|
|February 2020|• Repatriation of six Koreans and a Japanese spouse quarantined onboard the Japanese cruise ship Diamond Princess (Tokyo→Gimpo) (one Air Force VCN-235 dispatched)|
|May 2020|• Repatriation of 60 Korean expatriates living in Africa (Addis Ababa, Ethiopia → Incheon) (Utilized the chartered flight to bring in Hanbit Unit #12 to South Sudan)|
|July 2020|• Assistance with the repatriation of 290 ROK workers from Iraq (two KC-330 tanker aircraft dispatched)|


-----

**A More Comprehensive Response System** The Ministry of National Defense is

**for the Protection of Overseas Citizens** continuously improving the response

system related to the mobilization of the

ROK Armed Forces’ emergency rescue and relief operations capabilities and resources for
the protection of Korean overseas citizens. In December 2022, the “Crisis Response Manual
for the Protection of Overseas Citizens,” containing the Ministry of National Defense’s
response procedures to disasters overseas, was comprehensively amended. This revision
was aimed at enabling a speedy and proactive crisis response by setting out a detailed list
of considerations and requirements for the deployment of military assets and concrete
deployment procedures and clearly assigning related responsibilities and is expected to help
make it easier for our Armed Forces to determine the scope and nature of support to provide
and allow them to more quickly respond to a crisis situation.

In tandem, the Ministry of National Defense is building a government-wide cooperation

system for the protection of Koreans overseas to facilitate inter-agency consultation and carry
out joint crisis response exercises. In order to better guarantee the safety of Korean citizens
in diverse crisis situations around the world, the Ministry of National Defense will continue
to cooperate with all related entities such as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry
of Oceans and Fisheries, and all services of the ROK Armed Forces to further improve and
enhance the response system.


-----

-----

-----

**Chapter**
# 6

**Safe and Transparent**
**Civil-Military Cooperative**
**Defense Management**

**Section 1. Improving the Service Environment with**

Emphasis on safety

**Section 2. Transparent and Efficient Management of**

National Defense

**Section 3. Civil-Military Cooperation; together**

with the people

**Section 4. Securing an Adequate Defense Budget and**

Rational Allocation of Budget Resources


d F T C / R O i f T h Hi


-----

**Section**


###### Improving the Service Environment with Emphasis on safety

To ensure the health and safety of our service members, the ROK is building a military health
system that is tailored to the specific needs of its armed forces. As part of this effort, the
military opened the Armed Forces Trauma Center to address trauma cases and improved
its medevac capability by establishing a centralized command and control mechanism and
fielding additional medevac helicopters. In addition, the military is making efforts on various
fronts to strengthen its safety management capability including but not limited to establishing
a safety management mechanism and focusing on prevention centric approach to safety.

**1. Military Health System that is Tailored to the Needs of its Armed Forces**


**Patient-centered** The MND is making a concerted effort to innovate the

**Environment Improvement** rigid, provider centric nature of the Military Health System

to a patient centered one that is better equipped to meet

the healthcare demand of service members. Particular effort has been made to access to care
by improving transportation to medical facilities, expanding office hours and simplifying entry
procedures. Furthermore, measures are being taken to guarantee continuity of care to service
members so that they may receive care for their symptoms, illness, or injuries even after they
are separated from the military because we are committed to taking care of our service members
even after their discharge.

Considering that the majority of service personnel are visiting the military healthcare facilities

using outpatient shuttles or bus services provided at the Division level, the Ministry of National
Defense will increase the total number of shuttles between military units and hospitals to 39 by
2025. The number of buses running at the Division level has already been increased to 26 in
2022 and will be further expand to 53 by 2025.

At the Armed Forces Capital Hospital and Daejeon Hospital, morning hours were extended to

meet the surge of patients during this time period. Goyang and Chuncheon Hospitals increased
the number of exam rooms for departments that are high in demand such as orthopedics and
dentistry, so that the outpatient service members can timely receive the necessary care.

Entry procedures at military hospitals have also been simplified to make them more accessible

to military families. Armed Forces Capital and Daejeon Hospitals have dedicated staff to serve
as guides for visitors and except for restricted areas, they are freely open to accompanying family
members so that they may enjoy access comparable to that of civilian hospitals. Furthermore,
amenities for patients and their families at Daejeon, Daegu and Armed Forces Capital Hospitals
have been improved with the addition of facilities such as a new visitor center, recreational areas
and more; additional such improvements are scheduled for military hospitals through renovation
and modernization projects.

Additionally, the MND modified its policy so that service members may continue to be treated

at military hospitals for conditions they developed while in service. To take better care of our


-----

service members, as of 2022, government covers pharmaceutical expenditure associated with
continued treatment of discharged service members. Furthermore, policy regarding mental health
have also been changed to make the government bear the cost for mental therapy from private
providers for officers and NCOs, which have been paid by the individuals up to this point.


**Broadening Access to Private Healthcare** To better address the diverse healthcare

needs of service members and guarantee

their rights to select a provider of their choosing, the Ministry of National Defense is
making continuous efforts to improve their access to private healthcare. Previously, in
order to receive care from a private provider, service members needed to obtain a referral
from a military physician as well as approval from their respective commanders. Today, the
authorization process has been simplified so that the approval by the commanding officer is
the only requirement needed for a service member to visit a private healthcare provider.

As of August 2021, a new subsidy for private healthcare is in effect, which allows the

government to provide partial funding of medical expenses associated with receiving care
from private healthcare providers in order to reduce financial burdens of service members.

The Ministry of National Defense will continue its efforts to ease access to private

healthcare for service members to guarantee their rights to select a provider of their choosing
and improve the overall quality of medical care they receive.


**Improvement and Specialization of** The Ministry of National Defense plans to renovate

**Military Healthcare Facilities** aging military healthcare facilities at the division

level or below and military hospitals supporting

the forward corps, which serve as source of primary care for wounded service members, by
2025. The goal is to modernize 24 of the 72 division level medical facilities, of which 13 were
already completed as of late 2022. The modernization project for the remaining facilities is
currently underway for completion in 2025, the modernization process will be subject to their
respective operating environments and be pursued through reconstruction, expansion and or
renovation. Furthermore, the four military hospitals in Hongcheon, Gangneung, Yangju, and
Chuncheon that support the forward corps will also be modernized in conjunction with the
army reorganization plan.

Additionally, in order to efficiently employ the limited medical personnel, military hospitals

are being reorganized per specialty areas such as surgery, mental health, outpatient services,
and rehabilitation. As part of this effort, the level of care and the types of consultation offered
are being readjusted throughout the15 military hospitals. Moreover, cutting-edge technology
will be introduced to military healthcare facilities, including medical image analysis by AI and
mobile telemedicine.


**Armed Forces Trauma Center** The Armed Forces Trauma Center opened its doors

in April 2022, with the goal of acquiring indigenous

capability to treat trauma cases that are frequented within the military such as gunshot or
blast injuries and to contribute to the national trauma care system. Specialized trauma care
provided by the Armed Forces Trauma Center, currently reserved for service members, will


-----

gradually extend in the future to members of Korea National Police, Firefighters, as well as
civilian patients. Opening of the Trauma Center allows the implementation of a “one-stop
emergency patient service”, a seamless process to handle emergency trauma patients through
emergency on-scene care in conjunction with the Medical Control Center of the Armed
Forces Medical Command, swift patient transfer using medevac helicopters (Medion) and
specialized treatment at the Armed Forces Trauma Center.

Going forward, the military will increase cooperation with private hospitals and continue

to develop specialized medical professionals, so that the new Trauma Center can effectively
contribute to advances in the fields of trauma care and public health.

Operating Room for Trauma Patients MEDEVAC Helicopter


**Developing and Recruiting Highly-Skilled** In order to acquire indigenous capability

**Military Medical Professionals** to treat specialty injuries that often occur

within the military and to better meet the

rising demand in areas such as trauma, surgery and psychiatry, the Ministry of National
Defense has undertaken steps to strengthen the clinical expertise amongst its medical
professionals. The number of military fellowship positions will increase from five to ten in
2023, with the aim of training skilled professionals in various specialties including trauma,
infectious disease and PTSD. Moreover, to enhance the clinical expertise of nursing officers,
tailored training sessions are conducted at the Armed Forces Capital Hospital as well as
civilian hospitals in areas such as intensive care, emergency care, and surgery.

The Ministry of National Defense is also making a concerted effort to recruit medical

professionals. In 2022, the Armed Forces Medical Command raised the pay grade of civilian
nurses at military hospitals under its command and increased the number of authorized
positions for nursing officers, laying the groundwork to expand the pool of qualified nurses
for the military healthcare facilities. Through policy review and coordination with relevant
government agencies, the MND will continue to seek ways to recruit talented medical
professionals and improve their expertise.

**[Figure 6-1]** **Military Hospitals**
As of December 2022

**Hospitals under Armed Forces Medical Command**

|Capital|Daejeon|Yangju|Goyang|Pocheon|Chuncheon|Hongcheon|Gangneung|Hampyeong|Daegu|Guri|Seoul|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Navy||||||Air Force||||||
|Maritime Medical Center|||Pohang|||Air Force Aerospace Medical Center||||||


-----

**Emergency Patient Transport System** Swift transfer of patients is crucial in medical

emergencies, especially in remote areas that

are not equipped with sufficient medical staff and facilities. The Ministry of National Defense
is striving to guarantee the “golden hour” by establishing and continuously improving the
emergency patient transport system throughout its services.

In 2020, eight all weather medevac helicopters were fielded to actively support medical

airlift, providing the capability to transfer patients in severe condition to the Armed Forces
Capital Hospital within 90 minutes. Furthermore, paramedics are being assigned to company
level echelons to provide timely on-site emergency care. In addition, a “mobile telemedicine
system” is being operated in a trial basis in 32 units to allow real time sharing of patient
information with the hospitals to allow accurate emergency treatment during the transfer
process, this system is expected to expand to additional units in the future. By 2024, a
Centralized Control System will be established and in operation within the Medical Control
Center of the Armed Forces Medical Command, which serves as the control tower for medical
emergencies throughout all services, for optimized management of medical emergencies. The
establishment of such Centralized Control System will consolidate the pre-existing distributed
management networks into a single unified reporting mechanism that is capable of executing
real time command and control of medical emergencies.

Furthermore, under a government-wide medevac helicopter sharing agreement with the

National Fire Agency, Ministry of Health and Welfare, Korea Coast Guard, National Police
Agency, and Korea Forest Service, the Ministry of National Defense acquired the right to shared
use of 3,469 publicly and privately-owned helipads across the country as well as medevac
helicopters owned by the participating entities. In 2022, 19 medevac support missions were
provided to the MND under this agreement to airlift service members. The Ministry of National
Defense plans to further cooperate with relevant government agencies on issue of emergency
patient transport by pursuing projects such as setting up a collaboration mechanism between the
Medical Control Center of the Armed Forces Medical Command and the National Fire Agency.


**Infectious Disease Response and** During the height of the COVID-19 pandemic,

**Management System for the** the Ministry of National Defense assisted the

nationwide effort by providing medical personnel

**Armed Forces**

such as physicians (160,000 personnel annually)

and volunteering military hospitals to serve as dedicated centers for treating infectious
disease. Within the armed forces, a strict testing and quarantine system was implemented to
protect the health of service members and impact to their mission. As a result, COVID-19
cases within the military continues to remain low.

In addition, to mitigate the threat of other infectious diseases that present a high level

of risk to service members, due to the communal living environment of the military, new
enlistees are vaccinated against eight types of diseases, including influenza (seasonal flu)
and tetanus. Current plan is to begin development of an infectious disease monitoring
system in 2022 to enable accurate and rapid reporting as well as timely response
of infectious disease outbreaks within the armed forces. The Ministry of National
Defense is also striving to acquire vaccines and therapeutics to respond to crisis such as


-----

chemical warfare environments and continuously train skilled professionals for vaccine
administration.

**2. Strengthening Safety Management Capabilities**


**Establishing a Comprehensive Safety** Our service members carry out difficult and

**Management System** dangerous training and operations in diverse

environments. The conscription-based force

structure of the ROK military means that 35% of personnel are replaced with new conscripts
every year. Such turnover of personnel translates into higher risk of accidents due to lack of
experience, which is further compounded with growing complexity of the equipment they
operate and aging of various facilities.

To mitigate the risk of accidents with the military, the Ministry of National Defense

established the ROKAF Aviation Safety Agency in June 1995, followed by ROKA Combat
Preparation Safety Agency in December 2018 and ROK Naval Safety Group in July 2019.
In April 2020, the Safety Policy Team was formed within the Ministry of National Defense
to supervise and coordinate policies related to the safety of the armed forces, thus creating
a framework for the comprehensive management of safety issues for the overall military.
Following the recent reorganization of the Ministry of National Defense, the Safety Policy
Team has been integrated into the Disaster and Safety Management Division.

In July 2020, the Ministry of National Defense entered into an agreement with the

Korea Occupational Safety and Health Agency (KOSHA), in which the latter will assist
with the development of military safety experts through vocational training and lectures.
Under this agreement, the Ministry of National Defense will also carry out joint research
on the development of a defense safety management system with KOSHA and receive
technical consultation and diagnosis on high-risk facilities. To strengthen the defense safety
management system, the Ministry of National Defense will continuously expand the scope
of its collaboration with the civilian sector, identify & develop new cooperative tasks, build
organic capabilities to handle safety and raise awareness regarding health and safety across
the armed forces.

In August 2020, the “National Defense Safety Innovation Plan” was drawn up to map out

the path for a comprehensive and efficient safety policy for the military. Based on this plan,
the base plan for medium and long-term defense safety policy as well as its procedural basis
were established.

In December 2020, the “National Defense Safety Directives” was issued, providing a

framework for safety management in the defense field. The key contents of this directive
include the following: 1) Clearly define the concepts associated with national defense
safety management, establish a criteria for classifying accidents based on their nature and
strengthening accountability by designating respective departments that bear responsibility
based on classification of the accidents. 2) Consolidate rules and procedures distributed
across 26 different sets of directives, provide a comprehensive definition of responsibilities
of each officers in matters related to accident prevention, workplace improvement and public


-----

health, while specifically laying out the tasks of key officers and each services.

3) Provide the basis for key risk management system such as risk assessment and safety

diagnosis to support the establishment of advanced safety management framework; define
the procedure to respond to accidents in a timely, organized matter with emphasis on risk
management and accident prevention. 4) Emphasize the importance of safety education
and training, define the task of systemized management of defense safety information,
disseminate cases of fair assessment of safety achievements and accidents. 5) Establish safety
standards regarding weapons systems, military installations, and other special equipment and
materials; define scope and mission regulation to safeguard safety of weapons system.

In accordance with the new National Defense Safety Directives, the Ministry of National

Defense will implement a consistent safety policy, designed from a holistic perspective with
emphasis on prevention and preparedness. In January 2021, “Base Plan for National Defense
Safety Management 2021-2025” was established, setting out measures to reduce safety
accidents without negatively affecting the combat capability of our military. This base plan
serves as basis for drafting the annual defense safety management plan and establishing the
safety objectives as well as the annual implementation strategy to continuously improve our
safety management system.

In 2021, a study was conducted to develop standards for risk assessment and safety

diagnosis that are appropriate for the defense domain. Based on the results of this survey
a defense safety standard that reflects the unique environment of each service will be
established. In February 2021, a National Defense Safety Management Information System
project was initiated to design a system architecture that allows integrated management of
safety accident data and improved utilization of accident cases from different services. The
Ministry of National Defense will continue its campaign to raise awareness over safety and
create a safe service environment that the public can trust by establishing a tailored education
plan on safety and emphasizing routine safety inspections throughout the military.


**Emphasis on Prevention** To reduce safety accidents without negatively affecting

combat capabilities, the ROK military is making active

efforts to ensure that its installations and facilities can withstand natural disasters and are safe
for service members. Because significant amount of units are located in the mountainous
areas and many of the facilities across the country are aging, current focus is on implementing
practical, preventive measures that are tailored to the specific risk profile of individual sites
and facilities. Amid increasing incidence of extreme weather events, such as heavy rainfall,
typhoon, drought, and cold wave, the Ministry of National Defense is mitigating this risk by
carrying out preventive construction work[1)] every year on sites that are determined to be prone
to natural disaster.

Furthermore, to mitigate the health risk posed by growing heatwave days[2)] on service

members who often spend extended hours outdoors, the Ministry of National Defense has
supplied items such as cooling vests, ice packs, first aid kits for heatstroke and cooler bag
throughout the services. The MND plans to review the requirement of frontline units and
expand the list of such preventive items to be supplied to service members.


**1)**
Status of preventive work
239 sites in 2020 (12.4B KRW)
253 sites in 2021 (16.0B KRW)
200 sites in 2022 (15.5B KRW)

**2)**
In 2021, the number of days
with temperature exceeding
33°C was 8.1, which is 4.0 days
more than that of the previous
year (“Extreme Weather
Event Report 2021,” Korea
Meteorological Administration
et al)


-----

**Section**


###### Transparent and Efficient Management of National Defense

The MND is striving to earn the citizen’s trust through transparent and efficient management of
national defense; in order to do so, the MND is promoting innovation in logistics support based
on cutting-edge technology and expanding communication with the public in formulating its
policies. Moreover, reformation of the military unit structure and establishment of a smart
manpower management system are underway to actively prepare for changes in the future
defense environment such as decrease in number of service personnel.

**1. Total Life Cycle Management System and Cutting-edge Technology-driven**

**Logistics Innovation**


**Big Data and AI-based Military** In order to provide up-to-date logistics support that

**Logistics Innovation** is in line with the changing defense environment and

advance in weapons systems, the Ministry of National

Defense is harnessing Fourth Industrial Revolution Technologies. Utilizing big data and AI
platform to bring innovation to the military logistics system is currently being pursued. More
and more recently-fielded weapons systems are electronic systems controlled by software,
rather than mechanical equipment. Meanwhile, there is a growing need for military logistics
data are for diagnostics as well as prediction. Moreover, sensor data used in new-generation
aircraft, tracked vehicles, ships, and submarines are expected to have broader applications in
the future, further increasing the importance of collecting, storing, managing, and analyzing
real-time data[3)] that are produced from such sensor networks.

**[Figure 6-2]** **Roadmap for the Construction of a Big Data and AI Platform for Military Logistics**

**descriptionProject** **2019** **2020** **2021** **2022** **2023** **2024** **2025** **2026**

Development of a platform (DEMO)

Building a Operational ① Conceptual research ③ Construction of the platform

platform

requirements

to harness

big data

and AI for

military

logistics

② Test application of sensor data

(development of core CBM+ technologies)


The military logistics innovation project is carried out in three successive phases, including

conceptual research, test application of sensor data, and platform development. Conceptual
research was conducted from October 2020 to December 2021, focused on the applicability


**3)**
For example, the army’s
wheeled armored vehicles are
equipped with close to 300
sensors that are capable of
generating data


-----

of weapons system sensor data.[4)] Based on the results of this research, it was decided that
sensor data will be applied to new weapons systems and that for existing weapons systems
that are already fielded, their performance will be enhanced, focusing particularly on electronic
systems. Moreover, a condition-based maintenance concept was defined based on the level
of technology required for the use of sensor data and the cost-effectiveness analysis. Target
equipment was also selected for the purpose of developing logistics data standards and the test
application of sensor data.

In order to reduce the chance of lapse of coverage per weapons system, test application of

sensor data, which began in 2022, is utilizing various projects to develop technologies for
application of sensor data, including the “Defense Test Project,” “Defense Big Data Leading
Project,” and “Defense Core Technology Development Projects.” These projects are conducted
in conjunction with a core technology development project to build a condition-based
maintenance (CBM+) framework using sensor data.

Meanwhile, in March 2022, the platform development project was selected as a multi-agency

project after it was recognized that a government-wide cooperation was necessary in order to
research on the feedback mechanism between the civil and military sectors and optimize the
efficiency of R&D investment, as well as ensure positive ripple effect on the overall industry.
Based on the results of the conceptual research and the test application of sensor data, the
Ministry of National Defense will begin the platform development project in 2023, jointly
with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy, the Ministry of Science and ICT, and other
relevant agencies. Meanwhile, ahead of the start of the platform development project, a project
to develop a demo system[5)] for analyzing and testing the sensor data collected from the second
phase (test application of sensor data) kicked off in December 2022.

The goal of the big data and AI platform project is to create a platform for the systemic

management and use of vast quantities of data that are produced from weapons systems
throughout their total life cycle.

To achieve this goal, the data collection process is automated as much as possible and

the collected data are stored in a single system for comprehensive management. The data

**[Figure 6-3]** **Expected Benefits of the Military Big Data AI Platform**



**4)**
Creation of data sets by
extracting, refining, linking,
and aggregating data and
intelligent data management

**5)**
A project (2022-2025) to
construct a small-scale big data
system before the development
of a big data platform, covering
14 weapons systems, including
surveillance, mobility, ship,
aircraft, and force protection


Field data Condition

**Sensor** assessment data CBM+

**data**

Environmental

data Total life cycle cost-effectiveness

analysis and optimization

Industrial data Prediction of spare

parts demand

Data-driven post-logistics
support and performance

[Open innovation-based feedback system] enhancement projects

Spin on

Civil→military technologies

Linked with the development of new

**Intelligent defense** weapons systems

**platform** Increasing the efficiency of

Spin off weapons support systems

militarymilitary→→Civil technologies Civil technologies


-----

analysis system will be developed in parallel with the logistics technology information
system in an integrated manner.


**Fostering the Development of the Civil-Military** In order to ensure stable operation of

**MRO Industry and Improving Spare Parts** weapons systems, enhance combat

readiness posture, and contribute

**Management Policy**

to the advancement of the national

industry, the Ministry of National Defense is taking steps to foster the growth of the civilmilitary MRO[6)] industry and innovate the military’s spare parts management policy. These
steps include improving the parts management system, creating a defense product certification
framework, and strengthening cooperation between the civil and military sectors. To reduce
redundant investments and allow the civil
and military sectors to share facilities
and equipment, the Ministry of National
Defense is pursing plans to establish the
“Defense MRO Industry Incubation Center
(provisional title)”. The idea of such MRO
industry incubation center was proposed
in December 2021 by the Defense Science
Board. The MND is continuing its effort
to build support for the project and solicit Seminar on the Development of the Defense MRO Industry
cooperation from relevant government
agencies and public institutions by hosting events such as the “Seminar on the Development
of the Defense MRO Industry in March 2022”. Once established, activities of the center
will include developing MRO manpower for weapons systems and conducting research on
technological innovation in the MRO field.

When the defense MRO industry reaches its next stage of development through

cooperation between the civil, government, and military sectors, it is expected to enhance the
operational performance of weapons systems, as well as create civilian jobs by boosting the
technological competitiveness of the domestic MRO industry.


**Enhancing the Efficiency of** The Ministry of National Defense is continu
**Total Life Cycle System Management** ously striving to improve the efficiency and

cost-effectiveness of defense management and

guarantee timely operational sustainment capability through comprehensive management
of the performance, cost, related technologies and information throughout the life cycle of
the equipment, from requirement planning to acquisition and operation (hereafter, “total life
cycle system management”). Steady improvements have been made over the years to the
total life cycle system management (TLCSM) process by, for example, laying the foundation
necessary to strengthen the capacity to provide timely operational support.

In February 2021, “Total Life Cycle System Management Directive” was issued, providing

a framework for total life cycle system management and clear guidelines on its key elements
including operation and maintenance cost analysis, DMSMS (diminishing manufacturing


**6)**
MRO, which is an acronym
standing for maintenance,
repair, and overhaul, refers
to the activity of repairing
and maintaining an item, as
well as parts, techniques, and
manpower required for this
activity.


-----

sources and material shortages) management, RAM[7)] management, and the life cycle
sustainment plan (LCSP). The directive establish the regulatory basis for the TLCSM process
and set forth detailed procedures.

In 2022, to guarantee stable utilization rate of weapons systems and address limitations in

post-logistics support[8)] from a TLCSM perspective, related processes were redesigned into
data-driven processes. “Depot-level maintenance,” a maintenance concept in which weapons
systems are restored to their original condition, was replaced by the new concept “original
performance enhancement” in which the condition and performance of weapons systems are
enhanced in such a way as to allow their continued operation and maintenance. Moreover,
using RAM-C (reliability, availability, and maintenability-C),[9)] an engineering analysis
technique adopted in the U.S. and other defense industry powerhouses, efforts are being
made to shift the focus in the defense acquisition strategy to performance-based logistics
(PBL). In addition to being an essential requirement for the defense industry and defense
exports, RAM-C is also beneficial for the military as it can reduce defense budgets and
enhance the reliability of weapons systems.


**7)**
The acronym for reliability,
availability, and maintainability,
RAM is a key indicator in the
improvement of the equipment
utilization rate and the combat
readiness posture and the
reduction of life cycle cost.
RAM takes place throughout
the life cycle of a weapons
system, from requirement
planning to disposal.

**8)**
Logistics support services for
the operation and maintenance
of a weapons system, provided
in a continuous manner after its
development, acquisition, and
fielding, including the supply of
materials, facilities, manpower,
operational resources, and
technical data.

**9)**
An engineering analysis
technique to identify
alternatives that satisfy RAM
goals at the lowest possible life
cycle cost.

**10)**
A program aimed at facilitating
the adoption of high-quality
commercial technologies and
products, in which civilian
items are tried out to test
their performance and quality
and those that satisfy the
requirements are acquired for
military use.

**11)**
Products that were tested
through the commercial
product trial program and were
determined to be suitable for
military application (138 items
in 2021 and 129 items in 2022).

**12)**
An initiative to provide
public services and support
technological innovation and
innovative growth in the private
sector using the purchasing
power of the public sector.


**Increasing Defense Acquisition of** To enhance the welfare of our troops and streng
**Commercial Products** then their combat capabilities, the Ministry of

National Defense has increased acquisition of

highquality commercial products to repurpose them for military use.

Since the early 2000s, a growing portion of the supply needs of the armed forces have been

met through commercial products that conform to military requirements under an initiative
to diversify sourcing of defense acquisition. In 2015, amid the rapid advances in civilian
technologies, a trial program[10)] was created to test high-quality open market products.

The results of trials conducted under this program are announced through a product

presentation, held twice annually, during the first and second halves of the year. From 2021
on, those products that were tested to be suitable for military use[11)] are registered with the
“Commercial Defense Product Mall” at the website of the Public Procurement Service
(“Nara Marketplace”) to facilitate the acquisition process. This has also helped manufacturers
with marketing and distribution of their products as well as contributed to improving the
quality of military supplies.

In September 2022, the Ministry of National Defense signed the “Memorandum of

Understanding on Cooperation to Strengthen the Linkage between Innovative Procurement[12)]
and the Defense Acquisition of Commercial Items” with the Public Procurement Service, in
which the two agencies agree to tighten their cooperation to improve the quality of military


Product Presentation Showcasing Quality

Open-market Products (September 2022)


Commercial Defense Product Mall at the

Nara Marketplace Portal of the Public

Procurement Service


MOU between the Ministry of National

Defense and the Public Procurement

Service (September 2022)


-----

supplies and support the sustainable growth of private-sector suppliers.

The Ministry of National Defense intends to make continuous efforts to raise the quality of

military supplies, which is essential to improve the service environment and strengthen the
combat readiness posture of our forces.

**2. Open Management of Defense Affairs**


**Increased Communication** In order to earn the trust and support of the Korean

**with the Public** public for defense policy and instill pride in our troops

for their service to the country, the Ministry of National

Defense is stepping up its public communication efforts on key policy issues, using diverse
channels including media outlets, social media, and in-person communication. The Ministry
of National Defense operates the “Public Relations Expert Group,”[13)] an advisory panel
composed of private sector specialists from all walks of life, to tap their expertise to improve
its policy communication performance. “Online Supporters (M-Friends),’[14) ]composed of
college students interested in national defense issues, create and post social media content on
defense themes for two-way communication with the public.

The Ministry of National Defense makes active use of online platforms to expand the

reach of its messages. It produces variety of accessible online contents to help the general
public and service members gain a better understanding of defense policy issues. Series
that deal with themes such as life in the barracks, training, and weapons systems, including
“Pride,” “Gunvogue,” and “Real Military Debates” are posted on the Ministry of National
Defense’s official website. Key defense-related events, such as the Armed Forces Day, the
Seoul Defense Dialogue, Seoul ADEX, the 19th Asia Security Summit, or the 54th ROK-U.S.
Security Consultative Meeting are advertised on a wide gamut of platforms, including news
and online media. To elicit the public’s interest in policy debates, online content is created
on related issues and post-event materials, including video footages, are also published
online. Recent improvements in food service policy have been actively advertised through
mass media. The Ministry of National Defense notably sponsored and participated in the
production of the episode of the tvN reality show, The Backpacker Chef, on military food
to showcase the enhanced culinary standard and the skills of military chefs. The “Golden
Shovel Chef Award,” a cooking contest conducted jointly with the Ministry of Agriculture,
Food and Rural Affairs and other government agencies to promote the development of
military food services, was aired on DocuOn, an edutainment program by KBS. Military
food service-related content have also been published on a variety of cooking YouTube
channels.

Meanwhile, to showcase appreciation for troops serving on the frontline, despite challenges

presented by the prolonged COVID-19 pandemic, campaigns were conducted to encourage
the sharing of messages of gratitude and goodwill for soldiers.

The ROK Armed Forces have also participated in the efforts to send positive messages

to the Korean public amid the pandemic. In 2021, music video of “Kkotgilman geokge
haejulge (bed of roses),” a song on hopes of a timely return to a normal life, performed


2022 Military Photo
Book Project Our
Formidable Armed
Forces

**13)**
An advisory panel, made up of
30 experts from various fields,
including smart innovation,
culture, healthcare, media,
and advertising, established
in 2015 to develop innovative
communication ideas for
defense policy and tap
their expertise to improve
communication.

**14)**
An online student reporter
group created to strengthen
policy communication via social
media platforms, using publicfriendly and engaging content.


-----

Military Photo Book Project Our Formidable Armed Forces

by Daybreak and the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps bands, was produced and
disseminated. “Protecting Your Everyday Life” campaign which highlights the fact that
the military not only serves in the realm of national security but is defending the everyday
lives of its citizens received the 2021 Korea Communication Award. In 2022, active-duty
veterans of the first and second Battle of Yeonpyeong and descendants of ROK-U.S. service
members who fought in the Korean War attended professional baseball games, throwing out
a ceremonial first pitch. These events helped to keep the victorious battles at Yeonpyeong-do
at the forefront of public memory and provided an opportunity to remember the sacrifices
made by our service members to defend this country. A string of participatory events were
organized on social media platforms in 2022 for two-way communication with the Korean
public, including “We-Daehan Run”, a running challenge, and the “Armed Forces Day
Taegeukgi Raising” campaign. Meanwhile, a photo book containing the images of troops is
published annually to project the power and strength of the ROK Armed Forces to domestic
and foreign audiences. In 2022, the photo book had a dual theme, “Our Formidable Armed
Forces” and “The Strongest Alliance.” The photos were made available for viewing online
and calendars featuring them were printed and distributed.

Meanwhile, to generate interest and support for national defense policy, series of public

messaging videos were produced. Including “70 Years of Waiting,” a video on recovery of
war remains in the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ). This video not only resonated with Korean
public but also entered major advertising contests and received the “Korea Advertising
Award” and the “Good Advertising Award.”

Moving forward, the Ministry of National Defense will invest further in policy

communication to earn the Korean public’s confidence in our Armed Forces by publishing
appealing, user-friendly content about issues of popular interest and ongoing improvements
in living quarters for our service members.


**Expanding Public Involvement** The Ministry of National Defense pursuing inno
**in the Policy Formulation Process** vation in governance through “communication

and cooperation,” one of the administration’s

objective as well as its innovation strategy. To help spread a proactive approach to public
administration and spur innovation across government organizations, the “Government
Innovation and Proactive Public Administration Best Practice Contest” is held annually.
For the selection of best practice cases, continuous efforts are made to increase the Korean


Public interest
advertising “70 Years
of Waiting”


-----

public’s input through measures such as online voting. To broaden public involvement in
the campaign for proactive public administration, the Ministry of National Defense operates
the “Proactive Public Administration Monitoring Group,” a group made up of ordinary
citizens, serving as a bridge between the MND and the general public.

Meanwhile, “Citizens’ Group for Defense Information Disclosure,” a group of citizen

volunteers, annually formed to monitor defense information released by the Ministry
of National Defense, is contributing to enhancing the quality of information disclosure.
“Citizens’ Group for Policy Design,” another annually formed volunteer group, made up
of members of the general public and professional service designers, carries out tasks to
improve public services.

To increase the transparency and effectiveness of defense policy, the Ministry of National

Defense also takes part in the “Open Policy” scheme, providing a summary and progress
update of major policy agendas and name of participating government officials in a
continuing effort to protect citizens’ right to know and maintain broad communication with
the Korean public.


**Civil Society and Government Cooperation** To achieve the highest ethical standards in

**to Counter Corruption and** defense administration and earn Korean

people’s confidence in the integrity of

**Ensure the Integrity of Public Services**

public services, the Ministry of National

Defense has increased public oversight and participation across all aspects of defense and
military affairs. A stricter anti-corruption policy has been adopted and a variety of processes
based on civil society-government partnership have been instituted to promote ethical
conduct.

Corruption fighting mechanisms with direct public participation that are currently in

place include the “Anti-corruption Ombudsman,” a program in which independent privatesector experts take reports on corruption within the military, audit the military and issue
recommendations for improvement, and “Public-Private Partnership Council for Corruptionfree Military,” a committee composed of defense institution officials, members of civic
organizations, and people from broad walks of life, deliberating on measures to prevent
corruption in the military. In December 2021, the Ministry of National Defense entered
into an MOU with the Anti-Corruption and Civil Rights Commission for cooperation in
combating corruption and protecting the rights and interests of members of the armed forces.

Furthermore, to help all servicemembers gain a better understanding of anti-corruption
related legal requirements and ensure compliance, information sessions about anti-corruption
laws, including the Improper Solicitation and Graft Act and the Act on the Prevention of
Conflict of Interest, are regularly conducted. This is coupled with other initiatives to spread
corruption awareness and the message that integrity is a core value of a public servant, such
as the “Anti-Corruption Newsletter” and the “Anti-Corruption Essay Contest.” In tandem,
an anonymous reporting system has been established to encourage whistleblowing and
public interest disclosures and strict punitive measures are imposed on those who attempt to
obstruct whistleblowing activities, public interest disclosures or fail to fulfill duties related to
the protection of whistleblowers.


-----

Thanks to these efforts, the integrity metrics of the Ministry of National Defense have

improved year after year. In 2022, the Ministry of National Defense received grade 2, the
second highest rating, in the annual integrity assessment of government agencies, conducted
by the Anti-Corruption and Civil Rights Commission. The Ministry of National Defense also
plans to establish measures to reward whistleblowers that contributed to the advancement of
national defense. Going forward, the Ministry of National Defense will continue to uphold
the transparency and integrity of defense administration through citizen auditor programs
such as “Anti-Corruption Ombudsman” and the “Public-Private Partnership Council for
Corruption-free Military,” as well as seeking out new and more effective ways to combat
corruption.

**3. Defense Regulatory Reform to Enhance Public Interest**


**Identifying and Developing New** Every year, the Ministry of National Defense establi
**Tasks for Regulatory Reform** shes an annual regulatory reform plan to introduce

changes to defense-related regulations for the benefit

and convenience of the Korean public, without jeopardizing national security or the safety of
citizens. The current administration is pushing for a radical and broad-based regulatory reform,
led by the civil society, to get rid of unnecessary restrictions on the freedom of individuals and
businesses and help unleash the creativity of the private sector. The Ministry of National Defense
has joined this effort and has set up the “Defense Regulatory Reform Taskforce[15)] to identify and
develop regulatory reform tasks in the defense domain.

In 2021, 16 regulatory reform tasks were carried out in areas related to fostering the growth

of new industries, eliminating sources of inconvenience to the public, and alleviating burdens
on businesses. To facilitate data sharing and convergence within the military and increase the
openness of data, the “Defense Data Management Directive” was established, which provides
the regulatory basis for activities to promote the development of new industries, including AI,
big data, and cloud. Regulations regarding medical treatment was amended so that reservists
injured during training can receive treatment from civilian medical institutions in addition
to military hospitals. In addition, training notices for reservists, which used to be mailed or
delivered in person, can now also be sent through text messaging for improved convenience.
The scope of authorities delegated to local administrations have been expanded regarding
development projects within military facility protection zones. Local administrations are now
allowed to directly consult with the military unit with jurisdiction to shorten the approval process
and avoid causing unnecessary aggravation for local communities. Regulatory burdens on firms
have been eased as well by revising the tender assessment criteria so that no additional penalty
points are applied against goods and services offered by suppliers that were previously penalized
for bid rigging or other tender rule violations after the end of the period during which they were
precluded from the tender process or their participation was restricted. Moreover, as a show
of respect for those who served the country, a program was created to retroactively promote
the rank of veterans who served 30 months or longer on active duty, but were discharged as a
corporals due to the then promotion regulations to be promoted to sergeants.


**15)**
The Defense Regulatory Reform
Taskforce was established in
June 2022 to assist with the
government’s regulatory reform
agenda. The taskforce meets on
a monthly basis to identify new
reform tasks and develop plans
for reform.


-----

In 2022, 23 regulatory reform tasks were identified and carried out in areas related to spurring

growth of new industries, minimizing burdens on companies, doing away with sources of
inconvenience for the public and enhancing the service environment for troops. To foster
the growth of new industries, the defense acquisition system was improved as well through
measures such as speeding up the acquisition of cutting-edge technology-based weapons
systems through the rapid acquisition program.[16)] Security regulations on safety and security
testing have also been revised in order to establish the kind of security standards necessary to
introduce AI, unmanned systems, and cloud in the defense arena. The authorization process for
defense technology export has been simplified to reduce regulatory burdens for firms by waiving
certain procedures, such as deliberation by subcommittees, for technologies with low protection
requirement and risk of leakage. Furthermore, in order to prevent price rigging on goods sold
at PX stores by external vendors, a new program was put into place to monitor and manage
product categories for which there is a high level of competition. The product selection process
was also improved to quickly ban products that have been associated with price fixing or rigging
behaviors. To reduce inconvenience for civilians accessing military bases and avoid unnecessary
invasion of privacy, background checks are now conducted only for those handling classified
information and those that routinely enter restricted zones.

A mobile app (Armed Forces “Youth Dream”) for the reservation of intercity bus tickets was

developed for the convenience of servicemembers. Meanwhile, to simplify the recruitment
process for both military and civilian staff, a big data-driven AI human resources management
system (“Smart Human Resources Management System”)[17)] was developed. In addition to
recruitment, the system also provides career counseling and discharge-related support.

To ensure the quality of the regulatory regime, all proposals to institute new regulations

or strengthen existing ones are reviewed by the Ministry of National Defense’s internal
Regulatory Reform Committee[18)] for relevance. Meanwhile, in a continuing effort to identify
new ideas for regulatory reform in the defense field, a call for innovative ideas is launched
periodically, inviting members of the Ministry of National Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
and service personnel across all sections of the armed forces to contribute their suggestions.
Out of the 34 ideas proposed through this scheme, 3 were nominated for awards. In addition
to the 3 that received an award, 3 additional ideas were selected for inclusion in the shortterm and medium-term regulatory reform plans.

The Ministry of National Defense will continuously explore and carry out new regulatory

reform tasks that can make a positive difference in the lives of service members and the
general public. The Ministry of National Defense will also broaden opportunities for public
participation by conducting an online vote when selecting the case of best regulatory reform
and step-up communication efforts on related accomplishments to increase public awareness.


Armed Forces “Youth
Dream” App, Express
Bus mobile App

**16)**
A program in which cuttingedge technology-based
commercial products are tried
out before the requirement or
acquisition decision is made
either by purchasing a small
sample or having a prototype
developed for test purposes.

**17)**
This big data-driven AI
system, designed to enable
the integrated management
of military human resources,
across all areas of personnel
management, including
recruitment, education and
training, and pre- and postdischarge support, is currently
under development for
completion in 2025.

**18)**
The committee was established in
accordance with the “Directives
on the Operation of Regulatory
Affairs” (Ministry of National
Defense directives) to define the
scope of application of new
administrative regulations and
deliberate on their validity and
relevance. The committee is
composed of 6 to 15 internal
members (Deputy Minister for
Planning and Coordination,
Director General for Legal
Affairs, and heads of divisions
with jurisdiction over regulatory
issues on hand) and external
members (legal and regulatory
experts).


**Improvements in Ammunition** To keep ammunition storage facilities at a safe dis
**Storage Facility-related** tance from local communities, the Ministry of

National Defense designates their surrounding areas

**Practices**

as “military facility protection zones.” The designation

as a military facility protection zone, however, results in various development restrictions
within the designated area, including restrictions on the construction or expansion of new


-----

or existing buildings by local residents or roads by local administrations. The Ministry of
National Defense is currently implementing measures to minimize inconvenience to local
communities due to such restrictions.

Aboveground ammunition storage facilities, which account for 31% of all ammunition

storage facilities across Korea and many of which are severely dilapidated, are progressively
being replaced by more modern facilities such as igloo-style or underground bunkers.
Underground ammunition storage bunkers, which are the most efficient in terms of land
use, are currently the preferred solution. In tandem, through cooperation with the industry,
academia, and research institutions, the safe distance from ammunition storage facilities will
be re-determined by reflecting the geographic features of Korea to prevent unnecessarily
large swathes of land from becoming barred from development.

**4. Improving the Military Service Affairs**


**Special Management of Military** Starting in September 2017, military service records

**Service Records of Public Figures** of public figures including government officials have

been separately managed in accordance with Article

77-4 of the Military Service Act, which was amended in March 2017. This special recordkeeping
applies to civil servants ranked at grade 4 or higher and their children, high income individuals
and their children, athletes, and entertainment and media personalities. The status of compliance
with military service requirement is regularly monitored for these individuals, from preliminary
service enrollment until the completion of their active duty service. Between 2017 and August
2022, 19 cases of suspected military service evasion were identified in the monitored groups,
including cases involving deliberate weight gain or wrist surgery to get medical exemption.

More recently, the vast majority of individuals in the monitored groups have either completed



**[Figure 6-4]** **Changes made to the Enlistment Regulation to Address Inequality**

|/|Old rule|New rule|
|---|---|---|
|Postponement of enlistment date|• Enlistment postponed for all prospective enlistees irrespective of age, if taking a civilian occupational licensing or certification exam|• Restrictions on the postponement of enlistment on the grounds of a licensing or certification exam for those aged 28 years and older (effective as of August 2018)|
||• Enlistment postponed until the end of May of the following year for all those enrolling in a graduate program irrespective of age|• Restrictions on the postponement of enlistment on the grounds of enrollment in a graduate program for those aged 28 years and older (effective as of January 2019)|
|Permission for short overseas trips|• Overseas stay of up to 1 year per trip, maximum combined stay of 3 years for all trips|• Overseas stay of up to 6 months per trip, maximum combined stay of 2 years for all trips (effective as of May 2018) * Maximum limit of 5 trips removed (effective as of January 2022)|
|Physical examination grading system for military draft|• Grade 4 for chronic ankle or wrist instability|• Grade 3 for chronic ankle or wrist instability (effective as of December 2021)|



their military service or are in the process of completing it. Meanwhile, there have been cases
in which some entertainers and athletes used loopholes in the enlistment rules to put off their
military service. To address this type of deliberate avoidance of military service, regulations on


-----

the postponement of enlistment were tightened for those aged 28 years and older.

Accomplishments from these efforts to ensure the fair application of military service

requirements have been communicated to the Korean public through YouTube and social media
platforms to reach broader audiences. Online educational campaigns, targeting people in the
entertainment and media industries, are also actively conducted to encourage compliance with
military service obligations and spread the awareness of related legal requirements.


**Expanded Military Service Records** The requirement for candidates to a public

**Disclosure Requirements** office to disclose their military service records

was first introduced in 1999. Until recently,

**during Confirmation Hearings**

only candidates to a public office, for which a

majority approval by the National Assembly is necessary for appointment or election,[19)] were
subject to military service records disclosure requirements. In recent years, however, the
need to vet candidates to other public offices, such as the State Council, has been recognized.
Effective as of May 2018, nominees to the State Council are also required to submit details
of their military service records to the National Assembly and disclose them during the
confirmation hearing, which is a major step forward for the Korean public’s right to know.
In October 2019, unit of assignment military occupational specialty was added to the list
of disclosure items. The disclosure requirements were further expanded in October 2021
to include the service records of the spouse of a woman candidate to a public office if the
spouse completed his military service while he was already married to the candidate.


**Improvement of the Draft Physical** The Military Manpower Administration has

**Examination and the Pre-enlistment** recently introduced the latest medical equipment

to ensure the fairness and accuracy of the draft

**Fitness Test**

physical examination. To reduce the burden

associated with the cost of the examination, arrangements were made so that low-income
individuals and recipients of public assistance may receive the examination at their doctor’s
office at no cost. In 2022, to enhance the accuracy of the psychological evaluation, the
existing three-stage test, including psychological evaluation and mental health evaluation,
was expanded to include an extra stage of in-depth psychological evaluation towards the
physiologically vulnerable demographic.

Moreover, the pre-enlistment fitness test, which used to be conducted after the enlistment

by the unit of assignment, is now conducted before the enlistment by the Military Manpower
Administration. This change eliminates the long wait period before a prospective enlistee
who was declared unfit could be re-enlisted. In 2021, the Military Manpower Administration
conducted the pre-enlistment fitness test on new enlistees of the seven divisions under the
2nd Operations Command. In July 2022, the test was also conducted on new enlistees of the
six eastern divisions under the Ground Operations Command. The scope of the pre-enlistment
test by the Military Manpower Administration is set to further expand going forward.


**19)**
An “appointment approval
request” must be submitted
to the National Assembly for
the appointment of the Prime
Minister, the Chairman of the
Board of Audit and Inspection,
the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court, and the Supreme Court
Justices, while an “election
approval request” is required
for the appointment of
Constitutional Court Justices (3)
and the members of the National
Election Commission (3).


-----

**Updating the Alternative Military** Alternative military services were first introduced

**Service[20)] System** in 1973 with the goal of fostering the development

of key national industries, enhancing the nation’s

international standing, and putting surplus military manpower to efficient use. However,
there have been substantial changes in circumstances since then. The declining fertility rate
in recent decades resulted in a sharp drop in military manpower, and ROK’s international
status has dramatically improved. Hence, it has been widely suggested that the alternative
military service scheme must be updated to reflect the changing times. In November 2019,
an action plan called “Tasks for the Improvement of the Alternative Military Service System”
was established, led by the Office for Government Policy Coordination and through the
joint efforts of the Ministry of National Defense, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of
Science and ICT, the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism.

In accordance with “Tasks for the Improvement of the Alternative Military Service

System,” the sizes of research and skilled industrial personnel and “onboard ship reserve
service” personnel have been gradually reduced. Moreover, PhD candidates assigned to
research positions are now required to complete their degree by the end of their service
period as part of an effort to ensure that substantive contributions are made by alternative
service personnel. The assignment of research personnel with a master’s degree to SMEs in
the parts and materials industry and the equipment industry was increased and restrictions
were imposed on their reassignment to large firms. The Ministry of National Defense will
continue to explore new ways of enhancing the alternative military service system to bring
it in line with the future defense environment, redefined by declining military manpower
resources.



**[Figure 6-5]** **Key Improvements in Alternative Military Services in Industrial Support-related Fields**

|Col1|Col2|Tasks|
|---|---|---|
|1|Improved management of limited military manpower and greater fairness|• Reduction of personnel • Improvement of service requirements for PhD-candidate research personnel|
|2|Strategic use of human resources|• Increasing the number of industrial support personnel assigned to parts and materials firms and equipment manufacturers • Expanding the roles and responsibilities of government agencies with jurisdiction|
|3|Closer management of service performance, strengthening disciplinary action against underperforming or irresponsible service members|• Toughening of disciplinary rules and procedures against negligent or irresponsible behavior|
|4|Increased protection of the rights and interests of service personnel|• Introduction of a flexible service model for PhD-candidate research personnel • Creation of an online counseling system for onboard ship reserve service personnel that serve aboard international ships|


**20)**
Including onboard ship
reserve service, art and sports
personnel service, public health
service, draft physical examiner
service, “public service
advocacy” service, public
quarantine veterinary service,
research personnel service,
and skilled industrial personnel
service.


**Assistance for Enlistees with** Since 2019, the Military Manpower Admini
**Special Needs or Financial Hardships** stration has special procedures in place for

people with chronic health conditions or experi
encing financial hardship to assist them in meeting their military service requirements.
Effective as of 2020, persons suffering hematologic malignancies no longer need to undergo
the draft physical examination and are exempted from service based on document review.


-----

From 2021, all costs related to medical diagnosis are paid by the government whether or

not a prospective enlistee is exempted based on the results of the diagnosis. In 2022, 2,123
persons received financial aid toward the cost of a medical examination.

For prospective enlistees whose income is below a certain threshold, any additional tests

required by the draft physical examiner to be conducted at civilian medical institutions are
administered at no cost to them. Low-income enlistees are, moreover, awarded extra points
when applying for a volunteer assignment and are given preferential consideration for
assignment as skilled industrial personnel.


**Honorable Families with Military** To create a social atmosphere in which those who

**Service Tradition** serve in the military are valued and respected, a

special program known as “Honorable Families

with Military Service Tradition” was launched in 2004. Families that served on active duty
for three generations (direct family members) are honored under this program. In 2013,
families whose members served in the Korean Liberation Army were inducted into this
program. In 2020, “National Independence Honorees” were also inducted into the program.
In 2022, the program added 1,816 new families, the highest number since its launch in
2004. Selected families receive a certificate recognizing their service to the nation and an
appreciation plaque, as well as discounts or waivers of fees for using various public and
private facilities.

**[Figure 6-6]** **Honorable Families with Military Service Tradition – Designation Statistics**

As of December 2022, units: families, persons

|/|Total|2004 ~2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|2021|2022|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Number of families|9,447|1,062|301|545|497|466|560|492|714|741|1,017|1,236|1,816|
|Number of veterans|47,650|4,857|1,444|2,642|2,520|2,490|2,932|2,670|3,779|3,820|5,222|6,289|8,985|



**5. Stable Supply of Supplementary Military Manpower and Efficient**

**Management of Human Resources**


**Measures to Supplement** Amid the rapid decline in military manpower

**Military Manpower** resources, the Ministry of National Defense has

overhauled its human resources planning system to

ensure a stable supply of supplementary personnel over a medium and long-term horizon.

The assignment of armed forces personnel to the Korean National Police, Coast Guard,

and the fire department will discontinued after 2021 and be completely phased out by 2023.
The number of personnel assigned to alternative service duties such as research or skilled
industrial personnel will be progressively reduced by 1,200 annually between 2022 and
2026. The size of full-time reserve forces will also be reduced from 16,000 to 8,000 in
2023 by reassigning them to active duty. Meanwhile, to increase the number of enlistees


Honorable Families
with Military Service
Tradition project


-----

that are assignable to active duty, the criteria for determining fitness for military service
(BMI, vision), which were tightened in 2015 to reduce the backlog in draft processing, were
restored to their previous, unmodified state so that the percentage of those determined to
be fit for service can rise to the level seen in 2014. Efforts are also made to reorganize the
manpower structure with emphasis on officers and NCOs. To increase the manpower pool
for officer and NCOs the age ceiling for entering service was raised while the number of
female service member was expanded as well. Going forward, in lined with the restructuring
of forces planned as part of Defense Innovation 4.0, an appropriate size of the standing force
will be re-determined and a comprehensive set of measures will be implemented to ensure
the stable supply of manpower.


**Improve Recruitment of Officers and NCOs** The shift in the force structure with

emphasis on officers and NCOs, coupled

with increased use of cutting-edge weapons systems, has magnified the need for capable
professionals. While the size of the total standing force is reduced, the military is expanding
the officer and NCO corps to fill positions requiring skills, experience, and expertise.
However, amid the overall decline in military manpower, the demand to join the military as
professionals have declined, making their recruitment increasingly difficult.

In order to secure high-quality manpower, the recruitment of long-term, permanent

positions, which guarantee a stable career in the military, has been increased. The quota of
first and second lieutenants and staff sergeants has been decreased, while the quota of midlevel officers and NCOs were increased. The goal is to reduce the number of new recruits
to make room for career military officers and NCOs to serve for extended periods of time,
thus to formulate a human resources policy focused on career military officers and longterm service personnel. The retirement age for officers was pushed back and a process for
selecting newly assigned non-commissioned officers for long-term service was put into
place. Continuous efforts are also being made to boost compensation and benefits for officers
and NCOs.

In tandem, incentive payments are issued to recruit officers and NCOs who wish to serve

for short periods of time and Meanwhile, to secure manpower to serve as officers and NCOs
for a medium term, college students committing to an extended military service are awarded
an extended service grant,[21) ] most often in amounts sufficient to cover full tuition costs for
an undergraduate program. In the face of a growing shortage of military manpower, the ROK
military will continue to seek out solutions to guarantee the stable supply of high-quality
professional officers and NCOs for both medium and short-term service positions.


**Development of Skilled Military Manpower** To proactively respond to future changes

in the security environment, driven by

Fourth Industrial Revolution technologies, and spur innovation in the defense field, the
Ministry of National Defense conducts educational programs to develop skilled military
manpower, including degree programs and study abroad programs.

Degree programs, aimed at fostering military professors, researchers, and policy experts,

are taught at major higher education institutions in Korea and abroad. About 350 service


**21)**
A grant awarded to students
currently enrolled in a four or
two-year college on condition
that they agree to serve in the
military as an officer or a noncommissioned officer for an
extended period that exceeds
the compulsory service period.


-----

members are selected annually to pursue a PhD or MA degree in cutting-edge technology
fields, including AI, robotics, and aerospace engineering. Study abroad programs provide
service members with an opportunity to deepen their military knowledge, learn new
technologies, and improve their proficiency with weapons systems and combat skills. Study
abroad programs are also designed to train regional experts. 350 service members are sent
abroad annually to attend graduate programs at defense universities, command and general
staff colleges, and MOS schools in 40 countries. In recent years, service members are sent
to an increasingly diversified list of countries in regions including Southeast Asia, Eurasia,
the Middle East, Latin America, and Africa, under the goal of training combined and joint
operations specialists as well as building military diplomacy capabilities. Moving forward,
continuous efforts will be made to strengthen research and development capabilities of
skilled personnel and educational opportunities in AI and other cutting-edge fields will be
further expanded by closely linking with the Defense Innovation 4.0 initiative.

**6. Future-oriented Human Resources Management Model**


**Smart Human Resources** In conjunction with personnel restructuring, currently

**Management System** underway to address challenges posed by declining military

manpower, a project to build a “Smart Human Resources

Management System” will begin in 2023 for completion in 2025. The new system will
be designed to increase the efficiency of human resource management through innovative
processes, such as tailored training of personnel to meet specific skills requirements,
increased public services related to key areas of recruitment needs, and career counseling
for service members expecting to be discharged. Although a computerized human
resources management system (“Defense Personnel Information System”) already exists,
this system lacks features to support the efficient use of accumulated data and requires
manual intervention to view and analyze data. The new system will be an advanced system,
harnessing the latest technologies including AI and big data, to enable smart management
and use of accumulated personnel data. The “Smart Human Resources Management System”
will make it possible to efficiently manage the life cycle of the service members and civilian
employees and the data-driven decision-making process is expected to enhance fairness and
confidence in personnel affairs.

After the research project to develop an “AI-powered human resources management

concept” was undertaken by the Army in 2018, a detailed system design and a funding
plan were completed over the subsequent three-year period. The “Defense Personnel Data
Management Team” was later set up to gather input from the Ministry of National Defense
and personnel departments of different services about requirements in areas including
recruitment, education, training, assignment, pre- and post-discharge support, as well as
promotion management platforms. In 2021, a budget of KRW 9.45 billion was secured to
fund the project.

In 2022, an external system developer will be selected and after the required analysis

and system design is completed, the development of key processes for human resources


-----

management system will begin in 2023 and the system will be rolled out sometime during
the second half of 2025. The timeline of the project is summarized in [Figure 6-7] below:

**[Figure 6-7]** **Timeline of the Smart Human Resources Management System Project – Objectives and Tasks by Year**

|/|2023|2024|2025|
|---|---|---|---|
|Objectives|Analysis and design of functional requirements, systemic management of software development processes|Routinely conduct developmental tests and evaluation (DT&E), meet functional requirements based on user feedback|Optimize the system and ensure its stability through operational tests and evaluation (OT&E)|
|Key tasks|• Design the system, functions, and software standards • Operate a workshop for the development of required functionalities • Code software and test functional units • Define requirements, supervise design|• Establish and operate a testing and evaluation team • Software integration test, developmental test and evaluation (DT&E) • Privacy impact assessment (PIA) • Install hardware and commercial software|• Operational tests and evaluation (OT&E), supervision • Delivery inspection, conclusion of the project • Fielding, maintenance and repair/ system stabilization support|


**Enhancing the Personnel Management System by** To prepare for future warfare and in

**Field of Specialization** anticipation of a structural shift in

the military toward a technology
intensive model, the Ministry of National Defense has made extensive efforts to develop
specialists in key areas. The personnel management system has been realigned to emphasize
the development and use of “combined and joint operations specialists” and “cyber and
technology specialists.” “Combined and joint operations specialists” are personnel trained to
lead combined operations after the transition of OPCON. There are two ranks of combined
and joint operations specialists according to the level of joint operations capabilities and
English proficiency. To increase objectivity in the designation of a position as a specialist
position, the vetting process has been strengthened. The required level of language
proficiency, which was previously set at an arbitrarily high level was appropriately readjusted
according to rank. Moreover, a wholesale review was conducted on positions that were
previously designated as specialist positions to ascertain that they are positions that actually
require specialized knowledge of combined and joint operations. Moreover, combined and
joint operations specialist positions were filled through a rigorous selection process to ensure
that only candidates with specialized knowledge and skills are assigned to them. As a result,
the rate of assignment of skilled manpower to these positions has sharply increased. The
personnel management system will be continuously updated and improved in a manner to
promote the development and use of skilled manpower.

Concrete selection and classification criteria have also been established for cyber experts

so that candidates with required knowledge and skills are assigned to the position. The
recent designation of core cyber technology positions and related pilot programs provided an
opportunity to put the capabilities of military cyber experts to use, as well as increased job
satisfaction among them. Concerning cutting-edge technology specialists, the “development and
use of technology specialists” was selected as one of the tasks under “Defense Innovation 4.0.”
As part of this task, a comprehensive series of measures including organizational restructuring,
increase in degree programs in related fields, and improvement of personnel management, will
be implemented to enable a flexible response to the changing defense environment.


-----

**7. Master Plan for the Development of Civilian Military Workforce[22)]**

The recent drop in military manpower resources has resulted in the need to sharply increase
the civilian workforce. As the ROK Armed Forces become increasingly technology-driven,
there is also a growing demand for civilian workers specialized in fields such as aerospace
engineering and AI. In September 2021, the Ministry of National Defense established the
“Master Plan for the Development of Civilian Military Workforce” to proactively respond
to these challenges and requirements and help boost the quality and competitiveness of the
civilian employees.

The “Master Plan for the Development of Civilian Military Workforce” sets out tasks

in five areas. In the area of organizational structure and personnel size, the roles and
responsibilities of civilian workers and their areas of assignment are redefined. In the
area of recruitment, tasks to improve the recruitment method and process are laid out.
Improvements are also planned in the areas of employee welfare benefits and personnel
management. Finally, in the area of education and training, the plan sets forth tasks for the
creation of an education and training system offering instructions that are tailored to skills
requirements specific to each job position.


**Organizational Structure and Personnel Size** As the ROK is fast approaching a demo
graphic cliff, which will cause a sharp

decline in military manpower, active-duty positions in non-combat areas are progressively
replaced by civilian positions. The overall number of civilian employees has steadily grown
to meet the increasing manpower needs to support a technology focused military. This has
led to several issues, including restrictions hindering the job performance of civilian workers
assigned to certain posts that were previously active-duty positions, inequality of promotion
opportunities due to the difference in personnel size between units, and job families that need
to be downsized or consolidated as a result of technological advances.

To address these issues, positions whose duties cannot be wholly fulfilled by civilian

employees were converted back to active duty positions and medium-rank positions were
added to serve as the missing piece in the promotion path for civilian employees serving in
units under the direct control of the Ministry of National Defense. Finally, the job structure
in various units were overhauled and certain job families were consolidated as necessary by
taking into consideration of the job size.

Efforts for the enhancement of the civilian personnel system by the Ministry of National

Defense will continue into the future and new job categories will be added as required by
technological advances and the evolving defense environment.


**22)**
Civilian military workers are
special-service civil servants
assigned to work for the
military, carrying out technical
tasks or research, providing
education and training, or
performing administrative
duties.


-----

**[Figure 6-8]** **Tasks under the Master Plan for the Development of Civilian Military Workforce**

|/|Description|
|---|---|
|Organizational Structure and Personnel Size|• Redefine the roles and responsibilities of civilian employees and their areas of assignment • Change the personnel size and allocation, etc.|
|Recruitment|• Rational and flexible hiring process • Shorten Job advertising duration in extraordinary circumstances such • Increase efficiency of recruitment as the state of emergency • Recruitment from communities by linking with local schools, etc.|
|Employee welfare benefits|• Extending housing assistance to the civilian workforce • Access to medication through military healthcare institutions • Increase of allowances and benefits • More paid leave, increase in welfare facilities-related benefits, etc.|
|Personnel management|• Increase of extra promotion points awarded for accepting assignments in remote or contact areas • Improvement of personnel exchange between • Introduction of personality tests for civilian employees|
|Education and training|• Enhancement of the curriculum of the defense management program • Creation of a mid-level leadership program • Introduction of a continuous education program for civilian staff • Increase in educational opportunities including courses taught by outside institutions, etc.|


**Recruitment** Although the eligibility requirements for civilians to work for the

military as well as the types of tasks for which they are hired are mostly

the same across all branches of the armed forces, they are currently recruited separately by
individual services. This is also the case for units under the direct control of the Ministry
of National Defense, which also conduct their own recruitment. To address inefficiencies
resulting from this practice, in terms of both cost and manpower, a trial phase of a
consolidated recruitment process has recently been launched. Under this initiative, workers
recruited for units under the direct control of the Ministry of National Defense for grade-6
or lower positions are selected through a consolidated process by the services. Changes
were made to the rule requiring a job to be advertised for 20 days so that the duration can
be shortened in certain extraordinary circumstances, including the state of emergency.
Going forward, to improve the efficiency of recruitment, the application and review process
will become fully electronic to eliminate the need for applicants to submit hard copies of
supporting documents such as a diploma, license or certificate and for recruiters to sift
through reams of paperwork. Moreover, a special recruitment program will be designed for
remote, rural areas including islands to facilitate recruitment from communities by linking
with local schools.


**Employee Welfare Benefits** Even though civilian military workers are often assigned

to contact areas or remote areas with poor housing

conditions, no housing assistance has been available to them until now. To redress this
situation, efforts are currently in progress to provide housing assistance to civilian employees
stationed in distant corners of the country. Moreover, the exemption that allows activeduty personnel to receive medications from military medical institutions, even after the
pharmaceutical reform that prohibits dispensing of drugs by doctors, does not apply to
civilian military workers. An initiative is currently underway to amend the Pharmaceutical
Affairs Act so that the exemption can also be extended to civilian personnel. Meanwhile,
in an effort to improve the overall welfare of civilian employees, allowances and benefits


-----

including reimbursements for expenses are being upwardly adjusted. Civilian personnel’s
access to military welfare facilities will also be broadened progressively.


**Personnel Management** In order to incentivize civilian employees to accept assign
ments in remote locations or contact areas, extra promotion

points awarded to those who take on assignments in these locations have been raised. A new
rule was also introduced to give preferential consideration to transfer request by employees
who have completed a service period of two to three years in these areas. Moreover, the
scope of the personnel exchange program, which was previously limited to reciprocal
changes of staff, has been broadened to reduce workplace complaints and increase job
satisfaction. Meanwhile, as part of an effort to create a positive work environment and
prevent accidents, personality tests are now administered for civilian employees to test their
adaptability to the military workplace culture. In addition, equivalent military grades for
civilian job positions, proposed by each of the services, will be reviewed in coming times,
along with issues related to performance evaluation.


**Education and Training** The Ministry of National Defense is undertaking measures to

strengthen the capabilities of the civilian military workforce. A

mid-level leadership program was created to improve the job skills of grade-4 and 5 civilian
employees and the quota of civilian employees for military education abroad and capacity
building education has been increased as well. Plans to designate mandatory courses for each
job grade and introduce a “continuous education program” are also being examined. Finally,
considering the fact that the size of civilian military personnel is expected to reach 47,000
in the long term, a plan is in the works to design and offer a common curriculum for civilian
staff, consisting of basic subjects relevant to the performance of tasks and leadership training,
in addition to job skills training provided by each respective service.


-----

**Section**

**3** **Civil-Military Cooperation; together with the people**

The Ministry of National Defense is implementing measures to mitigate disturbance to civilians
residing near military bases such as restrictions on development, noise and dust associated
with training or operations, while pursuing a culture of coexistence by creating programs to
stimulate the local economy. The MND is also striving to provide service members with skills
to excel post-retirement with variety of military life cycle-based career programs, including
personal growth opportunities and post-discharge career development and planning support.

**1. Military Facilities that Coexist with the Local Community**


**Easing Restrictions in Military Facility** To protect the property rights of landowners

**Protection Zones** within military facility protection zones and

help revitalize the local economy, the Ministry

of National Defense has progressively eased land use restrictions within these areas over the
years. Particular efforts have been made to relax overly restrictive rules applying to frontline
areas. In areas where zoning restrictions cannot be altogether removed, more and more
decision-making power is being delegated to local administrations to simplify the approval
process for construction projects for the greater convenience of landowners and developers.



**[Figure 6-9]** **Repeal or Easing of Land Use Restrictions within Military Facility Protection Zones**


unit: ㎢

|Area Year|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|2021|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Repeal|50|1.6|28|27|20|25|37|337|77|100.7|9.1|
|Eased|5.7|6.3|0.8|46.5|4.5|0.2|0|13.2|0.5|1.3|3.7|


Recently, a wholesale review has begun to re-examine all military facility protection zones

across the country. The goal is to reduce their footprint by repealing protections in all areas
where zoning restrictions are not strictly necessary. The necessity of zoning protections will
be re-evaluated in both contact and non-contact areas as well as all military bases including
air bases in an active effort relax the current military facility protection scheme.

Moreover, to minimize the need for the designation of new military facility protection

zones, the Ministry of National Defense will seek to amend the Protection of Military
Bases and Installations Act to broaden the range of allowable activities within the existing
protection zones.

The Ministry of National Defense will keep up its efforts to minimize the impact of

military facility protection zones on host communities by introducing changes to laws and
regulations, necessary to ease land use restrictions within these zones.


-----

**Compensating Local Residents for** Previously, the only way for residents affected

**Military Airfield and Firing Range Noise** by noise from military operations or training

exercises to receive compensation was to

file a complaint in court. In November 2019, the Military Airfield and Firing Range Noise
Prevention and Compensation Act (hereafter, the “Military Noise Compensation Act”),
proposed by the Ministry of National Defense, was passed. Under the new law, residents
in high noise areas can receive compensation by simply filing a claim with the Ministry of
National Defense without having to go through the lengthy legal proceedings.

In accordance with the Military Noise Compensation Act, the Ministry of National Defense

issues compensation to residents impacted by noise from military activities, on an annual basis.
In 2022, 415,000 residents were awarded KRW117.7 billion in total compensation. To facilitate
the compensation process, the Ministry of National Defense recently began a pilot operation of a
noise monitoring system, measuring noise levels in areas surrounding military facilities.

The Ministry of National Defense intends to continuously increase public engagement

and communication efforts on related issues by organizing information sessions for local
administrations and residents as well as holding hearings at the National Assembly. A noise
reduction and compensation plan (“Basic Noise Prevention and Compensation Plan”) will be
established every five years to guide the effort to minimize the disruptive effects of military
noise on local communities and provide a stable environment for military activities.


**Relocating Military Air Base** In accordance with the Special Act on the Relocation

**Under Just Process** of Military Air Bases and Support Therefor enacted

in 2013, the Ministry of National Defense is currently

pursuing relocations of Daegu, Suwon, and Gwangju Air Bases to new locations, for which
there were relocation requests from the local governments.

In August 2020, Bian-myeon (Uiseong-gun) and Sobo-myeon (Gunwi-gun) were selected

as the new site (relocation site) for Daegu Air Base. After a relocation petition was submitted
by Daegu Metropolitan City in 2014, it took six years Daegu Air Base to find a new home.
The process was long and arduous due to the clash of interests between communities.
Nonetheless, thanks to the Ministry of National Defense’s persistent effort to communicate
and cooperate with local administrations and residents, the conflict resolution processes are
also significant. This project is also significant in that the new site were selected through a
democratic decision-making process by conducting a “deliberative citizens’ opinion poll.”
The planning stage of the construction of the new integrated air base has been completed,
including the locations of the runway, key airport facilities and estimated project cost. An
“Donation and Concession”plan (draft) has been submitted along with the MOA with Daegu
Metropolitan City (draft) to the Ministry of Economy and Finance. Plans to support the
development of community and welfare facilities in the surrounding areas of the new air base
are also forming into shape.

Discussions are also actively underway with USFK about the relocation of U.S. military

installations into the new air base. In October 2020, the Ad Hoc subcommittee for Relocation
of U.S. Facilities and Areas within ROK Military Air Bases (MARSC) was formed under the
SOFA Joint Committee, with Joint Working Groups (JWG) for Umbrella Agreement (UA),


-----

Engineering Memorandum of Understanding (E-MOU), and Master Planning (MP) under it.
The JWGs are currently working on the UA, laying out the basic principles to abide by for
the relocation of U.S. military facilities, related implementation procedures and the E-MOU
on details of the process. The group is also discussing issues related to the Master Plan for
U.S. facilities, including the arrangement of facilities at the new site, as well as project costs.

As for the relocation of the Gwangju Military Air Base, although an appropriate candidate

site was identified within the Southern Jeolla Province through a selection process that began
in February 2018, the project is at a standstill for the moment due to the objection from the
local administration and residents of the host site region. In April 2021, on the suggestion
from Gwangju Metropolitan City and the Southern Jeolla Province, the Office of the Prime
Minister set up a consultative group, made up of relevant agencies. It was decided that
relocation costs will first be calculated for each prospective site and then measures to support
host communities will be developed based on the estimated costs. Accordingly, in October
2022, the Ministry of National Defense jointly calculated the relocation costs for each of the
sites with Gwangju Metropolitan City and the Southern Jeolla Province. Support measures
for the host communities will be designed next by the consultative group and candidate sites
will be chosen among towns that respond favorably to the support measures proposed.

For the relocation of the Suwon Military Air Base, the Hwaong zone in Hwaseong-si was

selected as a candidate site in February 2017. Since then, there have been ongoing tensions
between the City of Suwon and Hwaseong. The Ministry of National Defense has decided to
put the project on hold until a common ground can be reached amongst stakeholders through
a joint dispute resolution committee with concerned local self-governments and roundtables
with civic organizations. The Ministry of National Defense intends to carry out all its air base
relocation projects in a fair and transparent manner through dialogue and persuasion.


**Return of Private and Public Land Occupied** In the past, during the process of establ
**without Authorization** ishing or reorganizing military bases, the

military came to inadvertently occupy

some private and public land to which it did not have legal rights, caused by failure to perform
a boundary survey, urgent operational requirement, or the inability to locate the landowner.
To protect the property rights of Korean citizens, the Ministry of National Defense is
identifying both private and public land that is occupied by the military without appropriately
compensating the owners and redressing the situation under an ongoing project.

Parcels the military needs to continue using are purchased, while those that will be used

only temporarily are leased. Meanwhile, parcels that are no longer used as a result of the
relocation of a base or the redeployment of troops are returned to their owners after restoring
them to their previous condition by removing all buildings and structures, remediating soil,
and removing pollution and contaminants. Between 2019 and 2021, the military’s land tenure
was brought into compliance with property laws on 7.41 million square meters of land. In
2022, the budget allocated to this project was increased by 16% from 2021 and an additional
3.31 million square meters of land was purchased, leased, or returned to the owners.

Moreover, cases handled under this project are no longer limited to those that were brought

to the attention of the Ministry of National Defense through civil petitions. In 2019, close to


-----

15,000 landowners were notified of the fact that their property was occupied by the military
in part or in whole without their permission or due process and was provided information
about how to seek government compensation. Thanks to this proactive approach, the total
compensation awarded, which previously averaged to KRW 1.5 billion annually, rose sharply
to KRW 24.1 billion over the three-year period between 2019 and 2022, which is a great step
forward in the protection of the property rights of citizens.

The Ministry of National Defense will progressively increase the budget for the program

and expand its scope to bring all land that is unlawfully occupied by the military into legal
compliance in a timely manner to thereby strengthen the Korean public’s confidence in the
armed forces.


**Removal of Unused, Abandoned Structures** To do away with unnecessary sources of

inconvenience for the public and make

military facilities a less intrusive presence for civilian communities, the Ministry of National
Defense has been removing or renovating unused or abandoned structures and installations.

In late 2018, the Ministry of National Defense conducted a full inspection of all unused

or abandoned facilities in and outside military bases to assess their operationality. 9,120
facilities, identified through this inspection, were removed or demolished by 2021.

In 2022, a new round of inspection was conducted, this time, to identify facilities that

could impede land use planning by local administrations and dilapidated structures that are
disruptive to the surrounding landscape or could become crime-ridden area. 1,500 such
buildings and structures, selected based on urgency and operationality, were pulled down.
The removal and demolition of unused or abandoned facilities will continue into 2023. The
Ministry of National Defense intends to continue to earmark funding for related programs to
create a safe and appealing environment for local communities.

Removal and Demolition of Unused or Abandoned Facilities (before and after)


**Civilian-Military Cooperation in** The Ministry of National Defense is rest
**Contact Areas and Multi-function Towns** ructuring the armed forces to transform the

current manpower-intensive forces into a

technology-intensive force. As part of this restructuring process, many units of the armed
forces have been consolidated, re-organized, redeployed or dissolved.

The downsizing of the armed forces is expected to have a particularly seismic impact


-----

on communities in the contact areas of the Gangwon Province where troops account for
a significant share of both the local economy and populations. In December 2019, in
recognition of the fact that the contact area communities have long maintained a close
relationship with the military and contributed to national security, the Ministry of National
Defense entered into an MOU for cooperation and shared success with Gangwon Province
and five Gangwon counties in the frontline areas (Goseong, Yanggu, Inje, Cheorwon,
Hwacheon) that are severely impacted by the reduction of troops.

During 2022, a “Shared Success Conference” was convened six times, discussing practical

challenges facing contact area residents and how the armed forces can be better integrated
into local communities and work together to achieve shared success. The Ministry of
National Defense will continue to maintain dialogue with these communities to build mutual
trust, undertake measures to revitalize the local economy and improve conditions for troops
stationed in these areas.

Moreover, facilities that are scattered across multiple sites will be consolidated in a few

strategic locations, both to increase the efficiency of military activities and make room for
multi-function civilian-military towns. The multi-function civilian-military town is a project
to create infrastructure for mixed civilian and military use. These towns will consist of a
military district where operations and training exercises are carried out and a mixed civilianmilitary district with residential facilities, amenities, and schools for service personnel, their
families, and local residents. The mixed civilian-military district will be designed in a way to
spur development and socioeconomic advancement of local communities.

**2. Environmentally Aware Military Management**


**23)**
Soiled water generated from
human activity or industrial
processes, containing liquid
or solid waste (Article 2 of the
Sewerage Act)

**24)**
Water containing liquid or
solid water contaminants
that cannot be safely used
without treatment (Article
2 of the Water Environment
Conservation Act)


**Increasing and Improving Military Pollution** To prevent waste water[23)] and contami
**Control Facilities** nated water[24)] from flowing into

public waters, the Ministry of National

Defense has set up water treatment plants across military facilities and conducts regular
inspections to ensure that they are safe and in good working order. Sewer systems at some
sites have been connected to municipal systems to make use of public wastewater treatment
facilities in an active effort to preserve water quality.

Meanwhile, to preserve the soil environment, oil storage tanks in military bases, which

fall into the category of “specific facilities subject to soil contamination control”[25)] under the
Soil Environment Conservation Act, are managed with special care. The surrounding soil
is regularly tested for contamination and sites with contaminated soil are remediated using
appropriate procedures. Moreover, to eliminate the risk of soil contamination, caused by
oil spill, underground oil pipelines were replaced by aboveground pipes[26)] and containment
dikes[27)] were constructed for aboveground oil tanks. Under a project that ended in 2022,
aboveground oil pipelines were constructed at 7,025 total sites and containment dikes were
installed at 7,169 sites. Active maintenance is planned to address any degradation that
may occur in the operating life of these facilities. Regular inspections of oil storages and
wastewater treatment plants will be coupled with the frequent patrol of their surrounding


**25)**
Facilities that are liable to
cause noticeable contamination
of soil, requiring special
management (Article 2 of the
Soil Environment Conservation
Act), including oil storage tanks
of 20,000ℓ or larger capacity

**26)**
Aboveground pipelines are
easier to maintain than
underground pipelines and
enable easy and rapid access to
the site of accidents to repair
damaged section and clean up
oil spills

**27)**
Tray-shaped containment
system for aboveground oil
tanks


-----

areas to prevent accidents in a continuing effort to strengthen the confidence of local
communities in the management of military facilities by the armed forces.

Soil Remediation Soil Contamination Prevention System (fuel tank containment dike)


**Green Retrofitting of Military Facilities** To avoid the exposure of our troops to hazard
ous substances, the Ministry of National

Defense is carrying out measures to mitigate asbestos in older buildings and minimize health
risks at work sites.

In accordance with the Asbestos Safety Management Act, the Ministry of National Defense

has appointed “building safety officers” in charge of managing the risk of asbestos exposure.
Safety information sessions are regularly conducted and asbestos containing structures are
encapsulated or sealed depending on the size of affected areas and based on the results of
risk assessment. However, in 2019, in an effort to provide a more fundamental solution, all
facilities were tested for asbestos and a plan was drawn up to demolish 12,494 buildings that
tested positive. Over the subsequent four-year period (2019-2022), 9,428 of them (75.2%)
were pulled down. The remaining 3,066 buildings are planned for rapid removal as well. In
the interim, mitigation measures as required under the Asbestos Safety Management Act will
be taken to contain the risk posed by these buildings.

Meanwhile, to protect the health of service personnel and create a pleasant work

environment, service members carrying out maintenance or woodwork-related tasks are
provided with personal protective gear and are made to undergo health checks at least once
a year. Service members found to have health issues are hospitalized and work methods and
staff size are readjusted at the concerned workplace. The work environment is examined
once a year at 2,500 sites. At sites where air pollution indicators are above an unhealthy
threshold, equipment such as ventilation and dust collection systems[28)] are improved to
bring the air quality up to a compliant level. Every five years, a survey is conducted to assess
the work environment and the status of health management at military facilities across the
country and make improvement on issues identified.


**Addition and Expansion of Ammunition** Ammunition demilitarization refers to the

**Demilitarization Facilities** process of making ammunition unusable for **28)**

military purposes by mutilating, destroying, A system for collecting and

eliminating solid or liquid

altering, and scraping them. In the past, retired munitions were demilitarized by incinerating particles suspended in the air


-----

or igniting them at outdoor sites, which
frequently resulted in the contamination of
soil and even caused wildfire. In order to
remedy these issues, efforts are currently
underway to expand demilitarization
facilities that can dispose of waste
ammunition in a more environmentallyfriendly manner and expand the capacity of
these facilities.

A Newly-constructed Ammunition Demilitarization Plant

The first ammunition demilitarization

plant was constructed in 2012, in Yeong-dong, Northern Chungcheong Province. This
plant included incinerators, elution, and disassembly facilities. In 2021, thermal incinerator
afterburners and disassembly facilities for large-size ammunition were added, which are
operating normally as of July 2022. Previously, these demilitarization facilities handled
mostly small arms ammunition, but they now have the capacity to annually dispose of
1,200 tons of ammunition of 100 varieties including large-size ammunition and projectiles.
Furthermore, they have equipment to filter harmful air pollutants produced during the
incineration process and their emission concentration data are published in real time on the
neon display boards operated by the Geumgang Environmental Office and myeon offices
of surrounding towns. Wastewater generated from demilitarization facilities are treated and
re-utilized, using internal purification and recycling systems. Furthermore, the byproduct of
demilitarization, such as gunpowder, bullet shells, and lead are sold to generate additional
income for the government treasury and maximize the efficiency of recycling. The military is
currently working on a plan to further upgrade its ammunition demilitarization capacity. New
submunition disassembly facility is being constructed to be able to dispose of submunitions
within cluster munitions, as well plasma incinerators to dispose of flares and illuminating
projectiles.

**3. Supporting the Personal and Professional Growth of Service Members**


**More Personal and Professional Development** To provide service members with pro
**Opportunities for Armed Service Personnel** fessional development opportunities, the

Ministry of National Defense has put

into place a wide range of educational programs. First, service members who were enlisted
while in college are guaranteed continuity of education through the distance learning course.
They are also awarded academic credits for their service experience. Through the distance
learning course, service members attend online classes conducted by universities they were
enrolled with before enlistment to earn credits. In 2022, 176 universities including Seoul
National University participated in this course. To encourage broad participation, 80% of
tuitions for the online classes are supported by the Ministry of National Defense. Experiences
gained through military service in a variety of fields are furthermore recognized as learning
experiences and are awarded academic credits. This program first began in 2019 with twelve


-----

universities including Gyeongin National University of Education. Today, the number of
participating universities has increased to 76, including Seoul National University. Second,
service members with an education level of high school or below and are currently preparing
for self-taught higher education examinations[29)] or GED (General Equivalency Diploma)
exams, are given an allowance for books and academic supplies and are provided tutors.
Meanwhile, e-MU[30)] allows members of personnel who are graduates of specialized military
vocational high school to attain an associate degree while serving in the military.

Third, to assist the attainment of national technical qualification certifications by service

members, the Ministry of National Defense administers qualification examinations, on behalf
of the Ministry of Employment Labor, twice a year for 83 types of certifications including
the information processing industry technician certificate. Meanwhile, license exams for
forklift and bulldozer operators are administered year-round. Close to 18,000 active-duty
service members obtain national technical qualification certifications through this program
every year. However, this number dropped sharply between 2020 and 2022 as most skills
exams that require in-person tests were postponed or discontinued due to the COVID-19
pandemic. [Figure 6-10] below provides the details of educational support and the number of
new certifications acquired per year.

**[Figure 6-10] Educational Support and Attainment of National Technical Qualification Certifications by Year**

As of December 2022, units: institutions, persons

|/|2018|2019|2020|2021|2022|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Universities offering distance learning course for armed service personnel|145|154|161|173|176|
|Universities awarding credits for military service experience|-|17|35|63|76|
|GED exam takers|258|117|89|102|66|
|Service members that obtained a new national technical qualification certification|19,530|17,920|8,914|6,224|11,178|



*The skills test portion of national technical qualification certification exams was postponed (2nd half of 2020) or discontinued (1st half

of 2021) due to COVID-19.

Since 2018, the Ministry of National Defense provides financial support for personal

development activities by service members.[31)] Up to KRW 120,000 per person is provided
annually to subsidize the cost of language proficiency tests, professional certification exams,
textbooks and other learning supplies. The Ministry of National Defense plans to continuously
broaden the range of programs to support the personal growth of armed service members.


**29)**
Self-taught individuals can
receive a government-issued
BA degree by successfully
passing a four Qualifying
Examinations (Liberal-Arts,
Major-Basic, Major-Advanced,
and Comprehensive)

**30)**
e-MU (Electronic-Military
University) offers associate
degree programs for enlisted
and non-commissioned officers
on extended service duty, who
are graduates of specialized
military vocational high
schools. These programs are
provided in cooperation with six
higher learning institutions and
consist of both online and inperson courses.

**31)**
During the pilot phase in
2018, the program had a total
budget of KRW 100 million
(KRW 50,000 per person, per
calendar year, 50% of eligible
costs borne by personnel). The
program’s budget increased
to KRW 2 billion (KRW 50,000
per person, per calendar year,
50% of eligible costs borne
by personnel) in 2019, KRW 8
billion in 2020 (KRW 100,000
per person, per calendar year,
20% of eligible costs borne by
personnel), KRW 23.5 billion
in 2021 (KRW 100,000 per
person, per calendar year,
20% of eligible costs borne
by personnel), and KRW 38.7
billion in 2022 (KRW 120,000
per person, per calendar year,
20% of eligible costs borne by
personnel).


**Business Startup Support Project** In order to prevent military service from causing

discontinuity in the education or professional career

of service members and promote a productive service environment, the Ministry of National
Defense has implemented a comprehensive multi-stage business enterprise startup training
program. During the first stage, focused on increasing service members’ interest in business
startup, communities are formed to allow those with shared entrepreneurial interests to come
together and network and basic education is provided on relevant topics to help them gain
a better understanding of key issues and spread entrepreneurial spirit. Service members are


-----

encouraged to create an entrepreneurship
club with like- minded peers within their
units. Startup instructors visit units with
entrepreneurship clubs and conduct classes
on foundational subjects. By learning
about business areas of their interest and
discussing startup ideas, service members
are naturally brought to develop knowledge
of key issues. Defense Startup Competition (August 2022)

Second stage is designed to provide

service members that are seriously considering an entrepreneurial career after leaving the
military with more advanced knowledge about business startup. Mentors with expertise in the
startup process visit units with an entrepreneurship club and offer professional consulting on
the startup ideas its members have developed.

Third stage is composed of various startup competition hosted by the Ministry of National

Defense and the respective services. These competitions are meant to provide an opportunity
for the participants to further develop their ideas and put them to test. The teams selected
at the Ministry of National Defense’s startup competition are moved up to the next level
to compete in the government-wide contest, which forces them to further hone their ideas,
concepts and push their innovations to the limit.

During the fourth and last stage, teams that emerged successful in the competitive stage are

provided consulting, technical and funding support for their startup projects in collaboration
with the Ministry of SMEs and Startups. By nurturing such business ideas of these service
members, the startup support program provides the opportunity to make their time spent
serving the nation into a productive one with potential for personal and professional growth.
By recognizing and nurturing the entrepreneurial potential of service members early on, the
startup support program, contributes to the national efforts to foster future business leaders.
From 2022, the program has been wholly funded by the Ministry of National Defense and is
no longer dependent on corporate sponsorship, which makes its operation more stable and
consistent. The Ministry of National Defense will continuously expand the range of startup
support by adding new mentorship programs in emerging Fourth Industrial Revolution
technology fields to more meaningfully contribute to the development of future business
leaders and the sustainable growth of the national economy.


**Assistance for a Successful** The Ministry of National Defense has made a broad

**Return to Civilian Life** range of resou-rces available to assist service members

in their transition to civilian life. Personalized career

counseling is offered to service members expecting to be discharged in the near future.
Meanwhile, the career development program, designed to closely reflect the life cycle
of armed forces personnel, from enlistment to discharge, and their individual profiles,
helps them plan and prepare for a professional career in civilian society and minimize the
disruptive effects of military service on education or professional growth.

The career development program is conducted in three phases. During the first phase, basic


-----

coaching is provided to all service members on career planning. Under an outreach program,
professional career counselors visit the respective units to talk about the job market and
the most promising career paths in recent years, conduct vocational aptitude tests and selfdiagnosis tests, and offer personalized counseling.

During the second phase, job skills training is offered to service members who wish to

receive such training. To help increase their odds of landing a job in the civilian sector, job
skills training is provided throughout the year in desired career fields, in collaboration with
the Ministry of Employment and Labor and the Ministry of SMEs and Startups. Job training
is conducted outside military bases, at civilian training centers and is attended on average
by some 5,000 service members annually. The size of these training sessions will continuously
expand through the coming years. Meanwhile, an SME internship program is also available for
service members to familiarize themselves with the work environment in their desired fields.

During the third and final phase, tailored training is provided to service members that

completed the first two stages of the program to help them meet the requirements of the
specific company they wish to work for. This training is provided in cooperation with
relevant government agencies and veteran-friendly firms and is focused on increasing the
actual chances of finding a new job. Programs such as “Career Academy,” a personalized
job search program, “Employer-sponsored Job Training,” a program in which training is
directly provided by a prospective employer, and “Traveling Career Information Seminar,”
are conducted on a monthly basis to offer direct career opportunities to as many service
members as possible.

Career Education for Service Members Employer-Sponsored Job Trainingg


**Career Transition Services for Medium** The Ministry of National Defense is streng
**and Long-term Service Members** thening life cycle-based career transition

services for medium and long-term service

members who served for five or more years in the military. By improving the career
transition training system and increasing the period of transition services, the odds of landing
a civilian job have been improved. In 2019, eligibility for military service planning education
was expanded to include second lieutenants and staff sergeants, in addition to captains and
sergeants first class. The military service planning education program is aimed at helping
incoming officers and NCOs to gain a better understanding about the life cycle of the service
career and plan ahead of time on their own terms, in relation to their life goals.


-----

In 2020, to assist with the systematic and stable preparation of officers and NCOs that

are soon to be discharged from the military for transition to a civilian career, the “Career
Design”[32)] program and the “Personalized Basic Career Transition”[33)] program were
launched. Those who completed the basic education program can choose to move on to
an advanced program[34)] to train further in preparation for one’s career. Starting in 2021, all
officers and NCOs who will be discharged in two years or less are required to attend a career
design education program so that medium-term service members can begin their preparation
for transition to a civilian career in a timely manner, using a planned approach. By requiring
medium and long-term service members to complete a basic course package and a variety
of personalized training (up to two programs), the Ministry of National Defense strives to
improve their employment prospectives and maximize the possibility of finding employment
during the career transition support period.

Moreover, for those medium and long-term service members who do not qualify for

the military pension, the Ministry of National Defense is currently in discussion with the
Ministry of Patriots and Veterans Affairs and the Ministry of Finance and Economy to
increase the career transition grant to assist their successful reintegration into civilian society.
Taking into consideration the manpower and funding situation of each service, the Ministry
of National Defense will also review the possibility increasing the length of the career
transition support period and using them in installments to support medium-term service
members, for whom reintegration into a civilian career is often more challenging.


**More Jobs for Veterans, Standardization** The Ministry of National Defense is making

**of Military Occupational Competencies** continuous efforts to create new military jobs

for veterans so that the experience and skills

they acquired during their service can be put to productive use.

Within the military, new non-combat positions are being created in administrative,

educational, logistics, and other areas to expand employment for both veterans and civilians.
The Ministry of National Defense is also closely working with the National Police Agency,
the National Fire Agency, and the Korea Coast Guard to create more job opportunities for
veterans in areas outside the military, where their experiences can be valuable assets. To
broaden veterans’ access to public sector jobs based on their military credentials, applicant
eligibility requirements for competitive experience-based recruitment have been eased
and job families and skills categories for which written tests are waived, such as security


**32)**
This program assists in
exploring and setting new
career goals based on skills and
capabilities acquired during
military service.

**33)**
The program is aimed at
improving the employment
prospects of medium and
long-term officers and NCOs,
expecting to be discharged
from military service in the
near future, by training them
on skill sets that are tailored
to their civilian career goal
(employment, business
startup, agriculture).

**34)**
A program to provide officers
and NCOs with qualifications
necessary to be competitive
in a civilian career according
to their job capabilities and
individual profile


Armed Forces Job Fair (September 2022)


-----

instructors, have been increased.

Moreover, the Ministry of National Defense organizes a job fair two to three times every

year to connect service members that are soon to leave the military and are in search of a
civilian job and potential employer. Although the job fair was held mainly online during the
past two years, due to the pandemic, in 2022, a large-scale fair was organized in a hybrid
style, combining in-person and online sessions. In-person job interviews and career inquiries
between job seekers and employers were coupled with a variety of ancillary events, such
as career counseling sessions, including one-on-one mentoring sessions with those that
currently work in professional fields that are of interest to service members. The career talk
and the job search seminar were live-streamed on YouTube so that service members who
were not able to attend the fair could participate virtually.

The Ministry of National Defense also recognizes the best employers for veterans through

an annual award program, during which commendation certificates and plaques are issued,
and organizes roundtables with CEOs and human resources managers of companies to
maintain close ties with potential employers, in a continuing effort to broaden employment
opportunities for veterans.

In 2015, the government introduced the National Competency Standards (NCS)[35) ]

to encourage competency-based manpower development and hiring practices among
government agencies, public institutions, as well as private-sector firms. The NCS-based
hiring culture has gradually taken hold in recent years. However, competencies gained in
the military have not been duly recognized in the hiring process because of differences in
terminology between the NCS and military job descriptions and the lack of an equivalence
or reciprocity system between the two, even though many of the tasks carried out by armed
forces personnel are the same or similar to those in the civil sector.

Currently, a project is underway to harmonize military competency categories with the

NCS so that veterans are given credentials for their experiences and skills in corresponding
military task areas. Under this project, competencies that match the NCS will be entered in
the certificate of experience so that they may count toward academic credits and be presented
for the consideration of recruiters and occupational certificate examiners.

Task categories are being standardized, with competency units (codes) established in

**[Figure 6-11]** **Using Military Service Credentials for Civilian Career Advancement**


**35)**
A government-created standard
classification system for
knowledge, skills, and abilities
required to perform job tasks
across different industries,
organized according to the
sector and task level


**Military** **Civilian**

**experience** **experience**

**NCS**

**Tasks performed**

**in the military** **Standardization of all job** **Issuance of a competency**

**positions and duties** **certificate**

-  Use of the standard military job description template -  Up to 5 competency categories per position (MND)

-  Competencies selected for all job

positions

**Competencies saved in the “NCS Bank”**

**Competencies registered** -  Discussions underway for the

**in the Defense Personnel** recognition of credentials earned in the

**Information System by unit of** military (Ministry of Employment and

**assignment and job position** Labor, Human Resources Development

Service of Korea)

**[Stage 1: competency analysis]** **[Stage 2: selection/registration of competency categories]** **[Stage 3: Issuance /accumulation of credentials]** **[Stage 4: NCS-based hiring]**


-----

**[Figure 6-12]** **Civilian Recognition of Military Occupational Training and Experience – Project Timeline**


**Phase 1 (2019-2024)** **Phase 2 (2025- )**

**Creating the basis for the transfer of military** **Broadening the civilian recognition of**
**experience into civilian career development** **military credentials**



-  Standardize military occupational competencies (selection of

competencies by job position)

-  Revise the military certificate of experience and pilot the new

format

-  Construct a military occupational competency database within

the Defense Personnel Information System



-  Official issuance of a competency-based certificate of

experience

-  Smart Human Resources Management System reflected and

utilized

-  Credentials saved in the NCS Bank


accordance with the NCS, for each armed services. A standard job description template is
being introduced and a database is constructed to manage related data. The first phase of this
project, which will include the revision of the format of the certificate of experience and the
amendment of relevant laws and regulations, is expected to come to completion by 2024.

During the second phase of the project, scheduled to kick off in 2025, the Ministry

of National Defense’s Smart Human Resources Management System, currently under
construction, will be linked to the NCS Bank, a system by the Ministry of Employment and
Labor, which is also in development. This will allow training, qualifications, and experience
received and gained while serving in the military service to be more efficiently transferred to
a civilian career, while enabling a comprehensive management of related data.


-----

**Section**


###### Securing an Adequate Defense Budget and Rational Allocation of Budget Resources

Securing an adequate level of defense budget is essential in order to maintain a
comprehensive defense posture against a broad spectrum of security threats and consistently
implement key defense policies. The Ministry of National Defense makes utmost efforts to
secure budgetary resources needed to build a strong, cutting-edge technology-based armed
forces with high morale. Furthermore, continuous efforts are made to more rationally allocate
budget resources by ensuring that the expenditure planning is closely and appropriately
aligned with policy priority.


**1. Importance of an Adequate Defense Budget**

National defense is a public good and the defense budget is a public budget allocated for
defense programs conducted to produce this good in accordance with applicable defense
policies. An adequate level of defense budget is determined by considering a comprehensive
range of factors, including the costs associated with building, operating, and maintaining the
military and available fiscal resource.

A country’s defense spending tends to increase proportionally to the level of security

threats it faces. As can be seen in [Figure 6-13], defense expenditure in countries facing
relatively lower levels of security threat, such as France, the UK, Japan, China, and
Germany, is only 1-2% of the total GDP. On the other hand, in countries that are parties to
geopolitical conflicts or standoffs, such as Israel, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Pakistan,
defense expenditure accounts for 3% or more of the total GDP. In 2021, the Republic of
Korea’s defense spending represented 2.55% of its GDP, which is higher than the global
average of 1.85%, but lower than the corresponding average among countries that are prone
to conflicts or standoffs.

The Republic of Korea is in a military standoff with North Korea and is faced with

front-line security threats, including nuclear and missile threats. North Korea has recently
carried out various types of back-to-back military provocations, ratcheting up tensions on
the Korean peninsula. To firmly respond to these threats and build a basis for peace on the
Korean peninsula, it is important for the Republic of Korea to acquire superiority North
Koreain defense capability by building a cutting-edge technology-based force and maintain
a robust military readiness posture.

Moreover, in light of the paradigm shift in future warfare and declining military

manpower, a timely response to adapt to the evolving environment is also crucial. The ROK
Armed Forces must harness the latest technologies by integrating them across all areas of
national defense as well as strengthen defense capabilities in new areas including the cyber
and space domains.


-----

**[Figure 6-13]** **Defense Budget of Major Countries in Relation to their GDP(as of 2021)**

**Germany**


1.33% **Iraq**

**U.S.** **UK** 3.65% **Republic of Korea**

3.29% 2.30% 2.55%

**Israel** **Iran**
5.05% 2.31%

2.02%

**France** 3.61% 0.97%

**Pakistan** **Japan**

5.54%

**Saudi Arabia**

1.23%
**China**

7.28%

**Kuwait**

 Source: “The Military Balance 2022” (International Institute for Strategic Studies, February 2022); ROK government statistics used

for ROK expenditure


Continuous investment must be made to ensure required logistics support, facilities, as

well as education and training, while being able to respond to the growing call for a new
culture of respect for military service and improvement of the service environment to bring
it in line with the expectations of the new generations by complying to their qualitative and
quantitative demands.

Proactively and effectively responding to omnidirectional security threats and the

changing defense environment, as well as meeting the Korean public’s expectations about
military culture and the service environment is possible only if there is sufficient funding to
support such initiatives. Amidst increasing security threats in the international community,
governments in major countries are accelerating efforts to increase defense spending. In the
U.S., Germany, and France, in particular, even with the reduction of the overall government
budget, defense budget has been increased significantly based on the need to strengthen
capabilities to respond to security threats and prepare for future threats. In Japan, the
government plans to raise the amount of defense expenditure to 2% of GDP by 20273, which
was 0.97% in 2022.[36)]

**[Figure 6-14]** **Change in Government Budget and Defense Budget in Major Countries**


**36)**
Japan plans to spend JPY 43
trillion in Defense from 2023 to
2027 (JPY 5.4 trillion in 2022
increased to JPY 8.9 trillion in
2027; Japanese Defense Forces
Reform Plan).



|/|U.S. (2023)|Germany (2022)|France (2022)|Australia (2022)|Japan (2022)|China (2022)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Government budget|△1.0%|△19.1%|△0.2%|△1.7%|+0.9%|+8.4%|
|Defense budget|+3.7%|+7.2%|+4.3%|+6.6%|+1.0%|+7.1%|


-----

**2. 2023 Defense Budget**

Budget planning for the fiscal year 2023 began amid growing domestic and external
economic uncertainty, caused by soaring prices of crude oil and raw materials, persistent
supply chain disruptions, and ballooning household debt. Because of this, the government
adopted an overall conservative budgetary approach to limit governmental expenditure,
which also put constraint on the defense budget.

Despite such difficulties, the Ministry of National Defense made its best efforts to secure

an adequate level of defense funding by conveying the need to strengthen the capability to
deter and respond to omnidirectional security threats and make timely improvements in the
welfare of service members. Appreciating the gravity of the current security environment, the
government allocated a significant portion of available fiscal resources to national defense.
As a result, as it can be seen in [Figure 6-15], while the rate of increase in the government’s
total expenditures fell sharply from 8.9% in 2022 to 5.1% in 2023,[37)] the corresponding rate
for the defense budget rose from 3.4% in 2022 to 4.4% in 2023.[38)]

**[Figure 6-15]** **] Changes in the Growth Rate of Government Budget and Defense Budget (rate of change, main**

**budget basis)**

**Government budget** **Defense budget** unit: %

2.9 2.9

|Col1|0.6|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||9.5||
||9.1 8.9 8.9 8.2||
|7.|1 7.1 7.4 6.2||
||7.0 5.3 5.5 5.1 5.4 4.9||
||3.6 5.6 5.0 4.0 3.6 4.0 3.4 4.2 3.6|5.1|
||4.0||


|’09|’10|’11|’12|’13|’14|’15|’16|’17|’18|’19|’20|’21|’22|’23|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|



The defense budget for 2023 was increased to KRW 57.143 trillion to meet fiscal needs to

build strong professional military, while creating a pleasant environment and compassionate
military culture that service members can be proud of. Of this amount, KRW 40.974 trillion
was allocated to operating costs, which includes the cost of taking care of servicemembers
as well as operating and maintaining weapons systems, representing an increase of 5.7%
compared to last year. Funding for defense forces improvement, which are costs associated
with the acquisition and development of weapons systems, was increased by 1.3% from
the prior year to KRW 16.916 trillion. The breakdown of the 2023 defense budget based on
general accepted accounting principles (GAAP) is provided in [Figure 6-16].


**37)**
The government’s total
budgetary resources, excluding
funds that are legally required
to be transferred to local
municipalities (local share tax,
educational block grants), are
expected to increase by only
about 1% in 2023.

**38)**
The government announced
that defense (+4.4%) and
social welfare (+3.8%) were
two priority spending areas
(Ministry of Finance and
Economy, 2023 Budget).


-----

**[Figure 6-16]** **2023 Defense Budget (GAAP basis)**

|Program|2022 budget (A)|2023 budget (B)|Change (B-A)|%|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Defense budget|KRW 54. 6112 trillion|KRW 57.0143 trillion|KRW 2. 4031 trillion|4.4|
|Forces operating budget|KRW 37. 9195 trillion|KRW 40.0974 trillion|KRW 2. 1779 trillion|5.7|
|Forces improvement budget|KRW 16. 6917 trillion|KRW 16.9169 trillion|KRW 225.2 billion|1.3|



In light of escalating nuclear and missile threats from North Korea, the allocation of the

2023 defense budget prioritized acquisition of core military assets required to optimize the
ROK 3K Defense. Funding for the Kill Chain, the KAMD, and the KMPR - the very three
weapons systems of the ROK 3K Defense - was increased sharply from 2022 (KRW 4.8
trillion) to KRW 5.3 trillion. This will enable the Ministry of National Defense to acquire
all necessary core military assets for the ROK 3K Defense, including the 2nd F-X project,
the 2nd performance enhancement project for Cheolmae-II, long-range ship-to-ship guided
missiles, and strategic surface-to-surface guided weapons-II as planned.

The 2023 budget also proactively reflects the budget requirements related to harnessing

AI to build capabilities that are adapted to the future battlefield environment. Additionally,
number of smart units using ICT systems for security, logistics, and general operating needs
will be increased, and more cutting-edge scientific training equipment and training centers,
equipped with AR and VR-powered training systems, are also to be established. The budget
also takes account of funding needed to enhance the capabilities of reserve forces, including
the increase in the compensations for reservists who participate in mobilization drills, as well
as purchasing MILES equipment, virtual marksmanship trainers, and a smart management
system for cutting-edge reserve force training centers.

Expanding investment in defense technology R&D and enhancing the capability of

the domestic defense industry was among the key expenditure items as well. Funds were
allocated for the acquisition of the latest state-of-the-art weapons systems and the support
for the domestic production of weapons parts to pave a path to the localization of military
technology and independent national defense capabilities. Funds were also allotted to foster
the defense industry into a strategic national industry by increasing support for new and
competitive defense corporations.

Moreover, a substantial portion of budget resources was allocated to raising wages and

compensation for military service personnel and provide a more respectful and humane
service environment.

Additional funds were earmarked to pay wages that are appropriate with tasks performed

by conscripted servicemembers serving their mandatory military service. The Ministry of
National Defense plans to gradually raise their monthly wage (including the government
support to the savings plan program for such soldiers) to KRW 2.05 million by 2025. The
2023 compensation budget will allow the enlisted wage (based on a sergeant’s wage) and
the government’s savings plan contribution to be increased to KRW 1 million and KRW
300,000, respectively. The enlisted wage schedule for 2023 is shown in [Figure 6-17]. The
compensation budget also includes funding necessary to increase the short-term service
incentive by 50%.[39)] The short-term service incentive is granted to encourage applications for


**39)**
A one-time grant issued to
short-term non-commissioned
officers or officers (noncommissioned officers: KRW 5
million in 2022→
KRW 7.5 million in 2023,
Officers: KRW 6 million in 2022
→ KRW 9 million in 2023).


-----

short-term officer or NCO positions and fairly compensate them for their short-term services

**[Figure 6-17]** **Enlisted Wage Increase Planned for 2023**

|Col1|Private|Private frist class|Corporal|Sergeant|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|2022|KRW 510,100|KRW 552,100|KRW 610,200|KRW 676,100|
|2023|KRW 600,000 (+KRW 89,900)|KRW 680,000 (+KRW 127,900)|KRW 800,000 (+KRW 189,800)|KRW 1,000,000 (+KRW 323,900)|



The 2023 budget also reflects the cost of improving the standard of living in the barracks

in a way that meets the expectations of future generations of soldiers. Additional funds
were allocated to the meal program to offer soldiers with more choices of food. Cooking
equipment and utensils and meal trays will be updated and additional civilian staff will be
hired in an effort to dramatically enhance the quality of food services. Meanwhile, a new
program called “Community Eat Out”[40)] was recently launched to provide service personnel
dining out opportunities and give a much-needed break to overworked military culinary
specialists. The quality of housing in the barracks will also be improved by progressively
replacing all 8 to 10 person rooms with 2 to 4 person rooms. Military wool and woobie
blankets will be replaced with regular comforters. Modular construction,[41)] which is faster
and cheaper than traditional construction methods, will be introduced for the housing of
officers and NCOs and will later be used for housing of all personnel.

The 2023 budget also focused on the improvements in the lives and welfare of officers and

< Wool and Woobie Blankets > < Regular Comforters >


Modular Cadre Apartments (photo rendition)


**40)**
A dine out program, offered
in cooperation with local
restaurants, allowing soldiers
to eat out once a month,
covering their expense of
meals of up to KRW 13,000 per
person.

**41)**
Prefabricated buildings
with standardized units and
measurements made in a
factory setting are transported
to the building site where they
are assembled.


-----

NCOs, who have been often left out of the recent improvement in personnel welfare despite
the fact that their responsibilities have increased over the years. The platoon-level command
allowance budget allocated to a platoon commander for activities aimed at uplifting the
morale of his or her unit, such as birthday events and sporting events, will be doubled to
facilitate the performance of command duties. The allowance paid to command sergeant
majors (CSM) for activities such as managing personnel affairs related to non-commissioned
officers and providing counseling for the enlisted will be raised from KRW 200,000 to KRW
300,000 per month. The housing allowance for officers and NCOs who are not provided
housing will also be doubled. The Ministry of National Defense will continue to implement
measures to maintain the morale of its service members and enhance the quality of living
and compensation for them to properly value and appreciate their service to the country.

**[Figure 6-18]** **] Increase in Platoon Command Allowance, CSM Allowance and Housing Allowance (monthly)**

**Planned for 2023**

|/|Platoon Command Allowance (based on a 25-member platoon)|CSM Allowance (battalion or equivalent)|Housing Allowance|
|---|---|---|---|
|2022|KRW 62,500|KRW 200,000|KRW 80,000|
|2023|KRW 125,000|KRW 300,000|KRW 160,000|


**3. 2023-2027 Medium-term Defense Plan**

The medium-term defense plan provides a blueprint for the construction and maintenance of
armed forces for the upcoming five year period and allocates resources accordingly.

The 2023-2027 Medium-term Defense Plan is the first medium-term plan established

since the Yoon administration took office. In the face of increasing nuclear and missile
threats from North Korea, driving up uncertainty in the security environment, the new plan
lays focus on carrying out national tasks as planned and without compromise despite the
overall budgetary stance emphasizing fiscal discipline. In light of the gravity of the current
security environment, acquiring core military assets including the components of ROK
3K Defense was given the highest priority in budget allocation. Enhancing the military
service environment, including increasing enlisted salaries, was also given preference.
The total defense spending planned for this five-year period is KRW 331.4 trillion and
the defense budget will increase by 6.8% annually over this period. KRW 107.4 trillion
(annual average increase of 10.5%) will be spent on the acquisition and development of new
weapons systems and KRW 224 trillion (annual average increase of 5.1%) on the operation and
maintenance of armed forces and weapons systems. KRW 99.8 trillion will be invested in 272
national projects, including procurement of ROK 3K Defense capability and the increase of
enlisted salaries. Key objectives and programs under the 2023-2027 Medium-term Defense
Plan are as follows:

First, response capabilities against North Korea’s nuclear and missile threats will be

dramatically strengthened. The ROK Armed Forces will acquire overwhelming defense
capabilities based on the ROK 3K Defense, composed of Kill Chain self-defense


-----

**[Figure 6-19]** **2023-2027 Medium-term Defense Plan**

|/|2022|Year|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2023|2024|2025|2026|2027|Total|
|Defense Spending (change, %)|54.6 (3.4)|57.1 (4.6)|61.4 (7.5)|66.0 (7.5)|70.9 (7.3)|76.0 (7.3)|331.4 (6.8)|
|Forces Operating Costs (change, %) (share, %)|37.9 (5.8) (69.4)|40.1 (5.8) (70.2)|42.9 (6.9) (69.8)|45.3 (5.7) (68.6)|47.2 (4.2) (66.6)|48.5 (3.0) (63.9)|224.0 (5.1) (67.6)|
|Forces Improvement Costs (change, %) (share, %)|16.7 (△1.8) (30.6)|17.0 (2.0) (29.8)|18.5 (8.8) (30.2)|20.7 (11.8) (31.4)|23.7 (14.2) (33.4)|27.5 (16.1) (36.1)|107.4 (10.5) (32.4)|



-  2023 numbers are based on the government proposal.


unit: trillions of KRW


mechanism, KAMD missile defense system, and KMPR (Korea Massive Punishment and
Retaliation) system. The Kill Chain’s ability to detect and strike targets will be boosted
through the introduction of high-performance stealth fighters, 3,000t-class submarines
equipped with SLBM, and ship-to-surface ballistic missiles. The complex, multi-layered
defense capabilities of the KAMD system will be enhanced by continuously improving the
performance of intermediate and long-range surface-to-guided weapons systems as well
as the Patriot system. The response capabilities of the KMPR system will be bolstered by
developing high-power, super precision-strike missiles and further ramping up the infiltration
and strike capacity of special forces. In addition, to augment deterrence and response
capabilities through integration, a “Strategic Command” will be established in 2024, which
will increase the efficiency of the military command structure.

Second, in order to build the capacity to carry out integrated operations across all

domains, including space, cyberspace, and electromagnetic spectrum in addition to the
ground, maritime, and air domains, funding will be increased to develop capabilities for key
battlefield functions. In the ground domain, to strengthen precision strike capabilities for
deep areas and mobile operations capabilities, Counter-battery Radar-II, 230mm multiple
rocket launchers, and K-variant tanks and wheeled armored vehicles will be deployed. In
the maritime and amphibious domain, costal fleets will be upgraded through the integration
of cutting-edge technologies and anti-ship, anti-air, and anti-surface combat capabilities will
be boosted. To enhance division-level 3D high-speed landing operations capabilities, Ulsanclass Batch III frigates, Gumdoksuri-B Batch-II patrol vessels, and marine attack helicopters
will be fielded. In the air domain, in order to acquire air superiority within the defense zones
and improve strategic target strike capabilities, KF-21 fighter aircraft will be fielded in
tandem to upgrades to the KF-16 and F-15K fighters.

Third, funding for development of AI-powered technology-based force will also be

increased. To improve surveillance capabilities for key targets and major targets located
beyond the Military Demarcation Line, intelligence assets, including medium to highaltitude unmanned reconnaissance aircraft, will be fielded at different altitudes. Meanwhile,
to minimize manpower-intensive approaches to combat and minimize human casualties


-----

at the same as maximizing combat efficiency, continuous efforts will be made to develop
an AI-assisted manned and unmanned hybrid combat system by adding more cuttingedge unmanned weapons systems (individual battlefield visualization systems, unmanned
surveillance vehicles, etc.). Moreover, a Defense AI Center will be established in 2024 to
coordinate AI policy in the defense domain. 1,000 officers and NCOs will be trained at
specialized civilian educational institutions into AI experts by 2026. This will be coupled
with the construction and acquisition of a range of AI infrastructure, including high-quality
data, high-performance computers, and hyper-fast communications networks. The number
of smart intelligent units will be increased, broadening the military application of the latest
technological innovations.

Fourth, an array of measures will be implemented to upgrade R&D capabilities in the

defense field, foster the growth of the domestic defense industry and facilitate defense export.
Support will be stepped up for R&D on defense technologies to respond to current threats
as well as the future battlefield environment. Funding will be expanded in the development
of hypersonic, space, quantum, and unmanned autonomous weapons systems that can be
potential game changers. The government will invest in the defense industry, focusing
particularly on such areas as rapid acquisition, maximization of the performance of existing
forces, technology protection, and assist defense exports.

Fifth, to create a culture in which military service is valued and respected, the compensation

to service members will be increased as well as expense allowances and benefits for officers
and NCOs. The average monthly enlisted wage (based on a sergeant’s wage) will be
increased to KRW 1.5 million by 2025 and the government’s monthly contribution to the savings
plan for enlisted members will be raised up to KRW 550,000, resulting in the total compensation
going up to KRW 2.05 million. Service incentive payments to short-term officers and noncommissioned officers will also be continuously increased to attract more applicants.

**[Figure 6-20]** **Planned Increase in Enlisted Wages and the Government’s Contribution to the Savings Plan**

|/|2022|2023|2024|2025|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Wage (sergeant wage basis)|KRW 676,000|KRW 1 million|KRW 1.25 million|KRW 1.5 million|
|Government Contribution to the Savings Plan|KRW 141,000|KRW 300,000|KRW 400,000|KRW 550,000|


Living standards and conditions in the barracks will also be brought more closely in line

with the expectations of new generations of enlisted service members. To raise the quality
of food services, budget allocated for meals will continue to increase and the current six
types of cold weather gear will be replaced by four types of high-performance garments,
providing enhanced mobility, thermal insulation, and comfort. Meanwhile, living quarters
will also improve from the previous communal living arrangement to a more private setting
that accommodates 2 to 4 persons per room, with each being furnished with their separate
bathrooms. Mobile telemedicine system will be established by 2027 at 104 division to
brigade-size units, to ensure the timely provision of vital emergency care to save lives.


-----

Finally, the housing program for officers and NCOs will be substantially expanded. The

supply of family-size housing units (85㎡) will be increased and studio type BOQ facilities
will also be introduced. Meanwhile, officers and NCOs who are not provided with military
housing will be compensated with a housing allowance.[42)] Expense allowances for platoon
commanders and command sergeant majors will also be increased so that they are more in
line with actually incurred expenses.


**42)**
The “housing allowance”
will replace the two existing
forms of housing assistance,
namely, housing benefits and
assistance with the payment of
interest expenses on leasehold
deposit loans. The provided unit
cost will reflect the real-world
housing expense level.


-----

-----

-----

**Chapter**
# 7

**Development of a Military Culture**
**that meets the Needs of the Future**
**Generation**

**Section 1. Improved Food, Clothing, and Living �**

Conditions to meet the Expectation of
Service Members

**Section 2. Remuneration that Respects and is**

Commensurate with the Sacrifices made by
Service Members

**Section 3. Improved Service Environment that is**

Reflective of Changes in Society

**Section 4. Emphasis on the Human Rights of Service**

Members


-----

**Section**


###### Improved Food, Clothing, and Living Conditions to meet the Expectation of Service Members

Food, clothing, and living conditions are essential components for a strong military and quality
of life for service members. As such, they must be improved to match the standards expected
by the public and service members alike. The Ministry of National Defense is striving to
improve the quality of life of service members through measures such as 'soldier-selective
catering system', improvements to the quality of military gear and apparel, as well as improved
living quarters that place 2 to 4 person per room.

**1. Improved Meals for Service Members**


**Improved Meal Provisioning System that** The Ministry of National Defense has

**Caters to the Needs of Service Members** introduced a ‘soldier-selective catering

system’ in which the menu consists of a

wide range of dishes and ingredients that reflect the preference of service members, unlike
in the past when meals were cooked only with limited ingredients. The new meal program is
part of the government’s project to improve food, clothing, and living conditions of service
members (transition to a selective meal program), with the aim of raising satisfaction of
servicemembers of their quality of life. Under the previous system, menu was determined
after the procurement of ingredients, which had to be done within designated areas and
only through private contracts. As such, the list of ingredients were limited and the military
was unable to completely satisfy the diverse preferences and health concerns of the service
members. In response, the MND is gradually phasing out private contracts and improving the
procurement system so that all ingredients are to be supplied through a competitive bidding
process by 2025. Under this new system, the MND will first develop the menu and then
procure the necessary ingredients, which will allow it to provide meals that are more closely
aligned with the customer demand and hence result in improved customer satisfaction.

The main features of the new selective meal program include abolishing the regulation

mandating the inclusion of relatively expensive or unpopular food items in the menu. As such,
each unit is now free to choose whether to include popular dishes like donkatsu (pork cutlets),
meatballs, sweet and sour pork, popcorn chicken, and chicken tenders in their menus as well
as how frequently they are to be served in their dining facilities. The MND has also abolished
the requirement to service unpopular rice-based food items and relaxed the mandate regarding
white milk to the serving of flavored milk (chocolate milk, strawberry milk, etc.) as well as
other drinks such as juice and soy milk. Starting in 2022, the requirement that a meal must
consist of rice, soup, kimchi and two additional side dishes was abolished. As such, there is
now greater flexibility to provide a wider range of meals that cater to the preference of the
younger service members such as single-dish meals and meals without soup. Also, through
brunch days or meals served outside the cafeteria (lunch boxes, food trucks, etc.), military is
providing food service to match the preference of the service members.


-----

The MND also operates a “Cafeteria Meal Steering Committee” composed of enlisted

service members. Through this committee, the MND aims to continuously improve the menu
selection and dining management based on the input made by service members, while striving
to provide customer-based food service.

Enhanced Satisfaction through Improved Meals


**Increased Cooking Personnel**


**Increased Cooking Personnel** To depart from the past of monotonous food

service management and to improve the

**and Improved Cooking Environment**

capability of division level units to develop the

ability to design their own menus for their personnel, the MND has dispatched nutritionists
down to the division-level since November 2021. It has shared various insights on culinary
skills and is continuing to expand the number of civilian cooks to ensure that quality food
service can be provided in the mornings and on national holidays.[1)] Furthermore, efforts
are being made to improve the treatment of civilian cooks by raising their base pay and
providing them with a monthly travel allowance (KRW 70,000) starting in 2022. The MND
has also increased the pool of military cooks to lessen their work load and to guarantee time
for rest and recuperation. Furthermore, in 2022, the MND introduced a snack allowance
(KRW 1,000 per day) for cooks to boost their morale. It has also introduced modern cooking
equipment such as ovens, fryers, and conveyor toasters to military units in order to allow
cooks to offer a greater variety of food and to cook with greater ease and convenience.
Currently, the MND is pursuing a project to improve the food service environment by
promoting better hygiene in dining halls and kitchens. With such improvements, dining halls
will not only be used as a venue for eating, but also serve as a form of culture complex capable
of meeting various needs.


**and Improved Cooking Environment**


**1)**
Allocation of civilian cook
doubled as it changed from 1
cook per 80 service members
to 2. To support this change,
number of civilian cooks
increased by 910 from 2,278 in
2021 to 3,188 in 2022, providing
a robust capability to support
the culinary needs of service
members.


Improved Kitchen Improved Dining Hall


-----

**Improved Meal** In order to expand the range of meals preferred by service

**Provisioning System** members and use better quality ingredients, the MND

continuously increased the budget allocated for meals to

servicemembers. Furthermore, since October 2021, the Ministry has been piloting a project
at eighteen military training camps where the catering service is outsourced to an external
party in the civilian sector. Outsourced catering service offers two main advantages: First,
military units can utilize the expertise held by private sector catering service companies,
and second, permanently understaffed military kitchen personnel can now focus more on
their military life and training. The MND will review the results of this pilot project and
then decide whether to expand its application. It should also be mentioned that under the
supervision of unit commanders, every aspect of the cooking procedure is carefully inspected
by food service managers and nutritionists to ensure that all meals are provided in a safe
way under excellent hygienic conditions. Commanders as well as staff officers and NCOs
will continue to work hard to improve the catering management system by holding regular
meetings with cooking personnel, and by personally participating in kitchen operations to
hear their opinions.

**[Figure 7-1] Daily Meal Cost per Service Member**

|Category|2018|2019|2020|2021|2022|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||1st Half|2st Half|
|Daily meal cost per service member|KRW 7,855|KRW 8,012|KRW 8,493|KRW 8,790|KRW 11,000|KRW 13,000|
|Increase rate|5.0%|2.0%|6.0%|3.5%|25.1%|18.2%|
|Annual budget|KRW 1.4974 trillion|KRW 1.4531 trillion|KRW 1.4325 trillion|KRW 1.3990 trillion|KRW 1.5538 trillion|KRW 1.6663 trillion|



**2. Improvements in the Quality of Military Clothing and Gear**

Military clothing and gear are important supplies directly linked to soldiers’ combat
capability and their quality of life. Therefore, the MND is constantly working to improve the
quality of these items.

First, to secure highly functional and comfortable military clothing, the MND is conducting

a pilot test of the domestic OEM (original equipment manufacturing)[2)] model. Under this
model, a mid-size and large businesses with superior technology would be in charge of
product development and quality control, while the smaller business would be responsible
for the actual production. This arrangement would allow the military to procure highly
functional yet comfortable clothing while contributing to the overall development of the
domestic textile industry through mutually beneficial arrangements that allows small firms
that produce the garment to the larger firms with their technical expertise to all prosper at the
same time.

Second, the MND is pursuing a reform of its clothing layering system[3)] to reduce the


**2)**
OEM:
A method of manufacturing a
product to be sold under the
trademark of the client

**3)**
Layering refers to dressing in
multiple layers. In the military
terminology, it refers to the
functional practice of wearing
multiple layers to protect
service members from the
weather (temperature, wind,
rain) and to prevent loss of body
heat due to physical conditions
(sweating, breathing).


-----

number of layers from six to four by replacing redundant items such as winter wear and
winter jackets with high performing yet simple garment. the current system requiring
service members to wear multiple layers of clothing during the cold season meant sacrifice
in fit and comfort. To resolve this issue, the MND commissioned a study in 2020 that
produced ideas for improving the military clothing system. Another study was carried out
in 2021 to gauge the current level of technology and based on its results, a cost analysis was
completed in 2022. By pushing ahead with future projects as scheduled, the ROK military
will eliminate any overlapping functions in military clothing and maximize the combat
capability of individual servicemembers by improving mobility, comfort, and insulation of
their uniform. Third, to ensure comfortable and hygienic conditions sleeping conditions,
the MND is planning to replace traditional bedding (wool blankets, pancho liner) used in
the Army and Marine Corps with commercial blankets (summer blankets, winter blankets,
comforter). In the past, all services used the same type of bedding, but in 1974 Air Force
switched to commercial blankets, and the Navy followed suit in 1999. However, the Army
and the Marine Corps continued to use wool blankets and pancho liners, which received low
satisfaction rating from service members. To ameliorate this situation, the MND is planning
to supply commercial blankets[4)] to all service personnel by 2023, for which the budget has
been duly assigned.

Fourth, the MND is continuously researching, developing, and enhancing the quality

of personal gear as they critically affect the combat power and survivability of individual
service members during combat. Since 2021, a new water bottle with improvements in
capacity and hygiene is being issued, compared to the previous water bottle made from
aluminum, the new bottle is made from stainless steel and has an opening that is twice the
size of the previous one, making it easier to clean and more resistant to heat and corrosion.
Also, starting in 2023, the MND will make every effort to timely procure light bulletproof
helmets, counter-terrorism equipment, and bulletproof helmets for mobilized units.

New Bulletproof Helmet New Bulletproof Vest New Water Bottle


**4)**
320,000 sets for the ROK Army
and Marine Corps

**5)**
Daily necessities: shoe brush,
shoe polish, razor, razor blade,
soap case, shower towel, soap,
laundry net, laundry detergent,
nail clipper, toilet paper,
toothbrush case, etc.

**6)**
Products for which cash
allowances are given: face
wash, toothpaste, toothbrush,
shampoo, body wash, skin
tonic, and lotion


Meanwhile, the MND is supplying each service member with number of essential daily

necessities[5)] to manage their personal hygiene, as well as giving cash allowances[6)] to allow
them to buy other daily necessities based on personal needs and preferences. The MND is
continuously expanding the range of products in the cash allowance category in order to
offer as much flexibility of choice as possible to each service member. The amount of cash
allowance has also increased. Especially in 2021, skin tonic and lotion were added to the
list of product categories (previously restricted to five categories for three years) for which
cash allowances are given. The amount of cash allowance per person was also increased
from KRW 7,870 in 2020 to KRW 11,550 in 2021. In the future, the MND plans to add


-----

more product categories to the list of cash allowance items and continue to increase the cash
allowances to ensure the satisfaction of its service members.

In order to guarantee success in the future battlefield and to improve the living conditions

of service members, the MND will continuously pursue research and development aimed at
improving the quality of military clothing and personal gear. The MND will also work hard
to ensure that all new improved personal gear and clothing are delivered in a timely manner
to the troops to enhance their combat capabilities.

**3. Improvement of Military Barracks**


**Renovation to Bed-type Quarters Shared by** To provide service members with a more

**a Squad (Upgraded between 2004 and 2002)** comfortable living environment, the

MND undertook a project to upgrade the

military barracks to bed-type quarters from 2004 to 2022. In order to transform the military
barracks from a simple accommodation into an actual space for living, floor-type quarters
shared by a platoon (30-50 members) has been replaced with bed-type quarters shared by a
squad (8-10 members). This renovation has effectively increased the living area per person
from 2.3m² to 6.3m², and all sanitary facilities and amenities (washrooms, toilets, libraries,
and gyms) have been integrated into the barracks as well.


**Renovation to 2-4 Person Quarters** As the general living standards within the ROK

**(Introduced in 2022)** have risen in recent years, service members of

newer generations are also expecting higher

standards from the military as well. Therefore, the MND is planning to launch a project in
2023 to convert military barracks into 4-person quarters that will include washing facilities.
The adoption of quarters that can accommodate 2-4 persons will increase the living area
per person from the current 6.3m² to 10.78m², thereby assuring adequate independent living
space, quality sleep, larger resting areas, and mitigating the threat of infectious disease.

For this purpose, the building standards for 2–4 person quarters were established in 2022,

and three units of newly constructed military barracks were designed and built as 2-4 person
quarters to pilot test the feasibility of the idea.

Starting with 54 units in 2023, the 2-4 person quarter configuration will gradually

expand to include all army units across the country, vastly improving the military barrack
environment.


4-person Quarters (2023 onwards)


Bed-type Quarters Shared by

a Squad (2004-2022)


Floor-type Quarters Shared by

a Platoon (~2003)


-----

**Section**

**2** **Remuneration that Respects and is Commensurate**

###### with the Sacrifices made by Service Members

To provide remuneration that is reasonable and honorable to service members who are
faithfully fulfilling their duty of national military service, the MND raised the military
wage to 50% of the national minimum wage by 2022. The MND aims to raise the
monthly wage of sergeants to KRW two million by 2025. Furthermore, by providing
various allowances and improving housing conditions, the MND is also trying to improve
the quality of life for Officers and NCOs. By showing due respect to servicemembers
who serve our nation, the MND is striving to raise a culture of “proud to serve” within
the Republic of Korea.[7)]


**1. Increase National Support for those Fulfilling their Mandatory Military Service**


**Gradual Increase in Pay of Conscripted** In order to provide fair compensation and

**Service Members** improve accountability of the government

towards citizens fulfilling their mandatory

military service, the government began raising military pay with the goal of reaching 50% of
the national minimum wage of 2017 by 2022. As a result, the monthly wage of a sergeant,
which was just KRW 216,000 in 2017, rose to KRW 676,100 by 2022.



**[Figure 7-2] Annual increases in military pay**


800,000

700,000

600,000

500,000

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000


Sergeant
Corporal
Private 1st class
Private


**2017** **2018** **2019** **2020** **2021**


**2022**

|Year Category|Col2|2017|2018|2019|2020|2021|2022|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Minimum wage||-|30%|-|40%|45%|50%|
|Military pay (KRW)|Sergeant|216,000|405,700|405,700|540,900|608,500|676,100|
||Corporal|195,000|366,200|366,200|488,200|549,200|610,200|
||Private 1st class|176,400|331,300|331,300|441,700|496,900|552,100|
||Private|163,000|306,100|306,100|408,100|459,100|510,100|


**Increase Monthly Pay up** Despite continuous efforts to improve the monthly wage of

**to KRW 2 Million** service personnel, the general consensus among the public

was that additional compensation is needed in consideration

of the opportunities lost while serving in the military (e.g. break in career, economic losses,
etc.). Based on such findings, the MND decided to gradually increase the monthly wage
during the period 2023-2025 in combination with a wealth creation program (job preparation
program for service members) designed to provide a combined monthly compensation of
KRW 2 million to sergeants. This has been selected as a national task and is being actively
pursued today.

This will be achieved by raising the monthly wage (based on a sergeant’s wage) to KRW


**7)**
Wage increase in 2022
(compared to 2017):
Sergeant (KRW 216,000 →
KRW 676,100),
Corporal (KRW 195,000 →KRW
610,200),
Private 1st C (KRW 176,400
→KRW 552,100),
Private (KRW 163,000 → KRW
510,000)


-----

1.5 million[8)] by 2025. The remaining KRW 500,000 will be funded with government
assistance (Military Wealth Creation Program[10)] established for the Service Members
Tomorrow Preparation Fund[9)]), which will be increased from KRW 140,000 as of 2022 to
KRW 550,000[11)] by 2025.

**[Figure 7-3] Introduction of the Wealth Creation Program**

150

Wealth creation program
Monthly wage (Sergeant) 55

40

30

150

14.1 125

100

67.6


**2022(today)** **2023** **2024** **2025**

|Year Category|2022|2023|2024|2025|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total|KRW 817,000|KRW 1,300,000|KRW 1,650,000|KRW 2,050,000|
|Monthly wage (Sergeant)|KRW 676,000|KRW 1,000,000|KRW 1,250,000|KRW 1,500,000|
|Wealth Creation Program (Maximum assistance provided each month)|KRW 141,000|KRW 300,000|KRW 400,000|KRW 550,000|



Such initiative will enable service members fulfilling their mandatory military service

to receive remuneration that they deserve. In particular, the Wealth Creation Program is
expected to provide enough seed money for taking that first step into society after discharge,
because the sum of personal deposits, interests and government subsidies will be as much as
KRW 20,000,000 per person (for those who are conscripted in 2025).

**2. Improving Treatment and Working Conditions for Career Military Officers**


**8)**
Wage increase (Sergeant):
2023: (KRW 1,000,000) →
2024: (KRW 1,250,000) →
2025: (KRW 1,500,000)

**9)**
An installment savings program
was created by the MND
as part of the 2018 monthly
wage increase plan through
a partnership with the FSC,
the Korea Federation of
Banks, the Military Manpower
Administration, and 14 national
banks. This is a free installment
program (maximum monthly
deposit amount of 400,000 per
person) with a high-interest
rate (5%) that provides capital
to each servicemember after
their discharge from military
service.

**10)**
This program is designed to help
service personnel develop the
habit of saving by accumulating
a portion of their monthly wages
in an account. This money
becomes a lump sum upon their
discharge and ensures that
the first step they take as they
venture out into society is a
successful one. When service
members collect the Service
Members Tomorrow Preparation
Fund repayment upon maturity
(discharge rate), they receive
a 1% additional interest rate
payment. The government also
subsidizes up to 33% of the
principal and interest.

-  (1% interest subsidy) In
addition to the bank's basic
interest rate (5%) applied to the
Service Members Tomorrow
Preparation Fund, 1% additional
interest is provided as a form of
government assistance.

-  (3:1 Matching Support Fund)
Starting in January 2022, the
government will provide 33%
of the principal and interest in
subsidies for monthly deposits
made by service members into
the Service Members Tomorrow
Preparation Fund, based on a 3
to 1 matching scheme.

**11)**
Wealth Creation Program
(Service Members Tomorrow
Preparation Fund):
2023 (max. of KRW 300,000 per
month)
→ 2024(max. of KRW 400,000
per month)
→ 2025(max. of KRW 550,000
per month)


**Increase in Salary and** The MND is seeking to improve the compensation system

**Allowances** (salaries and allowances) in order to better reflect the realities

of the working environment and the special nature of the work

performed by service members who devote themselves to the defense of the country.

Given the significant raise in pay for conscripted service members and compensation given

to other civil servants, the MND introduced new types of allowances or raised existing ones
so that they may match those provided to other civil servants.

It has also increased the allowances paid to service members who serve in difficult

environments such as GP/GOP, islands, and submarines to more realistic levels, and, by also
raising other allowances that had remained at the same level for a long time, the MND is
pursuing improvements in the quality of life for Officer and NCOs as well.

Over the past five years (2018 to 2022), the MND introduced around 6 improvements on

allowances per year on average, for a total of thirty-three improvements.

Notably, for submarine crews, the MND has established an encouragement allowance

of up to KRW 20 million to induce submarine crews to serve for another tour of duty
(KRW 300,000-500,000 starting with crews who are on their fourth year of duty). For
military personnel who are serving in special regions like the GP/GOPs, the MND raised
the allowance for special region duty. These are just two of the six improvements that were
introduced and took effect in January 2022.


-----

**[Figure 7-4] Improved Compensation for Career Service Members**

|Year|Improved Compensation (33 improvements)|
|---|---|
|2018 (9)|① Sea Pay for submarine crews (staff sergeant – 1st Lieutenant) increased (KRW 70,000 ~ 85,000 per month) ② 10% raise overseas deployment allowance. ③ 10% raise in aviation incentive pay. ④ Establish additional pay for pilots flying scramble (KRW 10,000 per sortie). ⑤ Increase allowance for special region duty for officers and NCOs. ⑥ Expand eligibility for additional NCO encouragement allowance. ⑦ Incentives increased for enlisted service members to KRW 50,000. ⑧ Hazardous duty incentive pay introduced for civilian military servants performing on-site identification and autopsy assistance duties (KRW 40, 000). ⑨ Expand eligibility for encouragement allowance for special weapon operators(CFC Combined Targeting Board).|
|2019 (8)|① Improved the pay of salaried volunteer servicemembers to match that of regular staff sergeants. ② Encouragement allowances for short-term NCOs increased (KRW 2,500,000→5,000,000). ③ Increased seagoing allowance for sailors(KRW 3,000 →4,000). ④ Expanded the payment period for maintaining submarine qualification. ⑤ Introduced ship duty pay for onboard UAV operators. ⑥ Introduced hazardous duty incentive pay to UDT/SSU trainees (KRW 150,000 per month). ⑦ Increased watch duty pay (weekdays: KRW 5,000 →10,000/ holidays: KRW 10,000 →20,000). ⑧ Increased travel allowance for conscript servicemembers going on leave and discharge.|
|2020년 (6)|① Expanded encouragement allowance eligibility for NCOs serving in combat units. ② 10% raise in aviation incentive pay for rotary wing aircraft. ③ Raise in aviation incentive pay for officers serving as flight crew on transport aircraft. ④ Raise in aviation incentive pay for E-737 air traffic control officers. ⑤ Expanded eligibility for pilots to receive encouragement pay for maintaining flight currency. ⑥ 5% raise in ship duty pay for navy personnel on combat vessels.|
|2021 (4)|① Established encouragement allowance to image analysts (KRW 80,000∼130,000 per month). ② Increased seagoing allowance for submarine crews (KRW 10,000→30,000 for 1-day). ③ Established hazardous duty pay for navy medics operating diving chambers (70,000 per month). ④ Established of encouragement allowances for specialists operating the F-35 information system (80,000~120,000 per month).|
|2022 (6)|① Additional allowance for special region duty (KRW 5,000 ~ 10,000). ② Established Encouragement allowance introduced for submarine crews willing to extend their service period (KRW 300,000-500,000 starting with crews who are on their fourth year of duty). ③ Established Encouragement allowance for unmanned aircraft pilots (Global Hawk) (KRW 180,000 per month). ④ Expanded eligibility for Short-term NCO encouragement allowance, to include fixed-term NCOs. ⑤ Expanded eligibility for of hazardous duty incentive pay for civilian personnel serving in maritime facilities. ⑥ Expanded eligibility for of encouragement allowance for special equipment operators.|



In 2022, the following improvements were proposed for adoption in 2023: double the

housing allowance from KRW 80,000 to KRW 160,000; increase the incentive pay and
allowance for short-term serving NCOs by 50%; double the platoon leader’s monthly
activity allowance from the current KRW 62,500 to KRW 125,000 to improve the conditions
for performance of their duties; and increase the monthly activity allowance for master chief
petty officers, which had remained around KRW 200,000-300,000, to 300,000 per month.

In addition, the MND has selected the payment of special allowances, as an item of

national agenda, for service members and civilian personal who work night shifts and on
holidays staying alert to defend the nation 24/7. By seeking such adjustments to the military
allowance system to properly reflect realities of the working environment and military
operations, the MND is doing its utmost to improve the quality of life for those who are
serving our nation under challenging environments.


-----

**Improving Housing** Guaranteeing a stable residential environment is a crucial

**Support** element in the life of a service member and a critical component

in mission execution. As such, the Framework Act on Military

Welfare provides a legal basis to provide housing support to service members by explicitly
stating this responsibility in its clause.

Housing support is one of the most important policies that have a direct impact on the

quality of life for servicemembers and as such, improvements in the area will significantly
contribute to the overall service environment. For this reason, the MND created the Military
Housing Policy Division in 2020, laying the foundations for the systematic development of a
wide range of housing policies, as described below.

First, the MND is pursuing tailored residential support that takes into consideration all the

different requirements voiced by the beneficiaries, as well as social-environmental changes
and regional characteristics. Improving the poor housing conditions faced by junior officers
and NCOs is an urgent issue, and improving housing for officers and NCOs was selected
as a top task by the MND. To prevent cases of multiple individuals having to share a single
room, the MND has been building ‘single household’ residences for officers and NCOs. In
2022, the largest number of housing units (6,400) was renovated and the quality of housing
for officers was improved with added furnishings and equipment. Furthermore, the building
regulation for officers’ housing was changed to accommodate the ‘standard apartment
size’ of 85㎡(32 pyeong), which is the amount of space that officers strongly desire. With
the change in regulation all new housing units constructed starting in 2023 will be built to
the ‘standard apartment size’. In addition, the accuracy of estimating housing demand was
enhanced by revising the method of calculation used to determine the quota for each military
unit, which is often used as the basis of housing needs. Based on this calculation, the MND
is planning to provide housing support that matches the characteristics of each region. Also,
as the military is now employing a growing number of civilian employees to carry out duties
originally performed by active-duty personnel, the need to provide these civilian employees
with housing has become a pressing issue. Therefore, the MND is looking into expanding the
housing support for civilian employees working in remote areas.

Second, the MND is ceaselessly refining its policies to ensure practical help to officers and

NCOs who have not been provided housing of any kind. Despite the rise in housing prices,
housing allowance paid to service members remain frozen until now at KRW 80,000 since
1995, when it was first introduced. In 2023, the MND raised the housing allowance to KRW
160,000, a 100% increase that significantly lifted the burden of housing costs for service
members. The MND also noted the rise in long-term rental deposit prices and accordingly
increased the government subsidies for long-term rental deposit from KRW 130 million in
2017 to KRW 180 million in 2022. The upper limit of subsidies was also adjusted to reflect
regional differences in order to reduce the personal financial burdens of service personnel.
In December 2020, the deferment policy for repayment was improved by expanding it so
that even when service members are relocated to a different posting, they can continue to
live in the same place of residence if they have proper cause such as education requirement
for their children. Third, the MND is outsourcing the management of residential facilities to
civilian vendors as this is the best way of managing residences effectively and professionally.


-----

To minimize any gaps in the quality of the service provided to military units and improve
the level of management, the National Assembly enacted the Framework Act on Military
Welfare, and its enforcement decree, in 2021. Under this law, instead of each military unit
selecting a vendor on its own through competitive bidding, the vendor selection process has
become centralized and requires the MND to select a qualified vendor. Each military unit
then signs a contract with the selected vendor after negotiating terms and conditions that fit
its needs. In addition, the MND will introduce an integrated housing support information
system designed to enable the military authority to provide housing support services more
efficiently and seamlessly. With this system, the MND intends to refine the housing support
information system and enhance the users’ access and convenience.


**Improving Educational Environment for the** Children of service personnel stationed

**Children of Military Service Members** in remote regions have to deal with a

schooling environment that is not up

to par with the rest of the country as they face inadequate educational infrastructure and
frequent transfers. To address this issue, the MND has been expanding its collaboration
with civilian companies and educational institutions like LG U+ and EBS to provide highquality educational contents to the children of military personnel serving in remote regions.
For example, the schoolwork mentoring program run by the MND in partnership with EBS
previously accepted 300 applicants, but in 2023, the number expanded to 1,500 students. In
addition, in the hope of alleviating the financial burden of parents, the MND enlarged the
scholarship fund for children of service members who are entering their freshman year at
college and expanded the scholarship program that it operates in partnership with a civilian
scholarship foundation. These are just a few of the efforts the MND is making to foster an
environment in which officers and NCOs can concentrate on their duties without having to
worry about the education of their children.


**3. Improving the Military Pension System**


**Significance and Characteristic of the** The military pension system is designed to

**Military Pension System** foster stable living conditions and improve the

welfare of service members and their families

by providing them with proper remuneration in their retirement after years of faithful service
or providing it to their family members in the event of their death. Service members perform
life-endangering duties such as taking part in combat or training, and most live and work in
remote or forward areas under harsh working conditions involved in military operations and
long periods of standby duty. Due to the mandatory retirement age, most retire between the
ages of 45 and 56, when their living expenses tend to be highest.

The military pension system, which reflects the unique circumstances of military service,

not only serves as a social insurance that guarantees an income for one’s later years, but also
works as a form of national compensation to provide stable livelihood for service personnel
who sacrifice themselves for the country, but also need to retire at a much younger age than


-----

other recipients of the government employee pension program such as police officers, fire
fighters, civil servants and school teachers. The military pension plays an important role in
helping career service members focus on their duties without having to worry about their
life after retirement. Given such unique nature of military pension system, other developed
countries have established military pension programs that provide greater benefits than
pension for its civil servants.


**Improving Military Pension System** The MND has been continuously improving the

military pension system by identifying areas of

the system that must be reformed to accommodate changes in the social environment and
thereby allow retired service members and their families to enjoy stable lives and better
welfare. In June 2020, the MND granted the right to receive the split portion of the pension
to divorced spouses of military service members and to protect the right to receive a military
pension and guarantee the beneficiary’s basic right to a livelihood, the MND also introduced
a bank account dedicated to preventing any attempt to collect debt below the minimum cost
of living (KRW 1.85 million). In February 2022, the age ceiling for how long a child or
grandchild can receive a deceased service member’s pension was extended from 19 years to
25 years, provided that the person concerned is incapable of performing economic activities
for such reasons as the need to attend school. Also, while operating the military pension
payment suspension policy for elected officials, the MND discovered that the remuneration
for local council members fell short of the military pension amount and is planning to reform
this policy.

**4. Properly Honor Fallen Service Members**


**Honoring the Deceased Commensurate to** Under the current law, soldiers deceased

**Posthumous Promotion** in the line of duty in a non-battle situation,

and those who made a clear contribution to

the country in times of war, battle, or national calamity, may receive posthumous promotion
to the next rank. However, because there is no regulation which stipulates that survivors’
pensions, allowances and other benefits must be granted based on their posthumous rank,
both the deceased and their surviving family members were not given the appropriate respect
that is to be associated with posthumous promotions. Acknowledging this problem, the
MND is pursuing a revision of the related laws and regulations to ensure that benefits and
treatments are provided accordance with the posthumous promotion.

To honor the soldiers who made the ultimate sacrifice for the country and promote respect

for the patriotic spirit of national martyrs, the MND will continue improving the relevant
policies.


**Expanding the Recovery of**

**Korean War Remains**


The recovery of Korean War Remains is nationwide
project to honor veterans with the aim of recovering and
if possible, identifying the remains of patriots who gave


-----

their lives in defending the country and returning them to their loves ones. Launched in
2000 as part of the 50th anniversary commemoration of the Korean War, the recovery effort
has been expanded by establishing the MND Agency for Killed in Action Recovery and
Identification (MAKRI) in 2007

In March 2008, the legal foundation for recovery of remains was established when the

Act on the Recovery of the Remains of Service Members Killed during the Korean War
was signed into law. In accordance with the Regulations on the Operation of the Project to
Recover the Remains of Service Members Killed During the Korean War (Prime Ministerial
Decree), twelve government departments[12)] are participating in the Korean War Remains
Recovery Committee, whose role is to address issues such as identification of the remains,
ascertaining the whereabouts of surviving family members, collecting genetic samples from
surviving family members, and publicizing the project.

Each year from March to November, the MND sends around 100,000 soldiers (900

persons per day) from 30 divisions and brigades to 40 regions to search for human remains.
As of December 2022, the remains of 13,131 service members have been recovered. The
effort to recover remains in the DMZ began in March 2019 with the Arrowhead Hill project,
which formally ended in June 2021, to be followed by the White Horse Hill project starting in
September 2021. Table 7-5 below shows the total number of human remains recovered by year.



**[Figure 7-5] Remains Recovered by Year**

|Category|Total|2000∼ 2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|2021|2022|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Remains recovered|13,147|9,671|623|435|420|356|551|511|363|217|



*Includes 424 sets of remains recovered in the DMZ (Arrowhead Hill, White Horse Hill)


(As of December 2022, unit: bodies)


Remains recovered at
Arrowhead Hill

**12)**
Office for Government Policy
Coordination, Ministry of
National Defense, Ministry
of Unification, Ministry of the
Interior and Safety, Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of
Health and Welfare, Ministry
of Land, Infrastructure and
Transport, Ministry of Culture,
Sports and Tourism, Ministry of
Education, Ministry of Patriots
and Veterans Affairs, Cultural
Heritage Administration,
Korean National Police Agency


Remains Recovered at Arrowhead Hill On Scene Ritual to Pay Respect at Arrowhead Hill

The MND is making concerted efforts to increase DNA sampling of surviving family

members of deceased soldiers because DNA is critical to identifying the remains. As of
December 2022, a total of 86,575 DNA samples were collected. The Ministry of Unification,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Patriots and Veterans Affairs, local
governments, Nonghyup (National Agricultural Cooperative Federation), and the Korean
Veterans Association are cooperating to promote the Korean War Human Remains Recovery


-----

Project and jointly running a national campaign to support the effort. Notably, in 2021,
the military and local governments combined their manpower to focus their search for the
surviving family members of soldiers who were killed during the Korean War[13)] on a few
specific areas (Gyeongsangbuk-do, Daegu, Gyeongsangnam-do, Busan, and Ulsan), resulting
in the collection of around 10,000 DNA samples in 2021 alone. Based on this successful
experience, the MND began searching for family members in Gyeonggi-do, Incheon, Jejudo, Chungcheong-do, and Gangwon-do regions in 2022. Table 7-6 below presents the data
on the DNA sampling of surviving family members by year, while Table 7-7 shows the DNA
sampling of surviving family members carried out during 2021-2022 with the cooperation of
counties and local governments.



**[Figure 7-6] DNA Sampling of Surviving Family Members**


(As of December 2022, unit: cases)

|Category|Total|2003 ∼2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|2021 12,959|2022|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|DNA sampling|86,575|32,160|4,041|4,072|4,155|8,936|8,973||11,279|



**[Figure 7-7] DNA Sampling of Surviving Family Members Conducted in 2021-2022 with the Cooperation**

**of Counties and Local Governments**

(As of December 2022, unit: cases)

|Category|Total|Gyeongsangbuk-do, Daegu, Gyeongsangnam-do, Jinhae|Gyeongsangnam-do, Busan, Ulsan|Gyeonggi-do, Incheon, Jeju-do, Chungcheong-do, Gangwon-do|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|DNA sampling|4,196|1,731|1,690|775|



To increase the chances of successfully identifying the recovered remains, the MND

reorganized the DNA analysis teams[14)] and consolidated their functions with MAKRI.
Furthermore, with the opening of MAKRI’s Human remains Identification Center[15) ]in March
2021, the entire process of storage, identification and DNA analysis could be conducted
in a single facility, vastly improving the efficiency of identifying human remains. During
the three years since restructuring of MAKRI from 2020 to 2022, sixty-six sets of remains
were ascertained, which accounts 31% of all identified remains. To strengthen the credibility
of its results, the Human Remains Identification Center is seeking to obtain international
certification by the end of 2023. Table 7-8 below summarizes the data on the identification of
soldiers killed in action during the Korean War.


**13)**
Cheongdo County,
Gyeongsangbuk-do (3.8. ~ 3.12.
/ MAKRI), Gyeongsangbukdo·Daegu·GyeongsangnamdoJinhae-gu (6.1.~6.30./
ROK Army 50th Division,
Jinhae Naval Base
Command), Gyeongsangnamdo·Busan·Ulsan (10.1.~10.31./
ROK Army 39th Division)

**14)**
In January 2020, the DNA
team of the MND’s Criminal
Investigations Command was
merged into MAKRI.

**15)**
The Human Remains
Identification Center (opened
on March 24, 2021) verifies
the identity of fallen service
members through identification
and genetic analysis of
their remains. The Center is
comprised of a remains storage
room, a remains identification
room, and a genetic testing and
analysis room.



**[Figure 7-8] Identification of Soldier Killed in Action during Korean War**


(As of December 2022, unit: cases)

|Category|Total|2000 ∼2014|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|2021|2022 23|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Identity verification|204|109|9|9|4|7|19|24||


The MND is also strengthening international cooperation in the recovery of the remains

of service members killed during the Korean War. It holds yearly meetings with the United
States on the progress of the recovery effort and carries out joint identification of human


-----

remains. By 2021, remains of 307 ROK service members killed during the war that were
erroneously transported to the United States, returned to the Republic of Korea, while the
remains of 26 U.S. service members were returned to the United States after recovery.
Through such dignified transfers, the MND demonstrated the government’s determination
to show the utmost respect and commitment to honor those who have made the ultimate
sacrifice to defend their nation. Table 7-9 below shows the data on the transfer of remains
between the ROK and the U.S.



**[Figure 7-9] Status of Remains Transfer between the ROK and the U.S.**


(unit: sets of remains)

|Category|Total|2000 ∼2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|2021|2022|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Remains of ROK service members transferred to Republic of Korea|307|27|0|65|0|147|68|0|
|Remains of US service members returned to the U.S.|26|12|1|2|0|5|6|0|


Promotional Poster made by Local Government Promotional Poster made by Civilian Bank

The MND also signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU)[16)] with six UNC sending

states to identify the remains of missing personnel. In November 2021, the remains of three
British service members were identified and buried for the first time at the UN cemetery in
Busan, an event that served as an opportunity to commemorate the noble sacrifices made by
UN troops during the Korean War with the Korean people. Since 2014, based on humanitarian
principles and international law, Republic of Korea and China have been pursuing return of
Chinese remains; 913 sets of remains have been returned to China up to this point. The Korean
War Remains Recovery Project is being undertaken faithfully through the unified efforts of the
government, the military, and civilian sector. However, additional effort is required to move the
project to the next level such as modernization of the remain recovery and identification process
as well as increased participation from the general public.


**16)**
MOU signatory countries:
The USA (2000)
Belgium (2015)
Australia (2019)
The Netherlands (2020)
Canada/Columbia (2021)


-----

Korean War Veterans on a Visit to Korea (September 2022)


Handover Ceremony for the Remains of Chinese Military

(September 2022)


Given the current recovery rate of around 500 sets of remains per year, it will take a

significant amount of time to recover the estimated 120,000 sets of remains. Considering the
ongoing nationwide development projects and the age of Korean war veterans, the remains
recovery project needs to be pursued in a timely manner. To this end, the MND is analyzing
real world limitations and possible mitigation in the search for the Korean war remains to
determine the future direction of the recovery project and develop detailed policies. Based
on the findings of the study, the MND will establish the future direction of the war remains
recovery effort to be adopted in 2023 and beyond.


**Appropriate Compensation** The MND has been emphasizing the government’s

**for Accidents and Injuries** responsibility to honor the noble sacrifices made by

service members by increasing the compensation in

the event of injury, disease, disability and death. In December 2019, when the Military
Accident Compensation Act was separated from the Military Pension Act and adopted as
a new law, the legal basis was established to develop a more professional and systemized
accident compensation system. In March 2021, the MND also created the Military Accident
Compensation Division to handle policies related to compensation for service members.

With the enactment of the Military Accident Compensation Act, the compensation for

death and pensions for bereaved families of service members killed on duty were both
adjusted upwards, while the additional points system for bereaved families was created to
improve the livelihood of surviving family members. In the case of disabilities sustained by
service members during active engagement with enemy forces and during special duties, the
amounts of compensation were raised compared to the compensation granted for general
disabilities by 2.5 times and 1.88 times, respectively. The accident compensation system was
also revised to better reflect the reality. For example, conscripted service members can now
receive the same level of accident compensation as officers and NCOs.

In February 2022, the legal basis was established to allow male service members who

could not previously obtain compensation for scars to receive an injury pension. Whereas
female service members have been eligible to receive an injury pension for clearly visible
scars picked up during their service since July 1994, eligibility was only granted to male
service members in October 2006. However, male service members who sustained such
injury before October 2006 had no way of being compensated because there were no


-----

transition rules. To address this issue, a transitions rule was created to address the gender
bias. In addition, the upper age limit for children and grandchildren to receive pension
benefits as surviving family members was extended from 19 to 25 years of age, qualifying
them to receive benefits until they can achieve financial independence.

In the future, the MND will continue to improve the accident compensation system on an

ongoing basis in keeping with its responsibility to honor the sacrifice made by our service
members to defend this country.


**Support a Successful Reintegration of** In addition to the programs for active

**Medium and Long-term Service Members** service members, the Ministry of Patriots

and Veterans Affairs is promoting diverse

**to Society**

support programs to help discharged

service members who have faithfully fulfilled their duties in the armed forces to transition
seamlessly to civilian life, as required by the Support for Veterans Act and is also working to
instill a sense of pride amongst separated service members and raise societal awareness. For
medium and long-term service members who served for more than five years in the armed
forces, there are ten Veteran Support Centers located across the country where they can go
to receive professional consulting services, job training and job search support, as well as
attending one-day job fairs. For those who are non-eligible to receive military pension, the
Ministry of Patriots and Veterans Affairs provides them with financial assistance similar to
the allowances handed out to civilian jobseekers, as well as free legal counsel. Furthermore,
for long-term servicemembers who served for more than 10 years, the Ministry of Patriots
and Veterans Affairs provides letters of recommendation for employment as a veteran,
educational subsidies for veterans and their children, special allocation of apartments, loan
support, medical care, and burial in a national cemetery.

First introduced in 2008, the monthly allowance for jobseekers was increased from KRW

500,000 to KRW 700,000 for long-term career veterans and from KRW 250,000 to KRW
500,000 for mid-term career veterans. Veterans are eligible to receive this allowance for a
maximum of six months. The ministry is planning to raise the allowance to KRW 990,000 by
2025, which would be equivalent to 50% of the allowance given to jobseekers in the civilian
sector. The payment period will also increase to match that of the civilians.

In addition, to secure the kinds of high-quality jobs favored by discharged service

members, the government amended the Support for Veterans Act in 2021 to include an article
on the establishment of a certification program for companies that excel in the recruitment of
veterans. To attract the interest of companies, the government created a range of incentives.
Exemption for customs inspections by the Korea Customs Service, funding from the Seoul
government to improve the working environment, and preferential interest rates from
Nonghyup Bank, Shinhan Bank, and SC First Bank are just some of the nine incentives
offered to companies that recruit veterans. In the future, the government will continue to
develop and expand its support policies for companies that hire veterans.

Meanwhile, in a drive to boost the self-esteem of veterans, foster a culture of appreciation

of their contribution and create stable jobs for them, the Ministry of Patriots and Veterans
Affairs has held a ‘Veterans Week’ every year since 2012. In 2021, the Support for Veterans


-----

Act was amended to permanently designate the second week of October as ‘Veterans
Week’, and in 2022 it was elevated to the status of a legal commemorative event that can be
celebrated with the hosting of diverse events.

At the 2022 Veterans Week commemorative ceremony, the official event was followed

by a talk show in which veterans were invited to hear their thoughts. Various events were
held during Veterans Week, including a seminar on improving the (government) policies
pertaining to veterans, a plaque unveiling ceremony for companies recognized as excellent
employers of veterans, an online job fair, and an invitational homecoming day for veterans.

Furthermore, during the Veterans Week, the Ministry of Patriots and Veterans Affairs

launched a national publicity campaign to thank veterans and cheer them on with the slogans
“Gratitude and Jobs for Veterans” and “Re;SPEC Veterans”, the latter’s wording being a
composite of the words ‘respect’ and ‘spec redesign’, which loosely means “redesigning
one’s personal specifications to return to civilian life”.


Veterans Week Ceremony (October 2022)


Plaque Unveiling Ceremony for Companies Recognized as

Excellent Employees of Veterans (October 2022)


Lastly, the current version of the Support for Veterans Act is focused on supporting retired

service members with medium- and long-term careers in the military. Therefore, to create the
legal basis for providing support to younger service members discharged after completing
their mandatory military service, the MND has been pushing for a revision of the Support
for Veterans Act. Since launching a pilot project in 2018, the MND has been providing
job search/entrepreneurship support to young conscripted service members who sustained
light injuries during their military service, those coming from low-income households and
recognized and recognized for the exemplary service, and those recruited as technology
specialists for positions whose job skills can be used upon their return to civilian life.


-----

**Section**

**3** **Improved Service Environment that is Reflective of**

###### Changes in Society

The MND and the ROK Armed Forces are introducing innovative measures to the
military culture in order to deal with various malicious incidents that occur within the
military, and are striving to improve the service environment to reflect ongoing social
changes. The MND and the ROK Armed Forces will continue a military culture that is
trusted by the public. This initiative will be accomplished by respecting the autonomy
and human rights of service members in a way that matches the expectations of the
public, while maintaining strict discipline in the ranks to ensure that the duties of the
armed forces are carried out properly.

**1. A Barracks Culture Where Autonomy and Responsibility are Equally Balanced**


**Innovation of the Barracks Culture** Due to steady effort to guarantee basic rights of

conscripted services members (use of personal

mobile phones, off-post activities, leave policies, etc.) incidents of AWOL have fallen[17)]

markedly, and the general public is also very cognizant of the progress being made in this
regard.[18)] However, this does not mean that violence and abuse in the armed forces have
been completely eradicated, and the public’s standards on human rights and welfare in the
military are much higher than that of the past. Due to the recent controversies surrounding
the quality of meals provided to service members quarantined during the COVID pandemic
in 2021 and the sexual harassment of a female NCO that ultimately led to her suicide, public
is demanding a fundamental solution to the problems plaguing the military environment. In
response, on June 2021, the MND formed a civilian-government-military joint committee
to study these issues. As a result, the committee came up with several recommendations on
improving the overall military service, including clothing, eating and living conditions of
service members, and the MND and the military subsequently concretized (concept, timing,
etc.) the recommendations and derived 102 tasks. To ensure that the tasks are pursued
consistently, they have been included as an important item of agenda in the government’s
policies on human rights and military service, such as the Basic Policy on Military Service.
In the future, the ROK military will strike a sound balance between the need to maintain
discipline and the need to protect the basic rights of service members, as this is essential for
carrying out the mission of defending national security and the national territory. Henceforth,
the MND will work hard to establish a military culture in which the creative ideas are the
service members are respected while ensuring mature accountability of their actions.


**17)**
The number of AWOLs fell from
705 in 2011 to 73 in 2021.

**18)**
The results of the 2021 KIDA
survey (survey on public
perceptions of military life)
showed that over 90% of
respondents held a positive
view of the changes introduced
to improve military life for
service members. The results of
the past three surveys all show
a similarly positive view (93.9%
in 2019, 94.4% in 2020, and
90.1% in 2021).


**Intensifying the Effort to Eradicate Injustice** The ROK Armed Forces have made

various efforts to eradicate injustice

within the military culture with the aim of building build a military environment and culture
that is safe, fair and instils a high level of morale.


-----

The MND pays regular onsite visits to teach military units how to innovate their barracks

culture, conducts field inspections to check how well the units are doing in abolishing
unreasonable and unjust practices, and
select units that show exemplary results.

The MND is also reviewing the option

of expanding the ‘self-governing system
for conscripted service members’ allowing
them to plan and execute self-governance
activities, while maintaining discipline
within the ranks.

Similarly, ROK Air Force has been oper
ating a self-governing committee called the

Self-governing Committee of Service Members (Top-notch

‘Top-notch Service Member System’ since Service Members System of the Air Force)
2005, while the Navy launched its ‘Model
Sailor Policy’ in 2022, and the ROK Army and Marines are also expected to adopt similar
self-governing programs tailored to their needs. At the same time, the MND will continue to
award military units that excel at eradicating unreasonable and unjust practices.


**Use of Personal Mobile Phones** In July 2020, the MND adopted the policy of per
mitting service members to use their mobile phones

after duty hours. The use of mobile phones not only alleviated service members’ sense
of disconnection from society, but also contributed to improving the combat power and
camaraderie within the respective unit by facilitating communication among its members.
In addition, this change in policy ushered
in a positive and productive environment
as conscripted service members used their
mobile phones for personal development
activities, such as attending online courses,
acquiring certificates, and gathering
information on employment and business
opportunities. Especially at the height of
the COVID-19 pandemic, when long-term
leaves, off-post activities and overnight

Soldiers Using Their Mobile Phones

passes were all restricted, mobile phones (Personal Development, Communication with Society)
played a major role on mental health of
conscripted service members as they could use their devices to search for information on
infectious diseases, attend online religious services, receive remote psychological counseling
with professional barrack life counselors, and make video calls to their family members and
friends.

Meanwhile, to prevent a rise in security incidents caused by service members’ use of

mobile phones, a detailed list of prohibited activities and policy on the appropriate use of
mobile phones in the military was established so that reasonable sanctions could be levied
in cases of infringements. At the same time, the relevant regulations, including the Unit


-----

Management Directive, were updated, and a defense mobile security app was developed to
control pictures being taken within military facilities. All service members regardless of their
rank are required to download and install this app on their mobile phones.

Also, to protect service members from vices like illegal gambling and digital sex crimes,

the MND produces materials on vice prevention in collaboration with civilian firms and
train professional instructors to educate service members accordingly. These are just some
of the measures now being taken to minimize the adverse effects of using mobile phones.
Furthermore, from June to December 2022, the MND conducted a pilot program called
‘Expanded Hours for Carrying Mobile Phones’, the results of this experiment will be used
by the MND to improve its policies on mobile phone use, for example by determining the
appropriate number of hours that conscripted service members should be allowed to carry
their mobile phones and devising methods to mitigate the adverse effects.


**Off-post Activities after Duty Hours**

**and Improvements in Leave Policy**


In February 2019, to guarantee sufficient rest and
autonomy outside duty hours, the MND allowed
conscripted service members to engage in off-post


activities after duty hours on weekdays.

Each service member is allowed to leave the base for off-post activities twice a month

after approval by their commanders, provided that military readiness is not affected. Service
members are using this policy for small get-togethers, hospital visits, meetings with family,
personal development, and various other personal needs. Off-post activities after working hours
on weekdays were found to have beneficial effects in alleviating service members’ feelings of
isolation and stress, while strengthening their
solidarity with other members of their unit
and enhancing their overall satisfaction with
military life.[19)]

In 2021, the military HR information

system was changed to allow conscribed
service members to also directly apply for
leave and obtain approval. Furthermore, if
the conscripted service member requires
an extension of their leave due to personal Service Members Enjoying Off-post Activities after Work
reasons, the system allows the service
member to directly contact his Commander through mobile phones or social media and gain the
necessary approval. The MND will continue to improve its policies on leave in order to ensure
that service members can fully enjoy their right to rest under the principle of ‘autonomy and
responsibility’.


**19)**
The results of the 2019 KIDA
survey (perceptions and
lifestyle of service members)
revealed the following facts:
The respondents felt that offpost activities during weekdays
produce positive effects such
as helping them to relieve
stress (90.5%), mitigate the
feelings of isolation (89.6%),
promote solidarity of military
units (89.1%), and improve
satisfaction with military life
(89.6%). In addition, 79.1% (4
out 5) of the respondents were
‘satisfied’ with the opportunity
to enjoy off-post activities
during weekdays.

**20)**
The number of registered
foreigners specified in the
statistical monthly report
released by the Ministry of
Justice (Immigration Office,
Immigration Policy Division):
210,249 in 2000, 1,143,696 in
September 2022.


**Creation of a Barracks Culture that** Republic of Korea is rapidly becoming a multi
**Respects Cultural Diversity** cultural society, with the number of registered

foreign nationals increasing[20)] from 210,000 in

2000 to 1.14 million in 2022. Such change in society means that it is incumbent for the armed
forces to properly understand the issue of cultural diversity. The MND intent is for service


-----

members from multicultural backgrounds to serve in the military free from discrimination,
and has been educating troops about multiculturism since 2010. In addition, for service
members who cannot eat certain foods like pork, beef, etc., for religious reasons, the military
offers alternative foods such as tofu, vegetables, and fried eggs. For service members who
are adherents of minority religions, religious facilities in military bases have been renovated
to allow them to attend religious ceremonies or, alternatively, arrangements are made so they
can use civilian religious facilities. The MND will continue to foster a military culture that
respects cultural diversity by making the necessary educational and policy improvements.

**[Figure 7-10] Results of the Survey on Service Members' Perceptions of the Effectiveness and their**

**Understanding of Multicultural Education**

Positive    Negative    Not sure


**95.5%**


**83.8%**


**80.4%**


**Understanding of the**

**education**


**Perception of educational**

**effect**


**Fellow service members from**

**a multicultural background are**

**regarded as comrades**


*Source: Korea Institute for Defense Analyses (KIDA,2021).

**2. Spreading a Culture of Respect for Human Life and Dignity**


**Increased Suicide Prevention Activities** To prevent non-combat casualties and protect

precious lives, the ROK military requires all

service members to become “Gatekeepers”[21)] who are responsible for preventing suicides
among their comrades. To this end, the MND has developed educational contents[22)] based
on the principle of ‘watching-listening-talking’ that are tailored to the specific needs of each
branch of the armed forces and certified by the Ministry of Health and Welfare (MOHW),
as well as providing suicide prevention education (at least once every 6 months) taught by
professionally trained instructors. The MND also operates an integrated suicide prevention
program that consists of three phases, i.e. identification, management, and separation, in
order to help service members adapt to military life and prevent them from committing
suicide. In cooperation with the Military Manpower Administration (MMA) and MOHW,
the MND provides social security services (mental counseling, welfare services, and job
consultation) to service members who have been discharged early as a result of their inability
to adapt to military service due to various psychiatric issues.

Recently, the MND kicked off the respect for life campaign, held a writing and poster
making contest on the theme of protecting life, and held a civilian-military joint seminar as part
of its efforts to raise awareness of suicide risks and build an environment that prevents suicides.


**21)**
A person who identifies service
members who are at high risk of
committing suicide and refers
them to professional clinics
(military life counselors) where
they can receive counseling
and treatment. In an emergency
situation, this person manages
and provides assistance to
prevent a high-risk individual
from committing suicide.

**22)**
Educational content designed
to teach service members
how to ‘watch out’ for signs
of suicidal behavior in their
comrades, 'listen' to suicidal
thoughts and ‘talk’ to them and
give them advice.


-----

The MND has commissioned an external

professional training agency to train
prospective suicide prevention instructors
and develop their expertise. Once trained,
the suicide prevention instructors embark
upon speaking tours to military facilities
around the country to educate all service
members and officers about how to prevent
suicides. The MND will continue to expand Seminar on Culture of Respect for Life (ROK Army)
its suicide prevention efforts through
video materials tailored to the needs of each branch of the armed forces, role play activities,
counseling programs as well as assistance to military units to overcome suicide incidents
through rehabilitation and support program for grieving family and friends.

**[Figure 7-11] Number of Suicide Prevention Instructors Trained Each Year**


As of December 2022, Unit: persons

|Year|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|2021|2022|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|No. of instructors|534|653|664|668|822|650|808|377|413|516|



-  In the case of 2020 and 2021, the number of instructors trained decreased because the COVID-19 pandemic restricted

classroom-based teaching at off-base institutions.


**Addressing the Emotional Distress of** To ensure that service members complete

**Service Members** their military service with a healthy mindset,

the MND operates a variety of systems for

diagnosing and resolving any personal problems they might experience during their service
in a timely manner. Because service members are used to living as civilians before entering
the military, they may well experience stress or emotional distress in the tightly controlled
and regimented military environment. Furthermore, they must accustom themselves to living
in a group. To control the factors that impede a smooth adjustment to military life, the MND
regularly conducts four-stage personality tests[23)] and expanded dispatchment of professional
counselors to battalion equivalent level units that can treat service members and offer them
counseling services. The MND also operates the Green Camp program, which provides
psychological counseling and therapy to service members who are experiencing difficulties.
In addition, the MND operates the National Defense Help Call Center, a 24-hour hotline
through which troubled service members can receive counseling and report their problems.
Other counseling hotlines are also available, such as the Wish Processing program and the
Military Human Rights Guardian program through which the military identifies some of the
problems experienced by service members and then resolves them as quickly as possible.

In 2022, the mental counseling support program, which was offered only to junior Officers

and NCOs until 2021, was expanded and made available to all officers, NCOs and civilians
working for the armed forces. The MND has also developed a mobile app with which service
members can now access the National Defense Help Call Center anytime, anywhere.

Going forward, the MND and the Korea Institute for Defense Analysis will work together


**23)**
A scientific tool used to screen
out recruits with psychiatric
issues and a low ability to adapt
to military life. The tool consists
of a 4-stage evaluation: (Stage
1) evaluation of a recruit’s
suitability to serve conducted
during the conscription
examination stage; (Stage
2) evaluation of a recruit’s
suitability to serve conducted
during the medical checkup
stage; (Stage 3) evaluation of a
recruit’s adaptability to military
life during boot camp training;
and (Stage 4) evaluation of
a recruit’s adaptability to
military service and human
relationships during the active
duty period (Stage 4).


-----

National Defense Help Call Center

**[Figure 7-12] Average Number of Daily Counseling Session at the National Defense**

**Help Call Center**

As of December 2022, Unit: cases

|Year|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|2021|2022|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|No. of sessions|47|111|159|176|170|134|159|155|139|



-  To protect the privacy of service members, the public cyber counseling sessions were discontinued on September 1, 2018.

to enhance the reliability of personality testing, strengthen the counseling system designed to
help service members deal with distress, and spread a culture of respect for human life and
dignity through effective education.


**Promoting the Use of Proper Language** Since verbal violence, including abusive lang
uage and swear words often ignite unfortunate

incidents and mishaps, the ROK military is trying to create a military culture of dialogue,
consideration for others and respect for individual dignity by encouraging service members
to use proper language in their daily lives.

To promote the use of proper language by service members, the MND has started a

movement to improve the standard of language used by soldiers, and published guidelines
on language use in the barracks and a comic book on the use of appropriate language in
barracks. The MND has also launched an educational program on the use of proper language
with the aim of building an environment in which service members use words that are
respectful and considerate of others, and refrain from using profanity-laden language.

Based on the belief that a great military culture begins with language that is considerate and

respectful of others, the MND will continue introducing effective methods for encouraging
service members to use proper and decent words when they speak.

**3. Support for a Healthy Work-Life Balance and Gender Equality**


**Laying the Foundations for Gender Equality** To pursue gender equality policies such

as spreading a culture and awareness of

gender equality as well as increasing female representation and participation in a methodical
manner, the MND establishes annual implementation plans for gender equality policies and


-----

reviews the progress of each task being. Whenever a law is amended, a new law is adopted
or a major project is launched, the impact on gender is evaluated by the MND’s gender
impact evaluation system. Also, the MND publishes the National Defense Gender Recognition
Statistics Book every year and reflects the data, when setting its gender equality policies.

In addition, based on the ‘2018-2022 Female Service Member Recruitment Plan’,

percentage of females officers and NCOs gradually increased from 6.2% in 2018 to 9.0%
in 2022. As a result, female officers were appointed for the first time in 2021 to serve as
the commander of a marine infantry battalion, commander of the special air force rescue
team squadron and leader of the army DMZ operations team. In 2022, a female officer
took command of the coastal surveillance and maneuver battalion for the first time. These
pioneers are all performing brilliantly in their respective positions. The MND plans to
develop the ‘2023-2027 Female Service Member Recruitment Plan’, which includes the
goal of constituting 15.3% of the armed forces with female service members by 2027 with
consideration to future manpower recruiting conditions. Furthermore, in August 2021, to
guarantee conditions for parental leave, the MND revised its policy so that officers returning
to active-duty status will be given preference in filling out vacancies due to parental leaves.
The MND will continue making efforts to put female service members, whose ranks are
growing steadily, into positions where they can demonstrate their capabilities.


**Expansion of Essential Facilities for** The MND is expanding the scope of essential

**Female Service Members** facilities for females, such as restrooms and

shower rooms, following the increase in the

number of female service members, caused by increased recruitment and retention, as well
as female civilian employees After identifying the level of demand by through a complete
enumeration survey of female essential facilities and gender impact assessments, the MND
installed 542 facilities at military bases that lacked such critical facilities required for female
service members. In 2022, an additional 192 such facilities were installed. The MND intends
to improve the service environment by continuously expanding essential facilities in view of
the increased number of female personnel within the military.


**Spreading an Organizational Culture** The MND uses various methods to cultivate

**that Values Gender Equality** a culture of gender equality within military

units. In 2022, it introduced self-governing

councils on gender equality communication to promote understanding and communication
in military units (division level and above). Through discussions among service members
organized by their background and rank, the self-governing council discussed gender biases
within organizational cultures and pursued opportunities to remedy the issue through mutual
understanding and dialogue.

In 2022, the MND tried another approach to cultivating an organizational culture that

upholds gender equality by launching a ‘tailored gender awareness consulting project’. Under
this project, a military unit (division level or equivalent) that best represents each branch
of the armed forces were selected. Improvement tasks for the selected units were derived
through diagnosis of their organizational culture after considering of their characteristics;


-----

afterwards, each unit received counseling on how to improve gender equality.

Another such endeavor is the Gender Awareness Level Assessment applied to officers

above the rank of colonel. In the second half of 2022, this assessment was expanded to
include commanding officers and NCOs in a drive to improve the gender sensitivity of midlevel officers. Moreover, to make certain that all service members and civilian workers
receive effective gender awareness education, contents such as standardized lesson plan
and remote educational videos that reflect the unique characteristics of each branch of the
armed forces were developed and utilized in courses on gender equality. In addition, training
designed to enhance the skills of instructors who teach gender equality courses was expanded
(2021: 330 students > 2022: 500 students).

In the future, contents tailored to the MZ generation and educational materials that match

the needs of each branch of the armed forces will be developed and used to continuously
enhance gender sensitivity of all service members and civilian workers in all branches of the
armed forces.


**Support for a Healthy Work-Life Balance** The MND is gradually improving its system

in a direction that will make it easier for all

service members to use the work-life balance support programs, irrespective of gender, and
in a direction that promotes family-friendly culture.

First, to guarantee maternity protection and improve parenting conditions for service

members, the application process for parental leave and fertility leave was simplified in
2021. Age ceiling in granting flexible working hours to servicemembers who have children
with disabilities was raised from 12 to 19. Also, eligibility and causes for childcare leave,
were expanded and the number of days for such leave increased from 2-3 days to 10 days
per annum.

In 2022, the Directive on Supporting Gender Equality in the Armed Forces was revised

to limit mothers who are pregnant or have recently given birth from serving night shifts.
The amended directive also permitted service members and civilian employees couples to
adjust their duty hours in the event of an emergency and provides up to four days of leave for
fertility treatment.

As of end of 2022, the MND operates a total of 159 childcare centers and 45 co-parenting

centers to create a stable parenting environment. The MND also subsidizes the staffing cost
to run night time childcare programs to allow service members to use the childcare centers
during the evening in the event of a training exercise or emergency recall.

Childcare Centers on Military Bases


-----

In the future, the MND will give preference in installing military childcare facilities in

the forward areas and remote regions that lack a robust parenting infrastructure, in order to
guarantee a stable working environments for all service members and civilian employees.


-----

**Section**


###### Emphasis on the Human Rights of Service Members

The MND and the Armed Forces are pursuing various human rights protection policies
to eradicate human rights violations and accidents in the military. Led by the Military
Human Rights Improvement Group, launched in 2022, the National Human Rights
Commission, the Ministry of Justice and other government agencies are cooperating
to prevent human rights violations against service members and providing support to
victims. The MND and the Armed Forces are seeking to increase satisfaction amongst
service members by meeting public expectations regarding human rights and establishing
an advanced military culture that is trusted by the public.

**1. Improving the Human Rights Protection System for Military Personnel**


**Strengthening Education on Human Rights** The Ministry of National Defense

**and Improving the Human Rights Protection System** is pursuing a systemized human

rights education policy by closely

cooperating with the National Human Rights Commission to raise awareness amongst
service members of their rights and responsibilities as “citizens in uniform” and to spread a
military culture that respects human rights. Specific action items within this policy include
the following: human rights education tailored to individual service member’s term of
service and conditions of their particular military unit, invitational lectures by human rights
experts for commanding officers, skills enhancement training for human rights workers
and instructors in the areas of healthcare, investigations, corrections, judge advocacy, and
military discipline, promotion of online human rights education, and the development and
distribution of participatory human rights educational material. In particular, ROK MND is
collaborating with the National Human Rights Commission to develop and distribute human
rights education plans that are tailored to the situation of each military unit.

In addition, to keep up with the changing view on human rights of service members, the

MND is working to improve the current human rights protection system by updating related
statutes and cooperating with outside organizations. Whereas until now, the MND utilized
the human rights impact assessment only while processing changes to human rights statutes
and regulations, the MND will expand the scope of this assessment to additionally apply
to changes in policies and systems. The MND also operates the Military Human Rights
Guardian System,[24)] through which service members may apply for human rights counseling
and request an investigation. To eliminate blind spots in protecting human rights, the MND
operates the National Defense Human Rights Monitoring Group, conducts surveys on the
state of human rights protection for servicemembers, and pursues improvements inhuman
rights policies to that match the public expectation with the help of outside experts such as
the advisory committees on human rights set up under the MND and the headquarters of the
three branches of the armed forces and human rights advisory lawyers at division level units.

In 2022, in order to enable the National Defense Human Rights Monitoring Group to

identify weak points in different areas of human rights protection, the MND reformed the


**24)**
An integrated national defense
human rights system where
service members can apply for
human rights counseling and
file petitions for investigations.
Service members are allowed
to request counseling or an
investigation of human rights
violations or discrimination and
check the progress and results
of the investigation.

*Application procedure for
the counseling service and
petition: Go to the “Military
Human Rights Guardian” linked
through the MND website on
the Internet or Intranet.
Internet: MND website
→Direct link to key information
→Military Human Rights
Guardian
→Click “Apply for Human
Rights Counseling and
Investigation”
Intranet: National Defense Hub
→ Counseling/Suggestion
→Military Human Rights
Guardian
→Click ‘Human Rights
Counseling and Investigation’


-----

way this group was managed, subdividing its activities, among other measures. Subsequently,
the group came up with several recommendations, for example, that the healthcare support
provided to service members could be made more efficient, and that the meal management
system should be improved. The MND is also trying to implement changes that have a
real impact on service members in the field by increasing the frequency of human rights
inspection from once a year to twice a year and expanding the number of military units
subject to such inspection from 10 to 30. Such increase in the frequency and scope of human
rights inspection will allow an in-depth study into the actual human rights situation within
the front-line units.


**Strengthening the Foundation of** In February 2022, the MND created the Military

**Human Rights Policies** Personnel Human Rights Improvement Group[25) ]and

tasked it with all the policy work on human rights

that were previously distributed amongst different offices such as personnel management,
welfare, and legal. Based on the ‘2023-2027 Basic Policy on Military Service’, the Group
is expanding the scope of human rights guarantees for service members by increasing
interconnectivity of existing policies on human rights, while establishing a comprehensive
human rights policy that encompasses agendas such as food, clothing,living conditions,
and the general service environment at large. In July 2022, the MND created the position
of Military Personnel Human Rights Protection Officer, whose role is to report as an
independent investigative body of the ROK Armed Forces to the National Human Rights
Commission. The President of the Republic of Korea appoints a member of the National
Human Rights Commission to the position of Military Personnel Human Rights Protection
Officer in addition to maintain their position as a member of the commission. Meanwhile, the
MND also formed a subcommittee, named the Military Personnel Human Rights Protection
Committee, and a support organization, the Military Personnel Human Rights Protection
Bureau. The MND cooperates actively to enable the Military Personnel Human Rights
Protection Officer to objectively investigate reports of human rights infringements and
promptly make remedial actions on behalf of victims, while guaranteeing military mission
capabilities and operational security.


**Fundamental Systematic Improvements for** By providing fundamental solutions con
**Ascertaining the Truth of Unsolved Deaths** cerning the deaths of military service

members in cases where bereaved family

**in the Military**

members have serious doubts about the

cause of death, the MND is endeavoring to clear all doubts and earn the public’s trust. Notably,
on April 11, 2019, the MND introduced a policy of allocating a government-appointed
attorney to bereaved families of service members who died in duty, to ensure that they receive
full and proper legal support; furthermore, the MND revised the Framework Act on Military
Status and Service on May 2020 to clarify the legal grounds thereof.

In accordance with the Special Act on Ascertaining the Truth of Military Accidents

Resulting in Death, the MND launched the Presidential Truth Commission on Deaths in the
Military in September 2018, and has been striving to honor deceased service members and


**25)**
This group was created by
combining the Legal Affairs
Office's Human Rights Policy
Department, the HR Welfare
Office's Gender Equality Policy
Department, and the Military
Culture Innovation Team.
This merged entity was then
reorganized and established
directly under the Vice
Minister’s Office to consist of
the General Office on Service
Members Rights, Sexual
Violence Prevention Response
Office, Military Culture
Innovation Office, and Gender
Equality Policy Team.


-----

their bereaved families, in addition to compensating damages suffered. The aforementioned
commission is tasked with investigating allegations raised by bereaved families in as
objective of a manner as possible.

In 2022, the MND sought to improve its expertise in military investigations by preparing

the formation of an investigation education center under the Criminal Investigation
Command as well as sending action level officers to receive training at the National Forensic
Service and the Korea Police Investigation Academy.

To uncover the truth and fundamentally resolve questionable deaths in the military, the

Military Court Act was revised and starting on July 1, 2022,responsibility to investigate
whether a crime was involved in the death of a service member or a civilian employee of
military was transferred to the civilian police, including the right to adjudicate.

The MND aims to gain the public’s trust and improve the human rights of service members

by continuously improving relevant policies, including expanding the government’s
responsibilities when service members die in service and honoring them to the fullest extent
possible.

**2. Establishing a System for Preventing Sexual Violence in the Military and**

**Protecting Victims**


**Strengthening Prevention** To prevent sexual violence, the ROK Armed Forces, under

**against Sexual Violence** the leadership of commanding officers, are emphasizing

prevention against sexual violence in the workplace,

introducing multifaceted policy improvements to better support and protect victims of sexual
violence, and reinforcing the integrated support system for victims.

To create working conditions safe from sexual violence, the MND issues annual guidelines

on the prevention of sexual violence and harassment, and focuses on improving gender
awareness education and inspecting/supplementing mechanisms to prevent sexual violence.
In 2020, as a means of improving gender awareness education, the MND added gender
equality to the four major categories of violence to be prevented which are sexual violence,
sexual harassment, sex trafficking, and domestic violence, to its education program. The
MND introduced a mandatory education course on gender equality that is offered twice a
year, once in online format and the other conducted on site.

All commissioned officers, sergeant majors and civilian employees grade 5 and above

are required to complete the onsite course, which focuses on holding discussions on
gender equality, moderated by expert lecturers. The onsite course has contributed to raising
awareness of gender issues and gender equality amongst those who serve in managerial roles.
Also, given the frequency of incidents in particular seasons, the MND designated summer
and winters as periods for emphasizing preventative measures against sexual violence.
Through sexual violence prevention programs overseen by unit commanding officers, in
addition to education about the procedures for handling incidents of sexual violence, the
MND warns service members to remain vigilant at all times, and is working to minimize the
occurrence of sex-related incidents.


-----

To eradicate sexual violence in the military and enforce gender equality policies, civilian

members of the MND’s Gender Equality Committee visited field units in the first and
second half of the year. During these visits, committee members observed how the MND
gender equality policies are being enforced, and measured the level of gender awareness
among service members by holding separate meetings with commanding officers and key
staff, female personnel with less than five years of service, personnel in charge of handling
cases of sexual harassment and sexual violence as well as a survey of both male and female
service members. The committee also looked into the conditions for handling cases of sexual
harassment and sexual violence. The Military Sexual Violence Survey is a sample survey that
has been conducted by the MND once every three years since 2016. In 2022, this survey was
expanded to include all service members and civilian employees, with the expectation that it
will produce more accurate data with which the MND will be able to develop increasingly
practical policies.

In 2021, the MND took the first step towards setting up a department dedicated to rooting

out and handling sexual harassment and sexual violence in the military at the MND as well
as the headquarters for each service. The establishment of such department to oversee the
prevention, management and handling of sex-related incidents was a key recommendation of
the civilian-government-military joint committee. As a result, the position of Sexual Violence
Prevention Officer, in addition to Sexual Violence Prevention and Response Centers, were
created at each branch of the armed forces in February 2022.


**Victim Protection** In 2021, the joint committee produced fifteen recommendations,

one of which concerned the formation of a team dedicated to

preventing sexual violence in the armed forces so that tragedies such as the recent case
of a female NCO committing suicide after being sexually harassed does not repeat itself.
Another recommendation implemented by the military concerned the establishment of the
“Support System for Victims before Referral to Investigation Authorities,” which took effect
in September 2021, to protect victims and prevent secondary damages. Under this system,
victims could receive mental counseling, medical care, job/position reassignment, and legal
advice before having to report the crime to investigation authorities. In May 2022, the MND
adopted “Guidelines for Preventing Secondary Damages caused by Sexual Harassment/
Sexual Violence”, reforming the regulations on how “secondary damages” should be defined,
and providing guidelines on treatment.

In order to protect and help victims more effectively, the MND will increase the number

of counselors for sexual grievances from 50 per Corps level echelons in 2021 to 150 per
Division level echelons in 2023 and, accordingly, the MND is improving independent
working conditions and expanding education to improve job competency. The MND is also
building channels of cooperation with other government organizations. In October 2021,
to help victims return to normal life, the MND entered into an agreement with the Ministry
of Justice to allow victims of sexual violence to access the services provided by the Smile
Center, an agency that provides psychological therapy to victims of sexual violence. The
MND is planning to develop a mobile reporting app by 2023 that guarantees anonymity and
could potentially increase the reporting rate, in addition to setting up an incident management


-----

information system that would permit a more systemized management of incidents and databased formulation of policies .

In the future, the military will pursue multiple improvements of its policies with the aim

of preventing sexual violence and protecting the victims. By boosting the effectiveness of
gender awareness education, the MND will improve the internal culture of military units and
increase awareness of sexual violence amongst service members, which in turn will create a
military culture that is safe from sexual violence and upholds gender equality.

**3. Operating a Fair and Trusted Military Justice System**


**Military Justice Reform** In February 2018, the MND developed a plan to reform the

military judicial system to guarantee the constitutional rights

and human rights of service members. In 2019, a bill to amend the Military Court Act was
submitted to the National Assembly, in which the peacetime appellate military court would
be abolished and appeals heard and ruled in a civilian court, while first instance military
courts would be consolidated and brought under the direct control of the Minister of National
Defense. In essence, the amendment sought to restructure the organization of military courts
and military investigation bodies, and improve the overall military court system.

Aside from modifying the Military Court Act, the MND actively worked on imple
mentable tasks on its own accord. In March 2019, the MND introduced the policy of
allocating a government-appointed attorney to bereaved families of service members who
died in duty and victims of crimes committed in the military to provide them with proper
legal support. In August 2020, the MND abolished the confinement policy, which had been
criticized as a form of “arrest without warrant” and introduced the discipline training policy
as its replacement. Furthermore, in December 2020, the National Assembly enacted the
Act on the Performance of the Military Police, which provided legitimacy to the duties
performed by the Military Police.

Lastly, in January 2022, investigation teams were set up for each branch of the armed

forces and the ROK Marine Corps to directly report to the Service Chiefs and the Marine
Commandant. This initiative was adopted to create an independent environment for the
investigators without the possibility of intervention by front-line commanders.


**Revision of the Military Court Act** The amended Military Court Act, containing newly

added provisions on the military judicial system,

took effect on July 1, 2022. To guarantee military personnel’s right to be tried by judges,
jurisdiction over appellate trials was transferred from the High Military Court to the Seoul
High Court. Under the Act, crimes involving sexual violence, death of a service member, and
those committed prior to the perpetrator’s entry into military service shall be investigated by
the civilian police and the prosecutor’s office and tried in a civilian court. Moreover, such
practices as appointing field officers as lay judges in peacetime, convening the authorities’
right to confirm judgments, and exercising commanders’ right to approve detention warrants
were abolished.


-----

Fairness and independence of investigations and trials in the military were guaranteed

by appointing separate, independent military judges and protecting their status, combining
first instance military courts of each branch of the armed forces into a military court directly
under the Minister of National Defense, and replacing the general prosecution teams
assigned to military units headed by General and Flag level officers with a prosecution team
for each branch of the armed forces that reports directly to its respective Service Chief.

**[Figure 7-13] Binary Criminal Procedures Following the Revision of the Military Court Act**


**Comparison of applicable laws after separation of the criminal procedures for military cases**




Changes in
procedures

Bifurcation

of

criminal

procedures

|Category|Institution name|Applicable law|
|---|---|---|
|Final appellate|Supreme Court|Military Court Act|
|Appellate|High Military Court||
|First instance|General Military Court||
|Investigation|Military Prosecutor||
||Military Judicial Police||

|Category|Crimes over which the military court has jurisdiction|Col3|Crimes transferred to a civilian court|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||Institution name|Applicable law|Institution name|Applicable law|
|Final appellate|Supreme Court|Military Court Act|Supreme Court|Criminal Procedure Act Court Organization Act Prosecutors’ Office Act Act on the Structure and Operation of National and Autonomous Police|
|Appellate|Seoul High Court||High Court||
|First instance|General Military Court||District Court||
|Investigation|Military Prosecutor||Prosecutor||
||Military Judicial Police||Police||


**Modification of Laws for the Establishing** With the passage of the amended Military

**the Military Judicial System** Court Act, the MND modified relevant

regulations to guarantee proper conditions

for military judicial agencies to carry out their duties. In March 2022, the MND introduced
regulations on the rules for investigations conducted by military prosecutors and military
judicial police, which outlines areas in which military prosecutors and military judicial police
must cooperate—as well as regulations on investigation procedures for crimes committed
by service members when such crimes fall under the jurisdiction of the courts, which covers
areas of cooperation between civilian and military investigations of crimes like sexual
violence when jurisdiction is transferred to civilian courts.

The MND will spare no effort in establishing a military judicial system that is trusted

by both the public and members of the military, and will work closely with the courts,
prosecutors’ office, police, and other related agencies to this end.


**26)**
A person with the obligation
to serve in the military who,
on the grounds of freedom of
conscience (guaranteed under
the Constitution of the Republic
of Korea), is currently serving
or is obligated to serve in an
alternative service in lieu of
active-duty service, reserve
service or supplementary
service (Article 5, Clause 1-6 of
the Military Service Act).

**27)**
“Because the current
categories of military service
violate the conscience of
objectors due to their religious
beliefs, etc. as they all premise
military training, Article 5 (1)
of the Military Service Act,
which does not prescribe any
alternative service programs
for conscientious objectors
pursuant to the freedom of
conscience provided under
Article 19 of the Constitution
of the Republic of Korea, does
not conform to the Constitution,
the relevant articles shall be
applicable provisionally until
December 31, 2019."


**4. Operating an Alternative Military Service[26)] System Integrating Military Duty**

**and Human Rights**

On June 28, 2018, the Constitutional Court of Korea declared that the provisions related to
Article 5 of the Military Service Act did not conform[27)] to the Constitution. Subsequently, in
July 2018, the MND, the Military Manpower Administration (MMA), and the Ministry of
Justice launched a task force to formulate an alternative service program.

As a result, on December 28, 2018, the MND announced its plan to introduce an alternative


-----

service program in which both “duty of military service” and “freedom of conscience” were
satisfied, by requiring service members to serve 36 months in a correctional facility for
alternative service. On April 25, 2019, the MND submitted the alternative service legislation
bill to the National Assembly and, on December 31, 2019, the Act on the Assignment and
Performance of the Alternative Service (“Alternative Service Act”) was promulgated,
entering effect on January 1, 2020.

In June 2020, the Enforcement Decree of the Alternative Service Act and its subordinate

laws were enacted and amended; a screening committee for alternative service was formed
to review alternative service assignments and, on June 30, the committee began accepting
applications for alternative service assignments. By the end of October 2022, a total of 64
plenary meetings of the alternative service review committee had been held and decisions
made on 2,684 applications (out of the 2,989 applications submitted) by vote. Of these, 5
cases were dismissed on the grounds that the applicants’ reasons for refusing to serve in the
military were insufficient, and 6 cases were dismissed due to lack of documents, while the
remaining 2,673 applications for an alternative service assignment were approved.

In this way, a person who is accorded an alternative service assignment by the review

committee must work as an alternative service personnel. Following the adoption of this
system in October 2020, the MND, in consultation with the Ministry of Justice, assigned 106
individuals to serve as alternative service personnel in 2020, 545 in 2021, and 403 in 2022.
After recruiting the first batch of 63 individuals in October 2020, the MMA has recruited
a total of 1,070 individuals for alternative service as of December 2022. These individuals
receive basic job training at an alternative training center for three weeks and are then
assigned to work at one of 19 alternative service institutions, such as prisons or detention
centers. For their 36 month of service, they live together and perform public services such as
providing meals, managing supplies, hygiene, and facilities at these correctional institutions.

The MMA is committed to maintaining fairness by strictly managing the alternative service

program as it is also an extension of the military service obligations. The MMA is also
cooperating with the Ministry of Justice to create an environment in which alternative service
personnel can fulfill their obligations faithfully. Furthermore, the MMA is striving to stably
manage the alternative service system, which allows conscientious objectors to proudly
fulfill their military obligations while ensuring their freedom of conscience guaranteed in the
constitution. The MMA is also working hard to improve conditions for alternative service, in
order to support alternative service members’ efforts to carry out their obligations faithfully.
For example, the MMA is closely cooperating with other government agencies to provide
alternative service members with the same level of benefits enjoyed by those serving on
active duty such as discounts on mobile phone plans and language test fees. Further efforts
are being made to support their return to society by making the Tomorrow Preparation Fund
program available to alternative service personnel as compensation for completing their
military service obligation and paying the cost of their national health insurance while they
are performing their alternative service.


-----

-----

-----

## Appendix

**Special Appendix**

1. The Past, Present, and Future of the ROK-U.S. Alliance

2. The History and Future of the ROK Armed Forces' Peace

Operations

3. Status of USFK Base Relocation

4. Status of Defense Export and Development of Weapons

System and Military Technology

**Appendix**

1. Force Posture of Neighboring Countries

2. Comparing Defense Budgets Around the World

3. Annual Defense Budget

4. Force Posture of the Two Koreas

5. Comparing the Economic Indicators of the Two Koreas

6. UN Security Council Resolutions on Sanctions against North

Korea

7. Key Denuclearization Agreements Regarding the North Korean

Nuclear Issues

8. Progress and Assessment of North Korean Nuclear and Missile

Development

9. Chronology of Test Launches of Ballistic Missiles by North Korea

10. Chronicle of Inter-Korean Military Relations
11. Chronicle of North Korea’s Incursions and Local Provocations

against the ROK

12. Examples of North Korean Violations of the 9.19 Comprehensive

Military Agreement (CMA)

13. Combined and Joint Exercises and Training
14. Joint Communiqué of the 53rd ROK-U.S. Security Consultative

Meeting (SCM)

15. Joint Communiqué of the 54th ROK-U.S. Security Consultative

Meeting (SCM)

16. Direct and Indirect Financial Support for the Stationing of USFK
17. Status of International Defense Industry Cooperation

Agreements with ROK

18. Status of International Defense Cooperation Agreements with ROK
19. International Disarmament and Non-Proliferation Agreements

and Organizations

20. Status of Overseas Deployment of ROK Armed Forces
21. Changes in Salary of Conscripted Service Members
22. Changes in the Mandatory Military Service Period

23. ROK National Defense Organization Chart
24. Amendment of the Laws and Regulations under the

Jurisdiction of the MND

25. Composition and Major Activities of the National Assembly

Defense Committee


-----

Special Appendix

### 01 The Past, Present, and Future of the ROK-U.S. Alliance

**1871 – January 1950: The Dawn of the ROK-U.S. Relationship**

The beginning of the ROK-U.S. relationship dates back to 1871, when the United States demanded the opening of trade relations with
Korea. However, meaningful cooperation between the two countries only began when U.S. troops were stationed on the Korean
Peninsula after the end of World War II. Because the United States did not place significant interest over the strategic importance of
the Korean Peninsula during this period, relationship between the two countries did not grow into an alliance. Nevertheless, this
period still bears historical significance as it served as basis for military relationship between the two countries.

|June 1, 1871|May 22, 1882|August 15, 1945|September 8, 1945|August 15, 1948|June 29, 1949|January 12, 1950|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|The United States Expedition to Korea|Treaty of Peace, Amity, Commerce, and Navigation between Korea and the United States|End of World War II|Stationing of U.S. Army XXIV Corps in Incheon|Establishment of the Government of the Republic of Korea|Withdrawal of U.S. Forces from Korea|Declaration of the Acheson Line|


**The U.S. Expedition to Korea (June 1−11, 1871): The U.S. Far East Fleet,**
**USS Colorado**
The ROK-U.S. relationship started with the United States Expedition to Korea,
which was triggered by the USS General Sherman incident (1866). At that time
the U.S. sent the USS Colorado, three escort ships, two gunboats, and 1,230
troops to coerce trade relations with Korea.

**Presence and withdrawal of U.S. troops on the Korean Peninsula**
**after World War II**
At the conclusion of World War II, the U.S. Army XXIV Corps was stationed
in Korea to disarm the Japanese forces, which led to substantial cooperation
between the Republic of Korea and the United States. Under the plan for the
occupation of Korea by the U.S. Department of the Army, approximately
70,000 U.S. soldiers were dispatched to Korea from September to November
1945 to bring the country under U.S. military administration.

In the meantime, while rapidly downsizing its military after the end of the
war, the U.S. started to adjust the number of troops stationed overseas
based on the strategic importance of each area. Against this backdrop, the
report on ‘U.S. Aid to Foreign Countries from the Perspective of National
Security’ issued by the Joint Strategy Survey Committee (JSSC) recognized
the need to provide aid to Korea, but rated the strategic importance of the
Korean Peninsula as relatively low. Based on this strategic assessment, the
U.S. military adopted the Island Perimeter Strategy which specified that
there was no need for the presence of U.S. troops in Asia. This Strategy was
officially announced during the ‘Acheson Speech’ in 1950.

Accordingly, on April 8, 1948, U.S. decided to pull its forces out of Korea,
while simultaneously providing military and economic aid to the Republic of
Korea in its National Security Council Document No. 8. On March 22, 1949,
the U.S. government rescheduled the timeline of the withdrawal of U.S.
troops in Korea to the end of June 1949, and adopted NSC 8/2, a revised
version of NSC 8, promising more military and economic aid to Korea.

The U.S. forces, about 30,000 men began to withdraw from the Republic of
Korea on September 15, 1948 and completed the withdrawal process on


**‘Treaty of Peace, Amity, Commerce and Navigation between Korea**
**and the United States’ ( May 22, 1882)**
This was the very first modern treaty that the Joseon Dynasty signed with a
Western power. In accordance with the treaty, official diplomatic relationship
was established between the Joseon Dynasty and the U.S.

June 29, 1949, leaving behind only 479 personnel of the Korea Military
Advisory Group. As a result, Republic of Korea was left militarily vulnerable
without a proper level of deterrence, while North Korea continued to build
up its military capabilities with the assistance of the Soviet Union.

**U.S. troops leaving Korea**
**(June 29, 1949)**
According to the U.S. strategic
decision, U.S. troops stationed in the
Republic of Korea completed the
withdrawal process, leaving only 479
members of the Korea Military
Advisory Group in the country.

**Acheson Line(January 12, 1950)**
Dean Acheson, the Secretary of State,
announced that Republic of Korea
would be excluded from the U.S.

Acheson Defense Perimeter during his speech

Line titled ‘Crisis in Asia.’ During this

oration he declared that, “The defense
perimeter runs along the Aleutians to
Japan and then goes to the Ryukyus
and on to the Philippine Islands,”
adding that, “So far as the military
security of other areas in the Pacific is
concerned, it must be clear that no one

Acheson can guarantee these areas against


Acheson

Line

Acheson

Line


-----

**1950 - 1953 U.S. Participation in the Korean War and the Establishment of the ROK-U.S. Alliance**

On June 25, 1950, when North Korea invaded the Republic of Korea without warning, the U.S. immediately called for the convening of
the UN Security Council to respond to the invasion. Subsequently, two Security Council resolutions were adopted, allowing a total of
sixty-three nations to provide support to the Republic. Sixteen nations sent troops to the peninsula, including the United States. With
this support, Republic of Korea was ultimately able to repel the Communist forces; however, this did not result in Korean unification
as the Armistice Agreement was signed in 1953. Shortly after the Armistice, the ROK-U.S. Mutual Defense Treaty was signed in
October 1953, which resulted in an official military alliance between the two countries. This later became the legal foundation for the
formation of a combined defense system.

|June 25, 1950|June 30, 1950|July 1-4, 1950|July 14, 1950|July 10, 1951|July 27, 1953|October 1, 1953|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|North Korea’s invasion of the Republic of Korea and the outbreak of the Korean War|President Truman’s approval of U.S. ground forces entering the war|Deployment of the U.S. Army XXIV Division|Operational control over the Republic of Korea Army transferred to the Commander of the UN Forces|Cease-fire talks begin|‘Armistice Agreement’ takes effect|ROK-U.S. Mutual Defense Treaty signed * Official Establishment of the ROK-U.S. Alliance|



**Key Events of the Korean War**


Busan Perimeter Line of Defense

(August 1 – September 14, 1950).

Situation Map of the UN Forces’ advance

(October 1950).


Incheon Amphibious Landing Operation

(15 September 1950).

**U.S. troop casualties during**

**the Korean War**

- Killed 36,940

- Injured 92,134

- MIAs 3,737

- POWs 4,439


**‘Mutual Defense Treaty between the ROK and the U.S.’**
**(October 1, 1953)**
President Syngman Rhee, who opposed a cease-fire without unification,
conducted diplomatic negotiations with the U.S. government, which wanted
an early end to the war, to sign the ROK-U.S. Mutual Defense Treaty, which
marks the official beginning of the ROK-U.S. Alliance.

**<Major Contents>**

**Article 2**
The Parties shall consult together whenever, in the opinion of either one of
them, the political independence or security of either of the Parties is
threatened by external armed attack. Separately and jointly, by self-help
and mutual aid, the Parties will maintain and develop appropriate means to
deter armed attack and take suitable measures in consultation and
agreement to implement this Treaty and to further its purposes.

**Article 3**
Each Party recognizes that an armed attack in the Pacific area on either of
the Parties in the territories now under their respective administrative
control, or hereafter recognized by one of the Parties as lawfully brought
under the administrative control of the other, would be dangerous to its
own peace and safety and declares that it will act to meet the common
danger in accordance with its constitutional processes.

**Article 4**
The Republic of Korea grants, and the United States of America accepts,
the right to dispose United States land, air and sea forces in and about the
territory of the Republic of Korea as determined by mutual agreement.

|Date|Key Events|
|---|---|
|June 25, 1950|North Korea invades the Republic of Korea – U.S. immediately calls for convocation of the UN Security Council. – The Republic of Korea Government requests U.S. military support.|
|June 27|The UN Security Council agrees on military sanctions against the North Korea and military support for the Republic of Korea.|
|June 30|U.S. President Truman orders the U.S. ground forces to deploy to Korea.|
|July 3|General MacArthur, Supreme Commander of Allied Forces, orders U.S. Marines to deploy to Korea.|
|July 7|The UN Security Council adopts a resolution to establish the United Nations Command.|
|July 8|President Truman appoints General MacArthur as the Supreme Commander of the UN Command.|
|July 14|President Syngman Rhee transfers operational control over Republic of Korea forces to the Supreme Commander of UN Forces.|
|August 1 – 14, September|The Battle for the Busan Perimeter|
|September 15|UN Forces conduct the Incheon Amphibious Landing Operation.|
|September 28|UN Forces recapture Seoul.|
|October 19|UN Forces occupy Pyongyang.|
|October 26|UN Forces advance towards the Yalu River.|
|January 15, 1951|PRC People’s Liberation Army occupies Seoul.|
|March 15|UN Forces reclaim Seoul|
|April 11|Lieutenant-General Ridgway is named Supreme Commander of the UN Forces.|
|May 11, 1952|General Clark is named Supreme Commander of the UN Forces.|
|December 2|President-elect Eisenhower visits the Republic of Korea to inspect combat areas.|
|July 12, 1953|The ROK and the U.S. agree to sign the Mutual Defense Treaty.|
|July 27|Signing of the Armistice Agreement|


**Initial Signing of the ROK-U.S. Mutual Defense Treaty (August 8, 1953)**
ROK Foreign Minister Byun Young Tae and U.S. Secretary of State John F. Dulles
sign the initial ROK-U.S. Mutual Defense Treaty at Kyungmoodae with President
Rhee and other ROK ministers looking on. The official signing of the Treaty took
place in Washington on October 1, 1953. Under the Treaty, the U.S. agreed to
jointly defend the Republic of Korea against external armed attacks.


-----

**1954 - 1968 The U.S. Provides Military Aid and the ROK Takes Part in the Vietnam War**

After the inception of the official ROK-U.S. military alliance, the two sides maintained a supporting-supported relationship until the
late 1960s. The ROK provided land and facilities to the U.S. Forces Korea (USFK) and, in return, the U.S. provided military and
economic support to the ROK, with the USFK leading the defense of the ROK. However, through milestones such as the
implementation of the ‘Status of Forces Agreement’ and annual bilateral Defense Minister level Meetings, the ROK-U.S. military
relationship was developed into a mutually complementary alliance.

|November 17, 1954|November 14, 1961|May 8, 1964|September 22, 1964|February 9, 1967|April 17−28, 1968|May 27−28, 1968|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Adoption of the ‘Agreed Minutes between the ROK and the U.S. relating to Continued Cooperation in Economic and Military Matters’|Summit Meeting of Chairman Park Chung Hee and President John F. Kennedy|U.S. requests ROK support in the Vietnam War.|ROK deploys troops to Vietnam.|‘Status of Forces Agreement’ (SOFA) takes effect.|Summit between President Park Chung Hee and President Lyndon B. Johnson|1st ROK-U.S. Defense Minister level Meeting|



**The Signing of the ‘Agreed Minutes between the ROK and the**
**U.S. relating to Continued Cooperation in Economic and Military**
**Matters’ (November 17, 1954)**
According to the minutes of the Republic of Korea-United States agreement
on military and economic assistance signed by Foreign Minister Byun
Young-tae and U.S. Ambassador Ellis Briggs on 17 November 1954, the
United States agreed to provide US $ 420 million in military assistance and
US $280 million in economic assistance to the Republic of Korea, in
addition to seventy-nine warships and one hundred jet fighters and the
establishment of ten reserve divisions. In return, ROK agreed to the
provision that “during the time the United Nations Command is responsible
for the defense of ROK, the ROK Armed Forces will be placed under the
operational control of the United Nations Command”. With the signing of
this agreement, ROK was able to maintain military of 700,000 personnel. **Summit Meeting between Chairman Park Chung Hee and President**
Meanwhile, the free military assistance provided by the United States to **John F. Kennedy (November 14, 1961)**
the Republic of Korea from 1950 to 1988 included the following: $5.47 Chairman Park, who came into power on May 16, 1961, visited the U.S. and held
billion under the military assistance program (MAP), and $170 million in a summit meeting with then President John F. Kennedy. Through the Joint
international military education and training (IMET). The United States also Statement, President Kennedy highly evaluated the pledge of the ROK
permitted the Republic of Korea to purchase military equipment worth of Government to return to civilian control and assured to extend all possible
$5.05 billion through foreign military sales (FMS) and $1.43 billion through economic aid to the ROK. In addition, the U.S. President reaffirmed the

commitment of the U.S. to render ‘forthwith’ all possible assistance to the ROK,

direct commercial sales, and to receive $2.35 billion in FMS loans.

including the use of its armed forces, in accordance with the ROK-U.S. Mutual
Defense Treaty, in the event of an armed attack against the ROK.

The Dove Unit deployment ceremony (February 9, 1965)

**The ROK Armed Forces Deploy Troops to Vietnam** **The ROK-U.S. Summit Meeting in Honolulu** **Status of Forces Agreement**
**(1964-1973)** **(April 17, 1968)** **(SOFA)**
As the U.S. became deeply involved in the Vietnam War, it requested In the wake of the Blue House Raid (January 21) The Status of Forces Agreement,
twenty-five allied nations including the ROK to support the Vietnamese and the capture of the USS Pueblo (January 23) in which stipulates the legal status of
government in May 1964. 1968, which heightened tensions on the Korean the USFK in accordance with Article 4
Accordingly, the ROK Ministry of National Defense, after deliberation peninsula, the need for close security consultation of the ROK-U.S. Mutual Defense
by the National Security Council and approval by the National between the ROK and the U.S. was emphasized. At Treaty, was signed on July 9, 1966 in
Assembly, made the final decision to send troops to Vietnam. From the the summit meeting held in Honolulu on April 17, Seoul and took effect on February 9,
first deployment in September 1964 to the fourth in 1966, the ROK 1968, the ROK and the U.S. agreed to hold an 1967.
sent approximately 48,000 troops to Vietnam, and completely annual Defense Minister level meeting to consult SOFA, also called the “Administrative
withdrew them in 1973 after the ‘Paris Peace Accords’ were signed to on ROK security issues, which marked a significant Agreement,” consists of thirty-one
end the Vietnam War. turning point for the security of the ROK. Articles, Agreed Minutes, Agreed

In May of the same year, the ROK-U.S. Defense Understandings and Exchanges of
Minister level Meeting was held for the first time in Letters, and it stipulates the legal
Washington D.C., and the two sides took turns rights and responsibilities of both
hosting the meeting each year. At the fourth sides with regard to the areas and
meeting in 1971, it was renamed as the Security facilities used by the USFK; entry and
Consultative Meeting (SCM), which continues to be exit, customs and duties, and criminal
held to this day. jurisdiction.


-----

**1969 - 1979 Seeking Self-Reliant National Defense Capability**

The start of USFK troop reductions based on the ‘Nixon Doctrine’ in 1969 pushed the ROK to aspire to a self-reliant national defense,
which began to materialize with the establishment of new military units and Yulgok project. During this period, the reduction of the
USFK was followed by the strengthening of combined training between the ROK and the U.S. as well as the activation of the
Combined Forces Command (CFC), serving as an opportunity to enhance the ROK-U.S. military relationship to a substantial degree.

|July 25, 1969|March 27, 1971|July 12−13, 1971|March 29, 1973|August 18, 1976|March 9, 1977|November 7, 1978|July 1, 1979|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Announcement of the ‘Nixon Doctrine’|Withdrawal of the U.S. 7th Division|4th Security Consultative Meeting (SCM)|Withdrawal of the ROK forces from Vietnam|Panmunjom Axe Murder Incident|USFK ground forces announce their withdrawal|Establishment of the Combined Forces Command (CFC)|Continued presence of USFK announced at the ROK-U.S. Summit|


**Announcement of the ‘Nixon Doctrine’ (July 25, 1969)**
The military and foreign policy lines of the Nixon administration were based on
the ‘Nixon Doctrine.’ The Doctrine, which proposed the reduction of U.S. military
intervention in Asia, declared in a 1970 diplomatic white paper that “the United
States cannot be solely responsible for the defense and economic affairs of any
country. All countries in the world, especially those in Asia as well as Central and
South America, must be responsible for their independent national defense.” The
doctrine also stipulated that “the United States shall reduce its military
intervention in Asia and the Far Eastern region, and when an allied nation is
under attack, other than a nuclear attack, the United States shall only provide
military and economic support. The country concerned should not expect support
from the U.S. ground forces and thus should be responsible for the defense of its
nation.” According to a recommendations by the U.S. Congress and the National
Security Council (NSC), the U.S. government decided to withdraw 420,000 U.S.
troops from Asia by June 1971, including 20,000 troops from the ROK, and
support a five-year national plan for the modernization of the ROK military. In
February 1971, in accordance with the ROK-U.S. agreement on the reduction of
the USFK and the modernization of the ROK military, the U.S. withdrew 20,000
troops, including the U.S. Army 7th Division, out of the Korean Peninsula by
March of the same year.

Minister of National Defense Jeong Rae-Hyuk and Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird

**The 4th ROK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting (SCM)**
**(July 12−13, 1971, Seoul)**
The ROK-U.S. Defense Minister level meetings was renamed as the ROK-U.S.
Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) at the fourth meeting. The meeting
consolidated the security cooperative relationship between the two nations, and
greatly contributed to the combined defense posture.

Activation of the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command (November 7, 1978)

**Establishment of the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command**
**(November 7, 1978)**
With the activation of the CFC and in accordance with Strategic Directive No.1,
the Commander of the CFC was given operational control over both the ROK and
the U.S. forces through the component commands.


**Introduction of the F-4D Phantom**
**fighter bomber (September 28, 1969)**
The “1.21 Incident” encouraged the ROK to
issue an urgent request for fighter-bombers
during the ROK-U.S. Summit in 1968,
resulting in the arrival of eighteen F-4D
Phantoms to the Republic of Korea in 1969.

**The U.S. 7th Division Farewell**
**Ceremony (Yongsan 8th Army training**
**ground, Seoul, March 27, 1971)**
In 1971, 20,000 U.S. troops of the 7th
Division withdrew. In preparation for the
reduction of the USFK, airlift mobility
exercises such as Focus-Letina and Freedom
Vault were strengthened, and the ROK-U.S.
1st Corps was mobilized on July 1, 1971, to
supplement an absence of combat power.


The U.S. 7th Division Farewell
Ceremony (Yongsan 8th Army

training ground, Seoul, March 27,

1971)


**The Carter administration announces the withdrawal of the USFK**
**ground force (March 9, 1977).**
At the time, the USFK plan was to withdraw 6,000 troops including one brigade
of the U.S. 2nd Division during Phase 1 (1978−1979), 9,000 soldiers including
logistics support troops during Phase 2 (−June 1980), and two remaining brigades
and division headquarters during Phase 3 (1981-1982), while maintaining the
presence of Air Force, intelligence communication units. In fact, 3,400 troops
were withdrawn by 1978, but the remaining plan for withdrawal was cancelled
after President Carter’s visit to the ROK in 1979.

|CFC Com|mander|
|---|---|


**National Control & Military** **National Control & Military**

**Authority** **Authority**

**Chairman of Joint** **ROK-U.S. Military** **Chairman of Joint**

**Chiefs of Staff** **Committee (MC)** **Chiefs of Staff**

**CFC Commander**

Wartime

**Component Command**

- Ground/Naval/Air Component Command

- Combined Marine Component Command

- Combined Special Operations Component

**ROK Armed** Command **U.S. Military**

**Forces Units** - Combined Psychological Operations Task **Units**

Forces


The ROK-U.S. Alliance Command Structure following the Establishment of

the Combined Forces Command


-----

**1980 - 1992 Re-consolidating the Alliance**

With the inauguration of the Reagan administration in 1981, the ROK and the U.S. enjoyed a stronger relationship than ever before,
and the establishment of the ROK-U.S. logistics support system guaranteed the ability to maintain a wartime footing. Furthermore, the
ROK-U.S. military relationship evolved into a partnership with the commencement of talks on defense cost sharing.

|January 28, 1981|June 8, 1988|August 2, 1989|April 19, 1990|March 24, 1990|November 13, 1990|December 25, 1991|December 31, 1991|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|President Chun Doo-hwan visits the U.S.|Signing of the Mutual Logistics Support Agreement|U.S. Congress adopts the Nunn-Warner Amendment|U.S. Department of Defense reports the EASI.|ROK joins the Pacific Rim Exercise for the first time.|1st agreement on sharing the defense burden at the 22nd SCM|Dissolution of the USSR, start of the post-Cold War era|Adoption of the Joint Declaration on the Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula|


**Focusing on diplomacy toward**
**the U.S.**
President Chun Doo-hwan visited the
U.S. in two occasions in January 1981
and in April 1985, and he also invited
U.S. President Reagan to Seoul in
November 1983. A total of three
ROK-U.S. summit meetings were held.

**Establishment of the Wartime ROK-U.S. Logistics Support System**

**1) Wartime Host Nation Support (WHNS)**
The WHNS refers to the military and civilian resource support provided for the
reception and onward movement of the U.S. forces deployed to the Korean
Peninsula in times of crisis or war, and for the maintenance of war capabilities.
The matter was first discussed at the 17th SCM in 1985, and need among MOU
was signed at the 19th SCM in 1987. The ‘Wartime Host Nation Support
Umbrella Agreement (WHNS UA)’ was signed at the 23rd SCM in 1991, and the
‘Wartime Host Nation Support Combined Steering Committee Charter’ was
signed in 1993.

**2) War Reserve Stocks for the Allies (WRSA)**
The WRSA refers to the U.S. war stocks stored in the U.S.’s ally nations. The
Critical Requirements Deficiency List (CRDL) refers to defense materials of which
the U.S. allies are in urgent need, among U.S. peacetime operation stocks and
war reserve stocks not designated as WRSA. Consultations on selling U.S.owned war materials to the ROK were made between the ROK Minister of
National Defense and the U.S. Secretary of Defense in 1982 and 1984. This was
part of an effort to resolve the difficulties in meeting the equipment and material
requirements of the ROK Armed Forces in a timely manner in the early stages of
war, as it takes time for ordinary sales to be reviewed and approved by the U.S.
Congress.

**3)Mutual Logistics Support Agreement (MLSA)**
The MLSA was signed between the ROK Minister of National Defense and the U.S.
Secretary of Defense in 1988 to provide mutual logistics support between the ROK
and the U.S. during wartime/peacetime, combined exercises and training, operation
and joint missions, as well as to meet unexpected temporary requirements.
The agreement stipulates that the mutual logistics support process begins with a
request from one party, whereupon the other party provides the requested support,
which must be paid back with materials of the same kinds, or with services or cash
in kind. Support is provided in the form of supplies, services, and such like.

ROK Minister of National Defense Oh Ja-Bok and US Secretary of Defense Frank Carlucci shake

hands after signing the MLSA (June 8, 1988).


**The Nunn-Warner Amendment and the ‘East Asia Strategic Initiative’**

**1)Nunn-Warner Amendment**
Submitted to the Plenary Session of the U.S. Senate in July 1989, the Nunn-Warner
Amendment required the U.S. administration to set up a plan to withdraw the USFK
troops and report the results of the negotiation with the ROK by April 1990. It was
based on the decision that; a) the U.S. needs to re-evaluate the location, military
structure and mission of its forces stationed in East Asia and the ROK, b) the ROK
needs to bear a higher share of the cost of its security, and c) the ROK and the U.S.
are to discuss the need for a gradual reduction of the USFK.

**2)East Asia Strategic Initiative (EASI)**
In April 1990, the U.S. Department of Defense submitted the EASI according to
the Nunn-Warner Amendment approved by the Senate. The centerpiece of the
EASI was a review of the U.S. positioning strategy in Asia-Pacific, which
considered various factors such as reaffirming the importance of the Asia-Pacific
region, reducing security threats from the former USSR, and cutting the defense
budget. The EASI redefined the role of the USFK from a ‘leading’ to a ‘supporting
role,’ and demanded that the ROK government bear greater responsibility in
sharing the defense burden. It also provided critical momentum for the evolution
of the ROK-U.S. military relationship into a full partnership.

**Rim of the Pacific Exercise (RIMPAC)**

RIMPAC is a large-scale combined sea maneuver
exercise that has been conducted in the Pacific Ocean
biannually since 1971 under the supervision of the U.S.
Pacific Command. It aims to enhance combined
operational capabilities and mutual cooperation
among the Pacific Rim countries so as to secure lines
of communication on major maritime routes in the

Pacific during contingencies. The ROK Navy has been taken part in this exercise
since the 12th RIMPAC in 1990.

**Adoption of the Joint Declaration on the Denuclearization of the**
**Korean Peninsula (December 31, 1991)**
After North Korea’s nuclear ambitions were exposed at the beginning of the
1990s, the ROK government, in close consultation with the U.S., made efforts to
prevent the North from developing nuclear weapons. In an attempt to ‘eliminate
the risk of a nuclear war and create the conditions and an environment conducive
to peace and peaceful unification on the Korean Peninsula through the
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula,’ the ROK government agreed to the
Joint Declaration on the Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. The
agreement was adopted on December 31, 1991, and took effect on February 19,
1992, with the Inter-Korean Basic Agreement.

Republic of Korea representative Lim Dong-won and North Korean representative Choi Woo
jin exchange documents of the Joint Declaration in the conference room of the Neutral Nations

Supervisory Commission at Panmunjom (January 14, 1992).


-----

**1993 - 2000 Seeking a New Security Partnership**

With the transfer of peacetime operational control in 1994, the ROK Armed Forces established an independent operational command
structure, and the wartime combined defense posture was further reinforced. The U.S. announced the East Asia Strategic Report in
1995, suspending the USFK withdrawal plan based on the EASI.

|October 21, 1994|December 1, 1994|February 27, 1995|May 8−19, 1995|June 23, 2000|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|The United States of America and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea sign the Agreed Framework|Transfer of Peacetime OPCON|Announcement of the New EASR|1st ROK-U.S. RSOI Exercise|The MND and DoD sign an MOA for recovery of the remains of fallen service members during the Korean war within the ROK|


**The Agreed Framework between the United States of America and**
**the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (October 21, 1994)**
North Korea started its research on atomic technology in the 1950s and joined
the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in December 1985. After years of
rejecting the “Safeguards Agreement” of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), North Korea finally signed it in January 1992 and submitted
an Initial Report on its nuclear materials and facilities to the IAEA. The IAEA
conducted six provisional nuclear inspections from May 1992 to February
1993, and demanded that North Korea agree to special inspections on two
unreported facilities in the Yongbyon Nuclear Complex. North Korea
responded by seceding from the NPT in March 1993. After that, the U.S. and
North Korea held high-level talks to resolve the nuclear issue. Consequently,
the two sides signed the Agreed Framework between the U.S. and North
Korea on October 21, 1994, which stipulates “North Korea shall freeze and
dismantle its nuclear facilities, and in return, North Korea shall receive a twomillion Kw light-water reactor and alternative energy.”

Inside the nuclear facility in Yongbyon

**Transfer of Peacetime Operational Control (December 1, 1994)**
On July 14, 1950, President Syngman Rhee transferred operational control of
the ROK Armed Forces to General Douglas McArthur, the commander of the
UN forces. Since then, the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command, established
in 1978, exercised both peacetime and wartime operational control. On 6
October 1994, the 26th SCM and the 16th session of the ROK-U.S. Military
Committee Meeting (MCM) endorsed Strategic Directive No. 2, which
resulted in peacetime operational control being transferred to the ROK Armed
Forces as of December 1, 1994.

Foreign Affairs Minister Han Sung-ju and
U.S. Ambassador to Korea James Laney
sign the exchange of notes on the
transfer of peacetime operational control
to the ROK Armed Forces as of 1
December (November 30, 1994).

President Kim Young-sam receives a
report from Gen Lee Yang-ho, Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the
transfer of ‘peacetime operational
control,’ and decorates the JCS flag with
the band symbolizing the transfer
(December 1, 1994).


**East Asia Strategic Report (EASR, February 27, 1995)**
Published in February 1995, the report on the United States Security for the
East Asia-Pacific Region, also known as the East Asia Strategic Report
(EASR), stipulated that the number of U.S. forces in the Asia-Pacific, including
the USFK, “shall be maintained above 100,000 at least until the end of the
twentieth century.”

**Reception, Staging, Onward Movement & Integration (RSOI)**
The RSOI is a command post exercise in which the ROK Armed Forces and
U.S. forces practice procedures for the reception, staging, and onward
movement to the frontline, and integration into the battlefield, of the U.S.
forces deployed to the Korean Peninsula during hostilities. In this exercise,
the ROK Armed Forces also practice procedures for wartime support for the
U.S. forces, mutual logistics support, mobilization, and the restoration of
combat power. This exercise has been carried out every year since 1994,
while the ROK-U.S. combined exercise started in 1995, and continues to this
day under the new name of Key Resolve (2008).

USS Ronald Reagan enters the port of Busan to participate in the RSOI (March 22, 2007).

**Signing of the Memorandum of Agreement on the Recovery of the**
**Remains of U.S. Soldiers (June 23, 2000)**
On Mt. Jago in Chilgok, North Gyeongsang Province, soldiers of ROK Army
50th Division and USFK 501st Brigade recover the remains of service
members who fell during the Korean War.


-----

**2001 - 2009 Elevation of the Alliance to a Strategic Partnership**

After the 9/11 terrorist attacks in 2001, the U.S. expanded the role of its allies in accordance with the ongoing transformation of its
military and the realignment of U.S. forces overseas. The ROK also faced demand by its citizens for a matured alliance relationship
befitting the elevated status of the Republic of Korea. Such change in the surrounding environment led to agreements on USFK base
relocation and wartime OPCON transition.

|December 18, 2001|March 29, 2002|April 30, 2003|October 6, 2004|October 22, 2004|February 23, 2007|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Deployment of the Haesung Unit to Afghanistan|Agreement on the ROK-U.S. Land Partnership Plan|Deployment of the Seohee Unit to Iraq|Agreement on the Yongsan Relocation Plan and the Land Partnership Plan|Agreement to pursue SPI at the 36th SCM|Agreement to transfer wartime OPCON on 17 April 2012|


**Change in U.S. Strategy after 9/11**
After the 9/11 terrorist attack, U.S. national security increasingly found itself
faced with various and uncertain threats, of which asymmetric threats were the
most significant. Such threats are transnational and tend to be non-militarized,
and include terror, WMD proliferation, and international crime.

To actively deal with such sweeping changes in the security environment, the
U.S. established a new military strategy and pursued transformations to embody
the newly formed strategy. Based on its remarkably refined military capabilities,
the U.S. carried out structural adjustments of its forces based overseas.

In this regard, it is noteworthy that the U.S. has switched from a threat-based to
a capability-based military strategy centered on military capabilities. Its strategy
includes the possibility of launching preemptive strikes against rogue states that
are developing and employing WMD, as well as terrorist organizations. Rather
than deploying massive forces overseas based on Cold War era strategies, the
U.S. focuses on expanding its rapid force projection and long-range precision
strike capabilities.


**Deployment of ROK forces overseas**
The ROK, which was a recipient of military and financial aid from the international
community during the Korean War just fifty years ago, evolved into a nation that
participates in the global effort to promote stability and carry out reconstruction
activities in war-torn regions.

**1) Afghanistan**
To respond to the 9/11 terrorist attack, with the
U.S. at the center, multinational forces initiated
Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan in
October 2001. The ROK participated by
providing support to the multinational forces’
counter-terror operations by deploying a navy

and air force transport group, as well as a medical and construction support
group from December 2001 to December 2007.

**2) Iraq**
With the commencement of Operation Iraqi
Freedom in March 2003, ROK deployed a
construction and medical support group to Iraq
in April 2003. The Zaytun Unit was formed in
February 2004 and completed a variety of
successful missions up until December 2008 in

Arbil, Northern Iraq. Zaytun Unit deployed nine waves of troops totaling 19,000
personnel. The Zaytun Unit marked the ROK’s largest overseas deployment since
the Vietnam War.

**USFK base relocation project**
This project aims to relocate U.S. bases scattered across the country to two main
areas, Pyeongtaek and Taegu, in order to ensure efficient use of the land and
stable U.S. military presence. It consists of two plans: Yongsan Relocation Plan
(YRP, movement of the nine U.S. bases in Seoul to Pyeongtaek) and Land
Partnership Plan (LPP, movement of units, including the 2ID, to Pyeongtaek,
Gimcheon, and Waegwan)

241.98 million m² 76.66 million m²


**Agreement to hold the ROK-U.S. Security Policy Initiative (October 22, 2004)**
At the 36th SCM, the ROK and the U.S. agreed to operate a consultative
framework titled the “Security Policy Initiative” (SPI), starting in 2005, in order to
discuss issues related to the need to advance the ROK-U.S. alliance. The ROK
Deputy Minister for Defense Policy is the ROK chief delegate while the Deputy
Assistant Secretary for Asian and Pacific is the US chief delegate. The SPI
receives guidance from the SCM on its meetings and reports the results to the
SCM when required.


**Transformation**
The purpose of this transformation is to
shape the U.S. forces into an agile and more
effective force capable of responding to new
and uncertain asymmetric challenges. The
crux is to maximize operational efficiency by
utilizing advanced technologies in order to
exert greater capabilities while deploying a
smaller number of armed forces. Also, when
faced with a threat, U.S. forces will possess
guaranteed maneuverability and operational
flexibility.

To this end, the U.S. has reorganized its Army
into brigade-level units with increased
mobility, lethality, and deployment
capabilities, while strengthening cohesion
and coordination among the different
branches of its Armed Services, and
expanding the capabilities and size of its
Special Forces. The U.S. is concentrating its
efforts on enhancing its homeland defense
capabilities by assigning state-of-the-art
destroyers for maritime security.


**Global Posture Review**
**(GPR)**
GPR concentrates on elevating
the effectiveness of the alliance in order to seek a fresh
cooperative relationship, while
stepping up the U.S.’s strategic
flexibility to be able to simultan
-eously cope with worldwide
and regional issues.

The U.S. overseas bases fall
into four groups based on the
capability of their allies and
geographical location, and are
linked by a network. The U.S.
emphasis is on capabilities
rather than on the number of
troops, units, or bases. This has
been achieved by enhancing
the lethality and effectiveness
of precision-guided weapons
leveraging advances in science
and technology.


**Agreement on the wartime OPCON**
**transition (February 23, 2007)**
Minister of National Defense Kim Jang
Soo and U.S. Secretary of Defense
Robert Gates agreed to deactivate the
ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command on
April 17, 2012, and make the transition
to a new ‘supported-supporting’
command relationship between the ROK
and the U.S.


-----

**2010 - 2021 Transformation of the ROK-U.S. Relationship to a Reciprocal and Mutually Complementary Alliance**

After the 9/11 Attacks in 2001, the U.S. focused heavily on the counter terrorism. In 2012, however, against the rise of China, it
announced the “Pivot to Asia” policy to increase its influence in Asia and began, as a part of this policy, to strengthen its cooperation
with regional allies like ROK.

|June 27, 2010|October 28, 2011|February 12, 2013|October 23, 2014|October 31, 2018|November 2020|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|The U.S. and the ROK agree to postpone OPCON transfer to 2015.|Establishment of the ROK-U.S. Integrated Defense Dialogue (KIDD)|North Korea carries out its 3rd nuclear test.|Agreement to pursue conditions-based wartime OPCON transition|The Guiding Principles of the Alliance are approved.|The Future Defense Vision of the ROK-U.S. Alliance is announced.|


**The “rebalancing of Asia” by the United States**
In 2012, the Obama administration announced the New Strategic Guidance
policy, in which the "Pivot to Asia" became a central theme, shifting the axis of
its military operations to Asia. As a part of this policy, the U.S. increased its
regional military presence by deploying more than sixty percent of its naval
power to Asia, and it worked on further deepening its relations with regional
allies such as ROK. The Trump administration defined China and Russia as
revisionist powers that are seeking to change the international order, and began
to pursue a China containment policy in earnest. The Trump administration
signaled that the strategic center of U.S. military policy had shifted to the IndoPacific region by renaming the U.S. Pacific Command as the U.S. Indo-Pacific
Command and actively pursued the modernization of its ground, maritime, and
air presence in the region.

**Sinking of the ROKS Cheonan and the Yeonpyeong-do Shelling**
In 2010, North Korea provoked ROK by sinking of the ROKS Cheonan and shelling
Yeonpyeong-do. As a result, the ROK and the U.S. prepared a "Joint Preparation
Plan against Local Provocations," which describes in detail how the ROK and the
U.S. should divide their roles and cooperation in order to counter different types
and levels of local-area provocations by North Korea. Through this effort, the
country’s ability to defend itself and deter North Korea’s provocations was further
strengthened.

**Establishment/Reorganization of the Korea-U.S. Integrated Defense**
**Dialogue (KIDD)**

**Korea-U.S. Integrated Defense Dialogue**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Strategic Alliance Working Group (SAWG)|||
|Extended Deterrence Policy Committee (EDPC)|||Strategic Alliance Working Group (SAWG)||



*Integrated with the Counter Missile *Renamed as the Conditions-based

Capability Committee (CMCC), renamed OPCON Transition Working Group
as the Deterrence Strategy Committee (COTWG) (2016).
(DSC) (2015).

In order to ensure the efficiency of the bilateral coordination system between the
defense authorities of the two countries, the ROK and the U.S. announced the
establishment of the Korea-U.S. Integrated Defense Dialogue (KIDD) at the 43rd
SCM in 2011. Afterwards, at the 8th KIDD meeting held in 2015, the two
countries made the decision to combine the Counter Missile Capability
Committee with the Extended Deterrence Policy Committee and rename it the
Deterrence Strategy Committee. Then, at the 9th KIDD meeting held in 2016, the
two countries launched the Conditions-based OPCON Transition Working Group
to replace the Strategic Alliance Working Group. Through KIDD, the ROK and the
U.S. are continuously discussing issues that affect the alliance and agendas for
its future development, as well as how to ensure the effectiveness of extended
deterrence and the transfer of OPCON to the ROK side.

**ROK-U.S. Cooperation in Public Health – COVID-19 Coordination**
The global spread of the COVID-19 pandemic was an event that consolidated the
alliance even further through the ROK-U.S. cooperation in quarantine and
humanitarian aid. In May 2020, the ROK sent an emergency supply of two million
masks to the U.S. and, in May 2021, the leaders of both countries signed a global
vaccine partnership at a ROK-U.S. summit meeting. In addition, in June 2021, the
U.S. provided 1.01 million Janssen vaccines for inoculation of the ROK Armed
Forces and those serving in the diplomatic corps.


**Conditions-based Wartime OPCON Transition**
At the 2010 summit meeting, the U.S. and the ROK agreed to postpone the timeframe
for the transfer of OPCON from 2012 to 2015 due to the increased sense of threat
from North Korea, which was triggered by the North’s second nuclear test in 2009,
along with the sinking of the ROKS Cheonan and Yeonpyeong-do Shelling in 2010.
Three years later, when the security situation deteriorated as North Korea carried out
the third nuclear test in 2013 and proceeded to upgrade its nuclear/missile
capabilities, the ROK and the U.S. agreed to pursue the "Conditions-based Wartime
OPCON Transition" at the 46th SCM meeting held in 2014. In this form of transfer, the
time period for OPCON transition is determined based on whether certain preconditions are met. In 2018, the U.S. and the ROK jointly produced the "Guiding
Principles Following the Transition of Wartime OPCON" which included a new
combined command structure in which the "U.S. Commander- ROK Deputy
Commander" structure would be replaced by the "ROK Commander-U.S. Deputy
Commander" structure. The U.S. and ROK have been working closely to ensure the
stable transfer of OPCON.

**Future Defense Vision of the ROK-U.S. Alliance**

**Current Combined Command Structure** **Combined command structure (proposed) after OPCON transfer**

**ROK Ministry of National Defense** **SCM** **US Department of Defense** **ROK Ministry of National Defense** **SCM** **US Department of Defense**

**ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff** **MCM** **US Joint Chiefs of Staff** **ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff** **MCM** **US Joint Chiefs of Staff**

**Commander★★★★USFK** **ROKForces Command Combined Staff/US Combined** **CommanderROK Army Deputy ★★★** **Commander★★★★ROK** **ROKForces Command Combined Staff/US Combined** **CommanderUS Deputy ★★★**

**Combined Forces Commander** **Combined Forces Commander**

**Designated ROK Armed Forces Units** **Designated US Military Units** **Designated ROK Military Units** **Designated US Military Units**

|ROK MinDisetfreyn osfe National SCM US Department of Defense ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff MCM US Joint Chiefs of Staff|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Co★ mU★ mS★FaKn★ der RFO CoKroc/ meU bsS iCn Combined Forc||Coeomdm Smb taainnffedd CR oODm★Kem★ p A au★r ntmyd y e r es Commander|
||Combined Forc|es Commander|
|Designated RUOnKit Asrmed Forces||Designated US Military Units|


|ROK MinDisetfreyn osfe National SCM US Department of Defense ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff MCM US Joint Chiefs of Staff|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Co★ mR★ mO★ aKn★ der RFO CoKroc/ meU bsS iCn Combined Forc||Coeomdm Smb taainnffedd CUoSm★ Dm★ea★pnudtey r es Commander|
||Combined Forc|es Commander|
|Designated ROK Military Units||Designated US Military Units|



At the 50th SCM meeting, the ROK and the U.S. agreed to develop a joint
defense vision which the alliance’s defense cooperation could be upgraded to a
more future-oriented system of cooperation, and, after a year of joint study, the
future defense vision of the ROK-U.S. alliance was announced in November
2020. This new vision stipulated that the ROK and the U.S. should i) seek peace
and prosperity in Northeast Asia and the Korean peninsula, ii) seek a peaceful
resolution of disputes under international law, and iii) protect mutual national
security interests based on common principles such as freedom of navigation.

**Nuclear/missile provocations by North Korea**
Despite repeated warnings from the international community and the ROK
government, North Korea carried out its third nuclear test in 2013, the fourth and
the fifth nuclear tests in 2016, and the sixth nuclear test in 2017. Through its
continuous missile development and provocations, North Korea constitutes a
serious threat to the international community and Northeast Asia. The U.S. has
focused on strategically deterring North Korean provocations by promptly
dispatching some of its strategic military assets, including its B-52 and B-1B
long-range bombers, F-22 stealth fighter jet, nuclear submarines, and aircraft
carriers.

Deployment of B-52s and F-22s over the Korean peninsula


-----

**2022 ∼ Developing into a Global Comprehensive Strategic Alliance**

As the central axis of peace, stability, and prosperity in Northeast Asia, the ROK-U.S. Alliance is evolving into a 'Global
Comprehensive Strategic Alliance' that can respond nimbly to the changing strategic environment in the region and the global
security challenges.

|May 21, 2022|August 16 -17, 2022|September 16, 2022|November 3, 2022|November 15, 2022|December 28, 2022|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|ROK-U.S. Summit Meeting|21st KIDD Meeting|3rd EDSCG Meeting|54th SCM Meeting|Relocation of the CFC is completed.|Republic of Korea announces the Asia Pacific strategy.|


**ROK-U.S. Summit Meeting (May 21, 2022)**
The two leaders agreed on a shared determination
to deepen and broaden the political, economic,
and security ties between the two countries,
including people-to-people ties. In particular,
President Yoon expressed ROK’s desire to play a
more prominent role in the Indo-Pacific region and

beyond, and proposed a vision of ROK as a global pivotal state. In addition, the two leaders
reaffirmed their commitment to turn the ROK-U.S. Alliance into global comprehensive
strategic alliance and agreed to bolster bilateral cooperation in the Indo-Pacific region.

**Expansion/deepening of the scope and level of cooperation between the**
**ROK and the U.S.**

With the agreement between the leaders of both
countries and security consultative bodies like
the KIDD, EDSCG, MCM and SCM, the ROK and
the U.S. are working continuously to develop the
alliance into an ‘global comprehensive strategic
alliance’. For example, through the 54th SCM,

54th Security Consultative Meeting the two countries have developed agendas for

(SCM) cooperation that include i) coordinating the North

Korea policy, ii) increasing the credibility of the U.S. extended deterrence, iii)
strengthening the ROK-U.S. combined defense posture, and iv) expanding cooperation in
military technology and defense industry.

(EDSCG) In accordance with the agreement reached at the ROK-U.S. Summit Meeting
held in May 2022, the defense authorities of the ROK and the U.S. held a meeting of the
Extended Deterrence Strategy and Consultation Group (EDSCG) in September 2022. This
vice minister level meeting was resumed after a hiatus of four years. The EDSCG is a
consultative body whose role is to discuss policy and strategy-related issues such as the
deterrent power of the alliance and the strengthening of stability in the Indo-Pacific region.
At this meeting, both sides reaffirmed that America’s ironclad commitment to Republic of
Korea draw on the full range of its military capabilities, including nuclear, conventional,
missile defense, and other advanced non-nuclear capabilities, to provide extended
deterrence for the ROK. In addition, the U.S. committed to strengthen coordination with the
ROK to continue to deploy and exercise strategic assets in the region in a timely and
effective manner. In the meantime, the 3rd EDSCG meeting contributed to enhancing the
deterrent power of the alliance and increased both sides’ understanding of the U.S.
extended deterrence and its ability to execute it.

(North Korea policy coordination) Besides joint efforts to deter and respond to nuclear
missile threats from North Korea, the ROK and the U.S. also agreed to continuously
coordinate their North Korea policies aimed at guiding the country to give up nuclear
weapons and accept a plan for a brighter future.

(Increasing the credibility of the U.S. extended deterrence) North Korea’s nuclear
missile provocations are becoming a serious challenge to the security of the Korean peninsula,
Northeast Asia, and the international community as a whole. In order to deter and strongly
respond to the North’s threats, the ROK and the U.S. are trying to bolster the capabilities and
posture of the alliance, but this hinges on the ability to strengthen the extended deterrence
provided by the U.S. For this reason, both sides have agreed to deepen cooperation in the
sharing of information, consultative procedures, and joint planning and execution. In addition,
both sides have agreed to revise the tailored deterrence strategy (TDS) and conduct
Deterrence Strategy Committee Table-top Exercises (DSC TTX) every year under the scenario

of a nuclear attack launched by North Korea.
Meanwhile, in accordance with the promise made
by both leaders to expand the rotational deployment
of U.S. strategic assets to the Korean peninsula and
the surrounding areas, the defense authorities of
both countries have agreed to increase the intensity
and frequency of U.S. strategic asset deployments

USS Ronald Reagan, a U.S. nuclear aircraft so that their deployment can be completed promptly

carrier, enters Busan Port. and in a more coordinated manner.


(Strengthened combined defense posture)
The ROK and the U.S. have also agreed to resume
large-scale combined field trainings in conjunction
with the combined exercise scheduled for 2023,
and are cooperating continuously to establish a
stable environment for stationing U.S. troops,
especially at the THAAD bases. Furthermore, in A river crossing exercise conducted by ROK
response to North Korea’s advancing missile forces and U.S. troops stationed in Republic
threats, the two countries have agreed to improve of Korea.
the missile defense capability and readiness of the alliance by establishing the Counter
Missile Working Group (CMWG) and reactivating the Program Analysis Working Group
(PAWG).

(Expanded cooperation in military science technology and the defense industry)
The ROK and the U.S. are expanding their cooperation in the military science technology
domain of advanced technologies. The two countries are expanding their cooperation in
the domains of quantum computing, sensor technology, electronic warfare, AI, autonomous
driving, directional energy, 5G, and next generation mobile communication (6G).

(70th anniversary of the ROK-U.S. Alliance) The year 2023 is a meaningful year
because it marks the seventieth anniversary of the ROK-U.S. Alliance. Various events are
being planned as a means to look back over the seventy-year history of the Alliance and
propose a future-oriented blueprint for the Alliance.

**“U.S. Indo-Pacific Strategy”**
In February 2022, the Biden Administration announced its ‘IndoPacific Strategy’ and reaffirmed its determination to strengthen
the country’s interest and role in the region. The administration
saw China’s coercive and aggressive posture, together with
North Korea’s nuclear weapon/missile program, as the major
challenges in the region and made it clear that the United States
would collaborate closely with its partners in the region to address these challenges and
guarantee a free and open Indo-Pacific region. With this objective in mind, the U.S. has
declared that it will establish a regional network for security cooperation in which the
modernization of alliance relationships and the strengthening of ties with friendly countries
will become important tasks.

**“Strategy for a Free, Peaceful, and Prosperous Indo-Pacific Region”**
To realize its goal of becoming a global pivotal state, the ROK is striving to build a regional
cooperation network through which it can prosper together with other countries and play
the kind of role in the international community that is commensurate with its international
standing. In keeping with this goal, the Republic of Korea announced its own Indo-Pacific
Strategy in 2022; a strategy that is built on the three principles of inclusiveness, trust, and
reciprocity, with the aim of securing freedom, peace, and prosperity in the Indo-Pacific
region. Based on this strategy, the ROK will advocate a policy of expanding cooperation with
regional countries, while continuing with its endeavors to bring peace and stability to the
region through close coordination with the U.S. Indo-Pacific Strategy.

**Relocation of the CFC Headquarters**
As the symbol of the ROK-U.S. Alliance and the
core of the combined defense system, the
Combined Forces Command (CFC) has played a
central role in the defense of the country and the
deterrence of war on the Korean peninsula since
its establishment in 1978. In November 2022, the
CFC completed its relocation to Camp Humphreys CFC Headquarters relocation ceremony
in Pyeongtaek. The ROK-U.S. Combined Forces
Command will, in this new Pyeongtaek era, contribute to a stronger combined defense
readiness by enhancing its operational capabilities.


-----

Special Appendix

### 02 The History and Future of the ROK Armed Forces’ Peace Operations

**1. Overview**

After the establishment of its first government in 1948, ROK had to overcome the massive devastation and upheaval caused by the
Korean War with the help of the United Nations and the international community. However, in just one generation, ROK became the
only case in the world to go from being an aid recipient to becoming a donor nation, and has today established itself as a global
pivotal state. ROK participated as a member of the multinational coalition in the Gulf War of 1991, and began peacekeeping
operations in earnest when it joined the United Nations in September 1991. As of December 2022, it has sent around 60,000 troops
on peacekeeping missions to thirty countries around the world, contributing to global security and prosperity.

Over the past thirty years, ROK peacekeeping operations of have grown both quantitatively and qualitatively. The year 2009 saw

the enactment of the “United Nations Peacekeeping Operations Participation Act”, followed in 2010 by the establishment of a legal
and policy infrastructure for dispatching peacekeeping troops overseas, including the creation of the International Peace Supporting
Standby Force. In 2021, ROK hosted the UN Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference, a top-level UN conference on peacekeeping
operations, during which Republic of Korea made six pledges based on its leading role in the field of technology and healthcare. In
2022, ROK established implementation plan for its six pledges and it is currently cooperating with the UN and related countries.
Based on such accomplishments, Republic of Korea is building an international reputation as a global leader capable of providing
new ideas regarding future PKO activities to the United Nations.

**[Table-1] Overseas Deployment of ROK Armed Forces around the World** (As of December 2022)




Iraq:

Seohee, Jema Unit (2003 – 2004)

Lebanon: Zaytun Unit (2004 – 2008)
Dongmyeong Unit (2007 – Present) Daiman Unit (2004 – 2008)

Western Sahara: Saudi Arabia:
ROK Armed Forces Medical Support ROK Armed Forces Medical Support Group (1991)
Group (1994 − 2006)

UAE:

Haiti: Bima Unit(1991)
Task Force Danbi (2010 – 2012) Akh Unit (2011 – Present)

Afghanistan:

Haesung Unit (2001 – 2003)

Cheongma Unit (2001 – 2003)

Dongeui Unit (2002 – 2007)

Dasan Unit (2003 – 2007)

Ashena Unit (2010 – 2014)

Sierra Leone:
Korea Disaster Response Team (KDRT) to fight The Philippines:
Ebola (2014-2015) Araw Unit (2013-2014)

Angola: East Timor:
Military Engineering Battalion Evergreen Unit (1999 – 2003)
(1995 – 1996)

Somalia Gulf of Aden:

South Sudan:

Cheonghae Unit (2009 - Present)

Hanbit Unit


Somalia:

Evergreen Unit (1993 – 1994)


-----

**[Table-2] Status of Overseas Deployment by Past Administrations**

|Category|Description|
|---|---|
|Roh Tae-woo (1988-1993)|• 1991: ROK Armed Forces Medical Support Group is sent to Saudi Arabia. • 1991: Air Force Transportation Group is sent to the UAE.|
|Kim Young-sam (1993-1998)|• 1993: The Evergreen Unit is sent to Somalia. • 1994: ROK Armed Forces Medical Support Group is sent to West Sahara. • 1995: Military Engineering Battalion is sent to Angola.|
|Kim Dae-jung (1998-2003)|• 1999: Evergreen Unit is sent to East Timor. • 2001: Haesung andCheongma Units are sent to Afghanistan. • 2002: Dong-ui Unit is sent to Afghanistan.|
|Roh Moo-hyun (2003-2008)|• 2003: Dasan Unit is sent to Afghanistan. • 2003: Seohee and Jema Units are sent to Iraq. • 2004: Zaytun Unit is sent to Iraq. • 2004: Daiman Unit is sent to Iraq. • 2007: Dongmyeong Unit is sent to Lebanon. • Participation in UN PKO: Liberia (2003), Burundi (2004), Sudan (2005), Nepal (2007), Sudan Darfur (2007)|
|Lee Myung-bak (2008-2013)|• 2009: Cheonghae Unit is sent to the coastal region of Somalia. • 2010: Danbi Unit is sent to Haiti. • 2010: Ashena Unit is sent to Afghanistan. • 2010: Onnuri Unit, the International Peace Supporting Standby Force is created. • 2011: Akh Unit is sent to the UAE. • Participation in UN PKO: Cote d’Ivoire (2009), West Sahara (2009), Haiti (2009), South Sudan (2011)|
|Park Geun-hye (2013-2017)|• 2013: Hanbit Unit is sent to South Sudan. • 2013: Araw Unit is sent to the Philippines. • 2014: Korea Disaster Response Team (KDRT) sent to Sierra Leoneto fight Ebola.|
|Moon Jae-in (2017-2022)|• Participation in UN PKO: Yemen (2019)|


|Jan. 1991|Feb. 1991|Jul. 1993|Aug. 1994|Oct. 1995|Oct. 1999|Dec. 2001|Feb. 2002|Mar. 2003|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Saudi Arabia: ROK Armed Forces Medical Support Group|UAE: Bima Unit|Somalia: Evergreen Unit|West Sahara: ROK Armed Forces Medical Support Group|Angola:Military Engineering Battalion|East Timor: Evergreen Unit|Afghanistan: Haesung and Cheongma Units|Afghanistan: Dongui Unit|Afghanistan: Dasan Unit|


|Apr. 2003|Apr. 2004|Oct. 2004|Jul. 2007|Mar. 2009|Feb. 2010|Jun. 2010|Jan. 2011|Mar. 2013|Mar. 2013|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Iraq: Seohee and Jema Units|Iraq: Zaytun Unit|Iraq: Daiman Unit|Lebanon: Dongmyeong Unit|Somalia coastal region: Cheonghae Unit|Haiti: Danbi Unit|Afghanistan: Ashena Unit|UAE: Akh Unit|South Sudan: Hanbit Unit|Philippines: Araw Unit|



**2. UN Peacekeeping Operations**

UN is actively carrying out peacekeeping operations (PKO) around the world with the aim of peacefully resolving disputes and
promoting peace and security around the world. The fact that UN Peacekeeping Forces received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1988
showcases the positive acknowledgement they are receiving from the international community.

In 1993, Republic of Korea sent its first peacekeeping force, the Evergreen Unit, to Somalia, and as of December 2022,

approximately 20,000 ROK troops have participated in UN peacekeeping activities in twenty-five regions around the world. To be
more specific, 19,000 troops have served in seven regions; when the data is broken down by type of mission, four units served as
engineers (Evergreen Unit to Somalia, Military Engineering Battalion to Angola, Danbi Unit to Haiti and Hanbit Unit to South Sudan),
two as combat units (Evergreen Unit sent to East Timor and Dongmyeong Unit sent to Lebanon), and one in the medical field.
Among these units, Dongmyeong Unit in Lebanon and Hanbit Unit in South Sudan are still performing their missions to this day.

**[Table-3] Participation in UN PKO by ROK Military Units** (As of December 2022)

|Period|Unit|Manpower per year (persons)|Period|Unit|Manpower per year (persons)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|July-August 1994|Evergreen Unit in Somalia|516|July 2007 - today|Dongmyeong Unit in Lebanon|8,437|
|August 1994 - May 2006|ROK Armed Forces Medical Support Group in West Sahara|542|February 2010 - December 2012|Danbi Unit in Haiti|1,425|
|October 1995 - December 1996|Military Engineering Battalion in Angola|600|March 2013 - present|Hanbit Unit in South Sudan|4,238|
|October 1999 - October 2003|Evergreen Unit in East Timor|3,283||||


-----

**Evergreen Unit in Somalia (July 1993 – April 1994)**

The Evergreen Unit deployed to Balad in Somalia assisted with the restoration
of roads (80km) devastated by the civil war and fulfilled the long-cherished
wish of the Somali people by building and opening a waterway (18km). It also
operated a school and a technical institute, which received accolades from
the local people. The unit withdrew in March 1994, nine months after its
deployment, due to the deterioration of the surrounding situation; however, the
Evergreen Unit’s impeccable execution of its mission led to numerous requests
from the international community to participate in peacekeeping operations on
a continuous basis.

-  Evergreen Unit: The name “Evergreen” represents the idea that the ROK unit

will turn Somalia’s soil into rich, fertile land..

**Engineering Unit in Angola (October 1995 – December 1996)**

The ROK military dispatched an engineering unit to Huambo, Angola from
October 1995 to December 1996. The unit executed peacekeeping operations
in Angola, as well as rebuilding bridges and restoring airfields damaged during
the civil war. The overseas deployment activities in Somalia, South Sahara, and
Angola had a positive impact in that they enabled the ROK to advance to nonpermanent membership of the UN Security Council for the first time in 1996.

**Dongmyeong Unit, Lebanon (July 2007– present)**

The Dongmyeong Unit in Lebanon was the second infantry unit after that
sent to East Timor to be dispatched overseas and is the longest serving ROK
peacekeeping force still stationed overseas. It carries out military operations
including reconnaissance, provides medical care services to the local populace,
paves roads, renovates school facilities and government buildings, and
executes other projects aimed at improving the living conditions of the local
people. In recognition of their work, all members of the Dongmyeong Unit have
received the United Nations Medal, the highest honor bestowed upon UN
peacekeepers. The local Lebanese residents have praised the unit, calling it the
"Best Gift from God" and "Friendly Neighbor."


**ROK Armed Forces Medical Support Group in West Sahara**
**(August 1994 – May 2006)**

The ROK Armed Forces Medical Support Group contributed to peace and
stability in the West Saharan region by providing medical support for the local
UN personnel and carrying out quarantine and epidemic prevention activities
on behalf of the local residents. In addition, the know-how accumulated by the
unit while conducting resupply and support activities, overcoming the 10,000
km distance between the Korean Peninsula and the West Sahara ROK Armed
Forces Medical Support Group, added immeasurably to enhancing the ROK’s
logistics support system.

**Evergreen Unit in East Timor (October 1999 – October 2003)**

The ROK military dispatched an infantry unit to East Timor from October 1999
to October 2003. As the first ever overseas deployment of an ROK infantry
unit in a UN peacekeeping operation, it contributed to establishing peace in
East Timor by joining the effort to support the reconstruction of the region
and the restoration of public order. The Evergreen Unit in East Timor initially
concentrated on restoring public order in October 1999, and transitioned into a
UN PKO mission in February 2000.

**Danbi Unit, Haiti (February 2010-December 2012)**

The Danbi Unit in Haiti carried out a wide range of civilian and military
operations including the removal of debris caused by the earthquake that hit the
island country in 2010, the rebuilding of damaged roads, the development of
water wells and other types of reconstruction assistance, as well as providing
education programs like Taekwondo classes and computer classes. Especially
after October 2011, when a cholera epidemic broke out, the unit focused on
treating emergency patients and preventing the spread of diseases through
quarantine activities in refugee camps.


-----

**Hanbit Unit, South Sudan**

**(March 2013-present)**

The Hanbit Unit in South Sudan is involved
in various reconstruction projects such
as the construction of cut-off walls to
prevent flooding when the White Nile
bursts its banks, and the construction and
reparation of roads that are essential for
the movement of people and cargo. It is
also exploring creative means of helping
the local inhabitants through civilianmilitary coordinated projects, such as the
Hanbit Occupational School and the Hanbit
Farm, and is becoming a beacon of hope for
the future development of this new African
country of South Sudan. For the people of
South Sudan, the Hanbit Unit has become a
‘subject of adoration and even love’.

In addition to deploying troops in unit formations, there are also individual postings to UN peacekeeping operations. So far

around,700 military personnel have served in 18 regions across the world, serving in various positions ranging from mission
commander, staff officers, liaison officers, and observers. Five officers have served at the General and Flag Officer level with four
serving as mission commanders and one in the capacity of Chief of Staff; among company grade and field grade officers, 200 have
served as staff and liaison officers, while 500 served as observes on the front lines risking their lives to support the mission. 23
officers are currently serving in the UN India-Pakistan Observation Mission, the UNIFIL, the Western Sahara Election Observation
Mission and the South Sudan Mission. Many officers have also worked at the UN Department of Peace Operations, which serves
as the headquarters of UN Peacekeeping Operations, and have raised the reputation of the ROK military through their hard work
and professionalism. Individual-level postings to UN peacekeeping operations are summarized in Table 4 below.

**[Table-4] Status of UN Staff Officers and Military Observers** (As of December 2022)

|Period|UN missions|No. of deployments (Persons)|Key tasks|
|---|---|---|---|
|Oct. 1994 - Present|UN Military Observation Group in India and Pakistan|224|Observation of ceasefire|
|Nov. 1994 - Jul. 2009|UN Observer Mission in Georgia|88|Observation of ceasefire|
|Jan. 2000 - Jun. 2004|UN Mission of Support in East Timor|59|Observation of ceasefire Staff Activities|
|Jan. 2002 - Dec. 2003|UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus|1|Commander of the PKO|
|Jul. 2003 - Dec. 2010|UN Mission in Afghanistan|7|Staff Activities|
|Oct. 2003 - Jan. 2016|UN Mission in Liberia|24|Observation of ceasefire Staff Activities|
|Sep. 2004 - Dec.2006|UN Operation in Burundi|4|Staff Activities|
|Nov. 2005 - Jul. 2011|UN Mission in Khartoum, Sudan|46|Observation of ceasefire Staff Activities|
|Jan. 2007 - Present|UN Interim Force in Lebanon|57|Staff Activities|
|Mar. 2007 - Jan. 2011|UN Mission in Nepal|13|Observation of ceasefire Staff Activities|
|Jun. 2007 - Jun. 2021|UN Mission in Darfur Sudan|19|Observation of ceasefire|
|Jul. 2009 - Present|UN Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara|44|Observation of ceasefire|
|Jul. 2009 - Jan. 2017|UN Mission in Cote d’Ivoire|14|Observation of ceasefire|
|Nov. 2009 - Dec. 2014|UN Stabilization Mission in Haiti|10|Staff Activities|
|Jul. 2011 - Present|UN Mission in the Republic of South Sudan|72|Staff and Coordination Activities|


-----

**3. Peace Operations of Multinational Forces**

After the end of the Cold War, during the latter years of the twentieth century, terrorism and piracy at sea emerged as a new threat
to world peace. The international community responded to these threats by forming a multinational force led by a specific country or
coalition of international security bodies. During the First Gulf War, which broke out in January 1991 following Iraq’s invasion of
Kuwait, ROK sent its Armed Forces Medical Support Group to Saudi Arabia as a member of the multinational force, which was the
first time that it dispatched a military contingent overseas. Republic of Korea also dispatched troops to Afghanistan in 2001, Iraq in
2003, and the Gulf of Aden in Somalia in 2009. As of December 2022, 39,000 ROK service members have participated in
peacekeeping activities in twenty-six regions around the world, as a part of a multinational force. Even today, 312 ROK service
members are on peacekeeping missions in six regions. ROK participation in multinational forces is shown in Table 5 below.

**[Table-5] Participation in Multinational Forces by the ROK Military Units** (As of December 2022)

|Category|Period|Deployed region, military unit (mission unit)|Number of troops (person)|
|---|---|---|---|
|First Gulf War|Jan. 1991 - Apr. 1991|ROK Armed Forces Medical Support Group|154|
||Feb. 1991 - Apr. 1991|Bima Unit, UAE|160|
|Afghanistan War|Dec. 2001 - Sep.2003|Haesung Unit, Singapore|823|
||Dec. 2001 - Dec. 2003|Cheongma Unit, Singapore|1,245|
||Feb. 2002 - Dec. 2007|Dongeui Unit, Afghanistan|786|
||Mar. 2003 - Dec. 2007|Dasan Unit, Afghanistan|1,329|
||Jun. 2010 - Jun. 2014|Ashena Unit, Afghanistan|1,745|
|Iraq War|Apr. 2003 - Apr. 2004|Seohee Unit, Iraq|952|
||Apr. 2003 - Apr. 2004|Jema Unit, Iraq|185|
||Apr. 2004 - Dec. 2008|Zaytun Unit, Iraq|17,708|
||Oct. 2004 - Dec. 2008|Daiman Unit, Iraq|1,324|
|Counter-piracy activities in the Gulf of Aden|Mar. 2009 - Present|Cheonghae Unit, coastal region of Somalia|12,218|



**The First Gulf War**

When Iraq invaded Kuwait on August 2, 1990, the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution calling on Iraq to withdraw
from Kuwait by 15 January 1991. However, Iraq refused to do so and this led to the start of the Gulf War, which pitted Iraq against a
U.S.-led multinational force. The Republic of Korea government carefully weighed up the issue of whether to support the Allies
when the U.S. government requested ROK support on August 18, 1990. It was then that the decision was made to send the ROK
Armed Forces Medical Support Group to Saudi Arabia and the Air Transport Group (Bima Unit) to the UAE. The ROK Armed Forces
Medical Support Group treated 1,634 soldiers and 87 civilians at the Al Nuairia Hospital in Saudi Arabia, while the Bima Unit of the
ROK Air Force successfully carried out 323 sorties during a period of 37 days, transporting three times as much cargo and personnel
than it had during domestic airlift missions. Both the Bima Unit and the ROK Armed Forces Medical Support Group raised the profile
of Republic of Korea in the international community. The deployment of a military contingent to the Persian Gulf was the country’s
first overseas deployment since the end of the Cold War, and served as a valuable opportunity to gain field experience and improve
the standing of Republic of Korea in the eyes of allied nations.


-----

**ROK Armed Forces Medical Support Group, Saudi Arabia** **Bima Unit, UAE (February-April, 1991)**
**(January-April, 1991)** Republic of Korea dispatched the Bima Unit, consisting of ROKAF C-130H

Republic of Korea sent a team composed of 154 medical personnel and aircraft and 160 personnel to the UAE. During its service in the Middle
support staff to the AL Nuairia Hospital in Saudi Arabia where, by treating East, the unit flew 323 sorties amounting to 461 hours and 57 minutes,
soldiers wounded during desert-based modern warfare, Republic of covering a flight range of around 240,000km, and transporting 1,405
Korea military gained valuable experience and data related to developing troops and 713.3 tons of cargo to their destinations. While flying between
wartime medical support system in areas such as manning and operating twenty-seven bases scattered across the Arabian Peninsula, including
field medicine. key bases in the UAE, Saudi Arabia, and Oman, the unit accumulated

invaluable wartime experience that provided valuable real-world
experience for ROKAF.

**Deployment to the War in Afghanistan**

After the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, the ROK government joined the ‘Global War on Terror’, otherwise known as
Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF). In December 2001, it dispatched the Haesung Unit and the Cheongma Unit, the transport units
of the country’s navy and air force, to Afghanistan. In February 2002, the ROK Armed Forces Medical Support Group (Dongeui Unit)
was deployed, followed by the Korean Army Construction and Engineering Support Group (Dasan Unit) in March 2003. In June 2010,
the provincial reconstruction team (PRT) was sent to Afghanistan to lend a helping hand to the stabilization and reconstruction
efforts, and the Ashena Unit was also sent on a mission to protect the provincial reconstruction team.

**The Haesung Unit is the sea transport unit of the ROK Navy that**
supported Operation Enduring Freedom with one landing ship and 171
crew members from the home port of Singapore. From December 2001
to September 2003, the unit carried out 17 missions (15 sea cargo
transportation missions, 2 search support missions), covering 92,692
nautical miles to deliver 5,300 tons of cargo.


**The Cheongma Unit is the air transport unit of the ROK Air Force that**
began supporting Operation Enduring Freedom in December 2001 with
76 members. From its base in Gimhae Airport, the unit transported
equipment and men between Singapore and Diego Garcia in the Indian
Ocean, completing 81 missions (transported 310 tons of cargo and 600
troops) until ending its mission in December 2003, having covered around
777,182 nautical miles during its deployment.

**The Dongeui Unit composed of 90 medical personnel and support staff**
treated 260,000 allied troops and local residents from February 2002 to
December 2007.

*＊The Dongeui Unit was named after Dongui Bogam, an encyclopedic

medical text written by Heo Jun, a royal physician of the mid-Joseon
period.

**The Dasan Unit, a 150 member engineering unit that served in**
Afghanistan from February 2003 to December 2007, completed 400
construction support missions in the country. A civilian team from the
Dasan Unit also participated in the Afghanistan provincial reconstruction
team (PRT) and provided support for humanitarian works carried out on
behalf of refugees and local civilians.

*The Dasan Unit is named after Jeong Yak-yong, a Silhak scholar of the

late Joseon period who invented a pulley-operated crane and designed
Suwon Hwaseong Fortress.


The Ashena unit on an escort mission to protect the safety of ROK PRT Personnel

In June 2010, in response to the UN's request for human and material
assistance for the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
operating in Afghanistan, and the Afghanistan government's request
for help in rebuilding the country, the ROK government dispatched
a provincial reconstruction team (PRT, composed of civilians, and
personnel from the government and military) and Ashena Unit to
Parwan Province. Ashena unit was responsible for defending the
base against attacks and protecting the members of the civilian-led
PRT, so that they could go about performing their tasks safely. The
unit implemented its ‘One Fence’ strategy, which consisted in inviting
the elders of nearby ten villages to base and holding sisterhood
football matches between the unit’s team and the local football
team. These activities helped strengthen ties with the local villagers
and decrease the level of risk to the base.


-----

**Iraq War Deployment**

In April 2003, the ROK government deployed the Seohee Unit (Engineering Support Group) and the Jema Unit (Medical Support
Group) to support Operation Iraqi Freedom led by the combined U.S.-UK forces. In 2004, the Zaytun Division, was also deployed to
Iraq to support peace. For about one year until April 2004, Seohee and Jema Units supported the multinational forces, performed
humanitarian post-war recovery activities, and provided medical aid to the local populace. The two units were integrated into the
Zaytun Division in April 2004, where they performed joint missions.

From April 2003 to April 2004, the Seohee Unit completed more
than seventy military related projects and fifty post war restoration
projects for the civilian sector. The former included assisting with the
construction and improvement work on the base facilities where U.S.,
Italian and Romanian troops were stationed, while the latter included
repairing school buildings, the local water supply, and the sewage
system. In order to provide medical support to the soldiers of the
U.S. military and those of allied countries, along with humanitarian
medical services to the people of Iraq, the Jema Unit brought in a
UN Level II(+) medical team and equipment, treating some 21,000
patients by the end of their tour. In April 2004, before returning
home, Seohee and Jema Units handed over their responsibilities
to the engineering and medical battalions under the control of the
Zaytun Unit.

**Troops of the Seohee Unit performing facility repairs in Nasiriyah, Iraq.**

The peace and reconstruction support unit, called the Zaytun Unit, The Daiman Unit, comprised of the 58th Airlift Group of the ROK Air
was the first ROK military contingent to be sent overseas for CMO; It Force, was sent to Iraq in October 2004 for the mission of resupplying the
completed its peacebuilding mission so successfully that it came to be Zaytun Unit and supporting personal rotations The unit was composed of
known as a ‘model of civil-military operations’ among the troops from 143 troops and four C-130 aircraft. By the time the unit returned home
other countries. By operating the Zaytun Hospital in Iraq, building roads, in December 2008, it had flown 2,000 missions without any major
schools and providing other services much desired by the locals, the accidents and covered the equivalent of 67 orbits of the Earth, or some 2.7
Zaytun Unit was able to form friendly relations with the locals, who million kilometers.
praised the unit by calling it the ‘Best Gift from God’. *＊＊"Daiman" in Arabic means "Always with you".

*＊"Zaytun" in Arabic means "olive" and symbolizes peace, olives are

beloved by the people of Iraq and are never absent from their cusines.

**Counter-piracy Activities in the Gulf of Aden**

In the late 1990s, with the end of the long civil war seemingly nowhere in sight, the political and economic situation in Somalia
deteriorated dramatically. One consequence of this was an increase in piracy activities. The issue really hit home in the Republic of
Korea when the deep-sea fishing ship Dowon was kidnapped by Somali pirates in 2006 and concerns were raised about the safety
of Koreans and Korean ships travelling in the region. When, the UN asked Republic of Koreato play a more active role in anti-piracy
activities in 2008, it was the perfect moment to create the country’s first naval deployment task force, whose mission was to secure
safe passage for ships travelling through the coastal region of Somalia. This is how Cheonghae Unit was formed in March 2009.


-----

Since then, Cheonghae Unit has carried out important operations in the fight against piracy and protected overseas citizens,
including Operation Dawn of the Gulf of Aden and the evacuation of ROK citizens from Libya.

Staff officers and liaison officers were also posted to the CMF (Combined Maritime Forces) to facilitate cooperation between

Cheonghae Unit and multinational forces. Especially in April 2010, for the first time in Korea’s naval history, a ROK Admiral was
appointed commander of CTF-151, the multinational combined maritime force that carries out anti-piracy operations in the Gulf of
Aden and along the east coast of Somalia. ROK Admirals were again appointed to head CTF-151 in 2012, 2014, 2016 and 2019.
With support from multinational staff officers, these Admirals exercised command over a task force composed of U.S., UK, and
Pakistani ships. Furthermore, 41 ROK naval officers were dispatched to CTF-151 with a total of 45 officers participating in the antipiracy operations as members of CMF.

As the ROK Navy’s first overseas deployment, Cheonghae Unit
first began to take part in maritime security operations conducted
by the CMF in March 2009, and since then it has been fulfilling its
responsibility of protecting Republic of Korea ships from pirates. In
January 2011, Cheonghae Unit successfully conducted Operation
Dawn of the Gulf of Aden to rescue Samho Jewelry and its crew
from the clutches of Somali pirates who hijacked the ship, rescuing
all ROK overseas citizens the ship. In March 2011, the Cheonghae
Unit completed to perfection an operation to evacuate ROK nationals
who were stranded in Libya following the outbreak of a civil war.
The Cheonghae Unit is still on active service in the region today. For
example, one of its other main duties is to protect the safety of the
strategic transport route that passes through the Gulf of Aden, which
The Cheonghae Unit conducting exercises at sea as part of the fight against piracy is critical to Republic of Korea’s energy security.

**4. Defense Cooperation and Exchanges Activities**

The ROK government also deploys troops to non-disputed regions for military cooperation and international coordination. These
activities differ from UN Peacekeeping Operations and the peacekeeping activities conducted by multinational forces. Such military
cooperation and international coordination can be largely divided into two categories with first being military cooperation which
involves ROK troops providing training and participating in combined exercises with the military forces of a foreign country, such as
the activities being conducted by the Akh Unit in the UAE. Second would be ‘humanitarian support’ in which Republic of Korea
sends military units to provide emergency relief to foreign countries, such as the deployment of the Araw Unit to the Philippines,
Korea Disaster Response Team (KDRT) to Sierra Leone, or to help search for airplanes lost at sea. Table 6 below shows the status of
the ROK troop deployments overseas for defense exchange and cooperation.

**[Table-6] Status of Defense Cooperation and Exchanges Activities Carried out by ROK Military** (As of December 2022)

|Category|Period|Region, military unit (mission unit)|Number of troops (persons)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Military Training Cooperation|Jan. 2011 - Present|UAE: Akh Unit|2,399|
|Typhoon Damage Recovery|Dec. 2013 - Dec. 2014|Philippines: Araw Unit|824|
|Maritime Search|Mar. 2014 - May 2014|Malaysia sea region: Maritime search team,|39|
||Dec. 2014 - Jan. 2015|Indonesia sea region: Maritime search team,|21|
|Ebola Response|Dec. 2013 - Mar. 2014|Sierra Leone: Korea Disaster Response Team (KDRT)|16|


-----

**Akh Unit in the United Arab Emirates (January 2011-present)**

In response to a strong request by the UAE government, Republic of Korea
dispatched Akh Unit to the UAE in January 2011 with the mission of
providing training to the UAE Special Forces and taking part in combined
drills. As the first military unit to be dispatched overseas for the sole
purpose of training and military cooperation, Akh Unit has contributed
enormously to advancing Republic of Korea’s relationship with the UAE
to the level of a strategic partnership. The Akh Unit has helped the UAE
Special Forces improve their combat skills during special operations,
improved its own ability to carry out special operations and operations
involving military units from other countries, and contributed to advancing
the national interest by expanding economic cooperation with the UAE.

*“Akh” in Arabic means “brother”.


**Araw Unit, Philippines (December 2013-December 2014)**

The Araw Unit is the Joint Philippines Support Group that was jointly
created by the ROK Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps on December
9, 2013. It carried out its mission until December 22, 2014, before
returning home, successfully completing its civil sector operation of
removing debris caused by Typhoon Haiyan, which hit the Philippines that
year, repairing public facilities, and providing medical care services. The
Araw Unit was dispatched at the behest of the government of Philippines
before any request from the United Nations. It was a reminder to the
world that Republic of Korea is a country that repays the kindness shown
to it by other countries such as the Philippines, which sent troops to help
ROK during the Korean War.

*“Araw” means the “sun” in Filipino and embodies the additional meaning

‘expecting to become a beacon of hope’.


**5. The Achievements and Future of Peacekeeping Activities**

For the past thirty years, in the name of defending peace, ROK Armed Forces have been engaging in peacekeeping activities in
many different regions around the world. Despite the short history, the peacekeeping operations by the ROK military contributed to
world peace and enhancing the image of Republic of Korea at the global stage. Through peacekeeping activities, the country’s
armed forces have accumulated field experience, expanded the domain of their military diplomacy, and been able to promote ROK
in conflict-stricken areas, thereby fostering favorable local conditions for market entry by Korean companies.

**[Table-7] Six Pledges from the Seoul Peacekeeping Ministerial**

|Construction of Smart Camps|• ROK presented the 'Smart Camp' model which utilizes its advanced IT technologies in UN peacekeeping operations. A pledge was made to set up a pilot demonstration camp at the Hanbit Unit in South Sudan.|
|---|---|
|Donation of helicopters|• Reconnaissance helicopters are urgently needed by the UN. A pledge was made to donate 16 MD 500 Defenders to countries operating missions in African countries.|
|Strengthening medical capabilities|• A pledge was made to send ROK military medical staff to the UN Medical Training Center to support with medical training.|
|Training support for engineering troops|• A pledge was made to donate military engineering equipment to countries that provide troops to the UN, provide training on using the equipment, and provide training on removing landmines, through bilateral cooperation.|
|Capacity building for women peacekeepers|• A pledge was made to establish a UN sponsored educational program at the Korea National Defense University (International Peace Activity Center) by 2023 for women serving in the military and also to improve the female participation rate in PKO.|
|Capacity building for police peacekeepers|• A pledge was made to send more police officers to PKO and establish a special educational program for UN police at the Korean National Police University.|


-----

Wherever they go, ROK military units are winning the hearts of the local citizens. The Evergreen Unit serving in East Timor earned

the moniker ‘King of Multinational Forces’, the Zaytun Unit in Iraq was called the ‘Best Gift from God’, the Danbi Unit dispatched to
Haiti was praised as the ‘Angel of Leogane’, and the Hanbit Unit in South Sudan was called the ‘Subject of Love’.

Republic of Korea’s efforts over the years have earned it a respectable standing in the international community, ranking ninth in

terms of financial contributions and thirty-seventh in terms of troop contributions. As a result, Republic of Korea was granted the
privilege of hosting one of the highest-level UN conferences, namely the United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference, in
December 2021, for the first time in Asia. As the host of the conference, ROK proposed six pledges, each of which seeks to address
a current issue faced by the UN (protection of the environment, ensuring the physical security of peacekeeping force members,
protection of women and children, etc.) and suggest a direction for the future. The conference highlighted the idea that ROK
technological prowess could become a key asset of the UN.

As the first step towards fulfilling the six pledges, Republic of Korea established multidimensional relationships with the UN and

troop contributing countries in 2022. In the case of the ‘Smart Camp’ project, ROK technological capabilities were vindicated when
its Ministry of National Defense was invited to give a presentation on the smart camp concept at the UN PKO technology
cooperation symposium held in South Africa in June of that year and at the UN Capacity Development Workshop held in Uganda in
October of the same year. In the case of the pledge to donate MD 500 Defender helicopters, in July 2022, teams from the UN, the
United States and the recipient country (Kenya, El Salvador) arrived in Korea to inspect the helicopters, ROK is planning and
cooperating with these countries to ensure that the sixteen helicopters can be handed over to the countries operating peacekeeping
missions in Africa. In the case of the pledge to provide military engineering support, Republic of Korea is cooperating with Cambodia
and the UN department responsible for the Triangular Partnership Program (TPP) to enhance the engineering capabilities of the
Cambodian troops serving in UN peacekeeping missions. In fact, in November 2022, the defense ministers of the Republic of Korea
and Cambodia held a formal ceremony to sign the agreement on the transfer of engineering equipment, which is scheduled to be
handed over to Cambodia in 2023, and military engineering training will also be provided by the ROK side. Republic of Korea is also
providing UN certified education to improve the competencies of female PKO personnel and medical care capabilities as scheduled.

With these feats, Republic of Korea is reinventing itself as one of the key countries leading the direction of the UN’s

peacekeeping operations by leveraging its advanced technology and knowledge resources. In the coming years, ROK will strive
continuously to expand its influence in the international community by playing a significant role in the peacekeeping operations of
the UN.


-----

Special Appendix

### 03 Status of USFK Base Relocation

**1. Project History and Progress**

The USFK Base Relocation Project aims to rearrange and consolidate USFK bases scattered across the Republic of Korea into two
hub bases in Pyeongtaek and Daegu, in order to guarantee stable stationing conditions for USFK, build a stronger ROK-U.S. Alliance
that is future-oriented, and encourage the efficient use and balanced development of national land.

The USFK base relocation project is being implemented under the Yongsan Relocation Plan (YRP), which involves moving the

USFK headquarters in Seoul and other units to Pyeongtaek, and the Land Partnership Plan (LPP), which consists of relocating the
U.S. 2nd Infantry Division, currently located north of the Han River in Dongducheon and Uijeongbu, to Pyeongtaek. The legal basis
for the project was established with the enactment of the “Special Act on Support Etc. for Pyeongtaek-si, Etc. following Relocation
of US Military Bases in Korea” (hereinafter referred to as “Act on Supporting Pyeongtaek Following Relocation of USFK Bases”).

Construction work on the new location of Camp Humphreys began in November 2007, and since then, the Ministry of National

Defense (MND) has been pursuing relocation of USFK units immediately upon completion of their new facilities. In August 2013, a
school for children of military personnel became the first facility to be completed at the new location. In 2018, major units including
the USFK Headquarters, UNC Headquarters, and the U.S. 2nd Infantry Division Headquarters were relocated to Camp Humphreys,
followed by the hospital and other support
units in 2019. The relocation of the CFC **Purpose of the USFK Base Relocation Project**
Headquarters and key command facilities
of the USFK, including the JOC and **returned land and Efficient use of**
communication center were completed in **balanced**
2022. The Pyeongtaek U.S. military base, **Yongsan Relocation Plan** **development of national land**

(YRP: Seoul → Pyeongtaek)

including the existing Camp Humphreys, Yongsan Relocation Plan
covers an area of 14,677,686 square meters **Land Partnership Plan**
(4.44 million pyeong), which is five times (LPP: Nationwide Land Partnership Plan→ Pyeongtaek, Daegu) **A stable** **A stronger,**
the size of Yeouido, making it the largest **environment for** **future-oriented**
U.S. military base overseas. Following are
select numeric facts about Camp

**Efficient use of**

**returned land and**

**balanced**

**development of**

**national land**

**A stable** **A stronger,**

**environment for** **future-oriented**

**stationing the USFK** **ROK-U.S. Alliance**

Humphreys; 64km of paved road, 67km of

**Pyeongtaek City Hall**

**USFK Headquarters** **14km**

**8th U.S. Army Headquarters** **Former base**

**CFC Headquarters**

**Pyeongtaek Port23km** **Training range** **Daechuri** **Medical brigade** **Public facilities**

**Vehicle maintenance base**

**Housing area**

**Railway station** **Artillery brigade** **2nd Infantry Division Headquarters**

**Heavy combat brigade** **Warehousing area** **28km**

**Asan-si**

**Anseong River**


Pyeongtaek Camp Humphreys U.S. Military Base


-----

**2. Return of U.S. Military Bases and Environmental Cleanup**

USFK bases are being relocated in conjunction with the return of the land they occupied to the Republic of Korea, followed by
cleanup of the surrounding environment. The ROK MND is strengthening ROK-U.S. coordination on the early return of U.S. military
bases (including Yongsan Garrison) and cleanup of the environment around the bases, as well as working closely with various other
government ministries and local governments to resolve issues related to cleanup and land return. As of December 2022, sixty-nine
U.S. military bases have been returned, while the remaining eleven bases (including the Yongsan Garrison) are due to be returned
according to the schedule outlined in the ROK-U.S. Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA). The ROK MND is pushing ahead with the
environmental cleanup project to ensure that the land formerly occupied by the bases are in a clean state before returning it to the
public. As of December 2022, eighteen out of thirty-one bases have undergone environmental cleanup, and cleanup activities are
now underway at the remaining thirteen bases.

The ROK MND is conducting the cleanup activities in accordance with the national laws and regulations in order to return the

land to the Korean citizenry as soon as possible. Based on previous experience in this area, the ROK MND has emerged as a leader
in efforts to improve the soil environment. In fact, between 2019 and 2021, the ROK MND successfully purified the soil polluteted
by dioxin on the land formerly occupied

of its kind in Korea. The purification of
land contaminated by dioxin was **In-pile Thermal Desorption**
selected as both a ‘conflict issue to be **(IPTD)**

Defense’ and hence, is a sensitive task
that could propagate a variety of social

engage in regular communication with
residents and civic groups; moreover,

with the highest level of transparency.

**1. IPTD facility interior** **2. Soil is heated with an inserted thermal rod.**

**In-pile Thermal Desorption**
**(IPTD)**

Piles of contaminated soil are transferred to an A thermal rod that emits heat of 1,000 degrees
indoor facility that is completely sealed to block Celsius or higher is installed in the soil, and
outside air. dioxin is separated into gas by heating the soil

to 335 degrees Celsius or a higher temperature.

**1. Thermal oxidizer** **2. Rapid cooler**

**3. Wet scrubber**

**Thermal oxidation process**

The separated dioxin gas is heated at 1,000 The dioxin gas is rapidly cooled to prevent
degrees Celsius for at least 2 seconds to oxidize regeneration. Byproducts (e.g. hydrogen chloride gas)
it completely, thereby rendering it harmless. generated during the thermal oxidation process are

neutralized.

**6. Exhaust duct** **5. Activated carbon absorber** **4. Wet electric dust collector**

Gas is released into the atmosphere at In the event of an emergency, dioxin vapor is Any remaining dioxin molecules are removed
concentrations that meet current safety removed by absorbing it into an activated using electrostatic power.
standards. carbon layer.

Dioxin Removal


**Environmental Cleanup Process**

**Verification**

**Detailed** **Execution** **Demolition of** **Cleanup** **Completion of**

**of** **Sale of land**

**survey** **design** **facilities** **work** **project**

**completion**

Korea

Pollution

Environment

Surveying Agency Local government

Corporation Soil remediation Demolition Soil remediation MND USFK Base

designated by the with jurisdiction

designated by the company company company Relocation Office

Ministry of over the area

Ministry of

Environment

Environment


-----

**3. Effects of USFK Military Base Relocation**

2022 marked a significant year in the relocation of the Republic
of Korea’s U.S. military bases. Handover of all facilities was
complete with the relocation of CFC Headquarters to Camp
Humphreys, which was celebrated with the relocation
completion ceremony hosted by the CFC Commander.

The relocation of USFK bases also contributed to

development of the national economy and improved welfare for
local residents due to the efficient utilization of the nation’s land.
The USFK Base Relocation Project is being implemented based
on the government’s plan to convert returned lands in Seoul and
other metropolitan areas into public parks, in addition to
separate plans for development. This project promoted the
development of local economies based on judicious use of the
returned land, and helped to resuscitate local economies. The
Pyeongtaek region in particular benefited from the project, with
the national government providing trillions of KRW into its
development, in addition to subsequent improvement in
employment rate and the local economy. The relocation is also
contributing to the growth of the domestic construction industry
by providing contract opportunities to local companies and
increasing the use of domestically-produced construction materials.


**CONSTRUCTION OF PYEONGTAEK**

**U.S. MILITARY BASE**

**Effect of generating production**

**+ added value**

**16.7 trillion KRW**

**Creation of 110,000 jobs**

**Effect of stationing U.S. troops in**

**Pyeongtaek:**

**500 billion KRW per year (2020 estimate)**


Economic Effects of USFK Military Base Relocation


In 2014, the Korea Institute for Defense Analyses (KIDA) conducted a study, which projected that the relocation of U.S. military

bases would generate 16.7 trillion KRW in manufacturing and value-added inducement, create around 110,000 jobs. In fact, it is
estimated that hosting will lead to an estimated increase of 500 billion KRW in consumption to the local area. Furthermore, based
on the Act on Supporting for Pyeongtaek Following the Relocation of USFK Bases, the government responded to long-standing
requests by Pyeongtaek citizens to improve the city infrastructure, including new roads, sewage facilities, and town hall. However,
using such numeric data alone cannot measure the entirety of benefits that are being brought through the base relocation project.
Improving the stationing conditions for USFK directly translated into improvement their capability and through base returns, the
Republic of Korea government has created the conditions for a more balanced development throughout the nation. In particular, the
efficient consolidation of U.S. military bases further strengthened the ROK-U.S. Alliance, something that is truly priceless. Going
forward, the ROK MND will cooperate closely with the U.S. to ensure the successful completion of the Yongsan Relocation Plan and
the Land Partnership Plan, one element of which is the creation of a public park at Yongsan Garrison—a project which can finally
begin, now that the CFC Headquarters has been relocated.

**4. Dawn of the “Pyeongtaek Era for the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command”**

**Relocation of the CFC Headquarters to Camp Humphreys**

During a meeting between the ROK Minister of National Defense and U.S. Secretary of Defense in June 2019, the two sides agreed
to relocate the ROK-U.S. CFC Headquarters to Pyeongtaek. Thereafter, both sides worked diligently to complete the move as soon
as possible. Finally, in October 2022, the ROK-U.S. CFC completed its move to Camp Humphreys, formally heralding the start of the
“Pyeongtaek Era for the ROK-U.S. CFC.”


-----

Created in 1978, the ROK-U.S. CFC played its role as a

symbol of the ROK-U.S. Alliance from its home at Yongsan
Garrison for 44 years. At the same time, as the world’s only
CFC Headquarters, it served as a bulwark for defending the
Republic of Korea against provocations and threats of invasion
by North Korea. With the relocation to Pyeongtaek, the
“Yongsan Era of the ROK-U.S. CFC” has come to an end. At
Pyeongtaek, which will soon become a new cradle for the
ROK-U.S. Alliance, CFC will strive to become a ROK-led
command that will have an even stronger combined defensive CFC Headquarters Relocation Ceremony (November 2022)
capability after transition of wartime OPCON.

**Expected Benefits of CFC Relocation**

With the relocation of the CFC Headquarters to Pyeongtaek, the CFC staff who previously had to split their time between Yongsan
and Pyeongtaek can now work shoulder-to-shoulder in one physical location. In particular, the key units that make up the combined
defense system, such as the CFC, USFK, and UNC are now able to improve their operational efficiency even further because they
are situated directly next to each other. Through such close coordination, conditions for an even stronger combined defense system
have been established.

Furthermore, relocation of the CFC to Pyeongtaek is an opportunity for the ROK and the U.S. to strengthen the spirit of the

alliance. Until now, the CFC was a place for cultivating personal and working relationships among ROK and U.S. service members,
but now, with its relocation to Pyeongtaek, conditions have been set for additional building of these critical relationships. Service
members who build their careers at the new CFC will contribute to developing the ROK-U.S. military relationship in the future, while
the “Pyeongtaek CFC” will serve as a cradle to raise key leaders that can lead the future combined defense system after transition
of wartime OPCON.

Lastly, the successful completion of the CFC Relocation Project will become a model case of how the Republic of Korea and the

United States should cooperate in the future on issues affecting the alliance. The U.S. personnel working at the CFC can now focus
on their missions in a more stable environment, and the ROK government can now pursue in earnest the return of Yongsan Garrison
and the construction of public parks at Yongsan. The project to relocate the CFC has been a great success, yielding mutually
beneficial results through cooperation between the two countries. As such, it will surely serve as a valuable milestone for resolving
future issues in the alliance and successfully completing the relocation of remaining U.S. military bases.


-----

Special Appendix

### 04 Status of Defense Export and Development of Weapons System and Military Technology

**1. Increased Exports in the Defense Industry**

**Results that Show Defense Exports are Increasing**

According to data released by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute in 2022, during the period 2017-2021, the
Republic of Korea became the world’s eighth largest arms exporter, contributing 2.8% to the total volume of arms traded globally.
This figure represents a 177% increase in the Republic of Korea’s global market share compared to the number in years from 2012
to 2016, when it contributed 1.0% to the total volume of arms traded globally.

**List of Major Arms Exporting Countries in the World and their Market Shares**

-  Source: Korea Research Institute for Defense Technology Planning and Advancement (KRIT) “2022 World Defense Market Almanac”

|Rank|Exporting Country|Market Share (%)|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2017 - 2021|2012 - 2016|Increase rate (%)|
|1|USA|39.0|32.0|14|
|2|Russia|19.0|24.0|-26|
|3|France|11.0|6.4|59|
|4|China|4.6|6.4|-31|
|5|Germany|4.5|5.4|-19|
|6|Italy|3.1|2.5|16|
|7|UK|2.9|4.7|-41|
|8|Republic of Korea|2.8|1.0|177|
|9|Spain|2.5|2.2|10|
|10|Israel|2.4|2.5|-5.6|
|11|Netherlands|1.9|2.0|-12|
|12|Türkiye|0.9|0.7|31|
|13|Sweden|0.8|1.2|-35|
|14|Ukraine|0.7|2.5|-72|
|15|Switzerland|0.7|1.0|-35|



In 2022, the ROK signed key contracts with several countries to supply arms such as the M-SAM II (UAE, January 2022), K9 self
propelled howitzers (Egypt February 2022 / Poland, August 2022), offshore patrol vessels (Philippines, June 2022), K2 tanks (Poland,
August 2022), FA-50s (Poland, September 2022), and Chunmoo multiple rocket launchers (Poland, November 2022), achieving a new
record in defense export of US$17.3 billion. Until last year, Korea’s arms exports were focused mainly on countries in Asia and the
Middle East, but with the signing of large arms contracts with Poland, it provided the Republic of Korea opportunities to expand its
scope of exports to Europe. The Republic of Korea is currently discussing large deals with several other countries as well, raising
hopes that the of arms exports will maintain a steady growth trajectory and contribute significantly to the national economy in the
future.


-----

**Diversification of Export Items**

The domestic defense industry can be traced back to the 1970s with localization of basic arms like grenades and mortars, and the
Republic of Korea’s position in the global market was insignificant. In recent years, however, with multiple years of steady growth
and development the Republic of Korea is now able to independently develop diverse weapons systems and advanced guided
weapons for use by its army, navy, air force, and for overseas export as well. As shown in the table below, since 2017, the Republic
of Korea has been exporting a variety of high-value guided weapons, such as the Haeseong missile and the Blue Shark torpedo, in
addition to its major export items including the K9 self-propelled howitzer and the T-50 aircraft. Such successes are attributable to
the customer trust that Republic of Korea weapons systems have earned in the international defense market, which has greatly
elevated the value of the ‘Made in Korea’ brand. In fact, ROK weapons systems are highly regarded in many countries because of
the world-class technologies, as well as their outstanding performance and competitive price when compared to similar systems
made by other countries.

**Key Export Items, 2017-2022**

|Year|2017|2018|2019|2020|2021|2022|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Key export item|K-9 self-propelled howitzers T-50|K-9 self-propelled howitzers Blue Shark torpedoes T-50 KT-1B|K-9 self-propelled howitzers Submarines Haeseong missiles|K-9 self-propelled howitzers|K-9 self-propelled howitzers T-50 Corvettes|MSAM II K-9 self-propelled howitzers Offshore patrol vessels K2 tanks FA-50 Chunmoo multiple rocket launchers|



**Increase of Defense Industry and Logistics Cooperation MOUs Signed with Other Countries**

A memorandum of understanding on defense cooperation signed between governments is a document that forms the basis for
defense industry cooperation with other countries. The numbers increased significantly from 38 MOUs signed with 33 countries in
2016 to 57 MOUs signed with 48 countries in 2022, thereby laying the groundwork for reciprocal defense cooperation.

**Status of MOUs Signed with Other Countries**

|Year|Country|Year|Country|
|---|---|---|---|
|1988|USA|2008|Columbia|
|1991|Thailand|2009|Egypt|
|1992|Spain, France|2010|Ecuador, Uzbekistan, Peru, UAE, Norway|
|1993|UK|2011|Denmark|
|1994|Philippines|2014|Poland|
|1995|Israel, Indonesia|2015|Chile, Czechoslovakia|
|1996|Canada|2016|Finland, Hungary|
|1997|Germany, Russia, Romania|2017|Botswana, Estonia, Croatia, Saudi Arabia, Kazakhstan|
|1999|Netherlands, Türkiye, Venezuela|2019|Argentina, New Zealand, Sweden, Paraguay|
|2001|Vietnam, Australia|2020|Ethiopia|
|2004|Bangladesh|2021|Bahrain, Jordan|
|2005|India|2022|Kenya, Greece|
|2006|Pakistan, Ukraine|||



Total number of countries: 48


-----

**Establishment of a Pan-Military Support System for Defense Exports**

The Ministry of National Defense and the Defense Acquisition Program Administration are cooperating with other government
agencies (in foreign relations, security, and industry areas) to respond to the diverse demands by other countries for defense
industry cooperation. Based on the DEFENSE INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT AND SUPPORT ACT (passed in February 2020), the
Defense Industrial Development Committee, jointly headed by the Minister of National Defense and the Minister of Trade, Industry
and Energy, was formed and committee meetings were duly held on three occasions in 2021 and 2022. The committee is being run
actively as an effective team that negotiates/coordinates pan-government support for the promotion of defense industry and
defense exports, and establishes export strategy as package deal forms such as industrial cooperation and financial support that
leverages pan-governmental capabilities. Furthermore, during the ‘Defense Exports Strategic Conference’ held in November 2022 by
the ROK president, the decision was made to accelerate the growth of defense exports and pan-governmental support was
promised.

In parallel with the operation of the pan-ministerial committee, the Ministry of National Defense and the Defense Acquisition

Program Administration jointly operate a support team to help industry win key export contracts per country. This team is composed
of representatives from the navy, army, air force, KODITS[1)], the Export-Import Bank of Korea, and other related government
agencies. The roles of the MND and the three branches of the armed forces are to increase cooperation with the defense
departments of the export target countries, publicize the superior performance of equipment that is of interest to foreign customers,
and provide follow-up support to customer countries to help them operate their equipment, and other support services for increasing
defense exports. The role of the Defense Acquisition Program Administration is to provide financial support and develop industry
cooperation packages with KOTRA and the Export-Import Bank of Korea.

In order to build the competitiveness of the country’s military weapons for exportation and transform the country into a

powerhouse of the global defense industry, the government intends to operate and improve the diverse pan-governmental support
systems effectively through the Ministry of National Defense and the Defense Acquisition Program Administration.

**2. Example of Military Science Technology/Weapon Development**

**The KF-21, ROK's First Domestically Developed Jet Fighter**

As the country’s first fighter jet developed with domestic technology to defend the skies of the Korean Peninsula in the twenty-first
century, KF-21 will eventually replace the ageing F-4 and F-5 fleet and serve as the main force for ROKAF. The development of a
fighter jet is a national level undertaking that requires an significant amount of investment in both budget and time. The KF-21
project will also take more than ten years for its completion because of all the advanced technologies that need to be developed
and a budget in excess of 20 trillion KRW. The government adopted an evolutionary development strategy with the KF-21 and is
planning on developing it in two stages: Block-I and Block-II. Fielding of Block-I is expected to take place from 2026 to 2028, while
that for Block-II is expected to take place between 2028 to 2032.

KF-21 Boramae successfully flies at
supersonic speed for the first time.

**1)** Korea Defense Industry Trade Support Center


-----

The KF-21 project was launched in the early 2000s when the government announced its plan to develop a domestic fighter jet in

March 2001. In November of the following year, the project was selected as a new long-term requirement. Project feasibility studies
were conducted on seven occasions between 2003 and 2014 as questions about the economic viability of the project precipitated
by the astronomical costs and uncertainties about whether the country could successfully develop the plane on its own were raised.

However, after intense discussions and examinations of the issues by government officials, the basic project implementation

strategy was approved by the 41st Defense Acquisition Program Promotion Committee in 2010, and it was decided that the method
of acquisition should be indigenous development, and that the Agency for Defense Development should be responsible of
explorative development and assessed that domestic companies should be responsible of system development. Explorative
development was carried out from 2011 to 2012 and the feasibility of developing the KF-21 system was demonstrated. Thereafter,
the total development cost of the KF-21 was finalized in 2014, and Korea Aerospace Industries (KAI) was selected as the main
contractor for system development.

Prototype (April 2021) The KF-21’s First Flight (July 2022)

With a length of 16.9 meters, height of 4.7 meters, and width of 11.2 meters, the KF-21 is smaller than the F-15, but bigger than

the F-16. Both a single-seat model and a dual-seat model are being developed. For its engine, the very heart of a fighter jet, KF-21
uses the F414 engine manufactured by GE, which can produce a 22,000 lbs of thrust. This same engine is being used by U.S. fighter
jets and its performance has been proven. The domestic development of the KF-21 will produce a range of benefits such as
strengthening the foundation of the country’s fighter jet component manufacturing industry, boosting the country’s ability to develop
its own fighter jets and its chances of securing international cooperation in the civilian sector, increasing the competitiveness of
ROK fighter jets in international markets, which in turn will lead to increased production and lower prices, and guaranteeing the
national capability to promptly supply the ROKAF with fighter planes when needed. Lastly, the development of the KF-21 will reduce the
country’s technological dependence on advanced countries like the United States and the EU, and produce the synergy effect of promoting
the growth of the semiconductor, automobile, and IT sectors, all of which are highly relevant to the production of fighter jets.


-----

**Dosan Ahn Chang-ho Class Submarine (Indigenously designed and built; 3,000t)**

Starting 1987, the ROK navy entered into a technical partnership with Germany to build the Chang Bogo I and Chang Bogo II class
submarines for service with the country’s navy. However, developing the Chang Bogo class submarines using German technologies
meant that when repairs had to be made due to equipment problems, it was necessary to send the submarines to the German
equipment manufacturer or seek technical support from abroad. To address this problem and improve the survivability and strike
capability of the nation’s submarine fleet, in 2007, ROK Navy launched the Chang Bogo-III project to construct the country's first
domestically developed 3000-ton submarine.

In pursuing the project, the ROK Navy relied on the submarine design and building expertise it had acquired in the process of

introducing German submarines, submarine operational know-how accumulated over a number of decades, and the technical
resources of research institutes and universities such as the Agency for Defense Development, the Korea Institute of Machinery &
Materials, and Seoul National University. Daewoo Shipbuilding & Marine Engineering (DSME), the winner of the contract to build
the submarine, and dozens of smaller companies subcontracted to develop the equipment that will be installed in the submarine,
worked tirelessly to satisfy the high-performance specifications and reliability. The first 3000-ton class ROK submarine, whose
construction began in 2014, was named ROKS Dosan Ahn Chang-ho to honor the deeds and creed of the man who fought for the
independence of Korea and the prosperity of the Korean people. The submarine was finally delivered to the ROK Navy in August
2021 after three years of rigorous testing and evaluation directed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the ROK Navy.

The Jang Bogo-Ⅲ Class Submarine (ROKS Dosan Ahn Chang-ho) being Constructed in Sections

Dosan Ahn Chang-ho submarines are equipped with a range of weapons, including mines, torpedoes and guided missiles, and

can make precision strikes on key targets with its SLBMs (submarine-launched ballistic missiles). Notably, the detection ability of its
sonar system [2)] and the target processing function of its combat system are vastly superior to those found in previous submarines.
In terms of survivability, the Dosan Ahn Chang-ho can travel for long distances underwater quietly thanks to its domestically
developed hydrogen fuel cells and the various noise reduction technologies that have been incorporated into the design of the
submarine. Together these features make the Dosan Ahn Chang-ho one of the most capable diesel-electric submarines in the world.

The localization rate of the submarine is about 76%, a twofold increase over older submarines owned by the ROK Navy. Through

the localization of key equipment like the combat/sonar system and the propulsion system, dependence on foreign technologies has
been greatly reduced, while problems like the inability to obtain timely maintenance support and the difficulty of sourcing
discontinued components are now a thing of the past. Hence, the submarine fleet utilization rate will greatly improve. In addition, if

**2)** A system mounted on a submarine to detect, identify and track surface and underwater targets


-----

The ROKS Dosan Ahn Chang-ho Cruising above Water A Submarine-launched Ballistic Missile (SLBM) Fired from a Submarine

the Republic of Korea succeeds in exporting the submarine, problems related to the intellectual property rights and export controls
imposed by other countries in the past will not be issues for the Dosan Ahn Chang-ho, which in turn will lead to increased export
competitiveness, creation of new jobs, and national economic growth.

The Republic of Korea achieved the feat of successfully developing one of the world’s finest submarines just thirty years after

importing its first submarine. In the years to come, the Chang Bogo-III class submarines will be deployed in strategic deterrence and
sea route protection missions and play an important role in defending the interests of the nation. Furthermore, the Republic of
Korea, by developing the Chang Bogo-III class submarines with domestic technology, has created the opportunity to become a naval
power.

**ROKS Marado, ROK’s Second LPH**

The aptly titled “amphibious operation” is a well-known form of joint operation conducted by the army, navy, and air force that often
turns the tide of war in favor of friendly forces through the deployment of sea and air power in areas where their enemy least
expects them. In many wars, including the Second World War and the Korean War, an amphibious operation often provided the
turning point and ultimately determined the outcome of the war. Thus, the usefulness of an amphibious operation has already been
amply demonstrated. In addition, frequent regional disputes and large-scale disasters amid the unstable international situation are
increasing the need to send peacekeeping missions abroad and to cooperate with foreign countries. For such scenarios, it has
become important to acquire the LPH, Landing Platform Helicopter, a type of vessel designed for amphibious warfare, because of its
ability to perform multipurpose missions and sustained maritime operations.

The ROKS Marado is an LPH with a displacement of 14,500 tons, a length of 199 meters, a width of 31 meters, and a maximum

speed of 23 knots per hour. It can transport 1,000 troops (crew and landing force), 11 helicopters, 6 tanks, and 2 LCACs, all at the
same time. It was named after Mara Island, ROK’s
southernmost island, to symbolize the country’s determination
to defend the southern waters of the Korean Peninsula and its
maritime traffic route. Republic of Korea launched its first LPX
project in 1999 and began the design and construction of the
ship in 2002. On July 12, 2005, just seven years after launching
the project, the country commissioned its very first LPH, named
“Dokdo”. At that time, it was the largest LPH ever built by an
Asian country. After undergoing a battery of tests and
evaluations, it entered service with the ROK Navy in 2008.
ROKS Marado, the Republic of Korea’s second LPH, was
delivered to the ROK Navy in June 2021, seven years after The ROKS Marado at Sea
construction began in December 2014.


-----

Surveillance radar, infrared detection and tracking equipment, and RAM (Rolling Airframe Missile) system for ROKS Dokdo had

to be purchased from abroad. However, those installed in the ROKS Marado were developed domestically, which greatly reduced
maintenance costs and made it easier to conduct maintenance. Furthermore, the survivability of the ship and its operational
performance as a command ship was vastly enhanced compared with the ROKS Dokdo on account of the much-improved combat
system and the 4-sided fixed radar (AESA) mounted on the ship. In addition, the ability to carry out amphibious operations was
improved by building a reinforced flight deck to facilitate the operation of rotary wing aircraft, like the MV-22, and a reinforced side
ramp[3)] via which various pieces of equipment possessed by the Marine Corps can be easily loaded on to the ship.

The LPH ROKS Dokdo and ROKS Marado can perform diverse missions as the leading naval vessels of the Republic of Korea and

protect the country’s maritime sovereignty and its citizens from security threats both non-military and transnational. They will
become the pride of Republic of Korea as they enhance the Navy's ability to execute amphibious operations, direct rescue
operations during large-scale disasters, and evacuate overseas Koreans in emergencies.

**K9 Thunder, The World's Top-Performing Self-Propelled Howitzer**

Ever since the signing of the armistice to the Korean War, North Korea has continuously threatened the peace and safety of the
Republic of Korea with its massive deployment of field artillery. To suppress North Korea’s artillery threats with a high-quality
weapon and pursuit a self-reliant national defense, the ROK military began developing the K9 self-propelled howitzer in the 1980s.
At that time, developing the K9 was a challenging task for the Republic of Korea because of the high technological specifications
involved. But the military succeeded in developing it and delivered the first batch to the ROK Army in 1999, and some 1,100 units
were eventually fielded. The performance rating of the K-9 Thunder, which has an automated fire control system and loading
mechanism, is among the very best in the world, and is considered to be as good as the self-propelled howitzers made by countries
with advanced defense industries, such as the United States.

To continuously upgrade the quality of its technology and attain superior firepower, ROK military successfully developed the first

upgrade variant (K9A1), and has been developing the second upgrade variant, the K9A2, since 2022. For the K9A2, the quality of the
K9 system will be improved overall; for example, the projectile
and fuse will be automatically loaded, the firing speed will be
increased by more than 30%, and the number of crew required
to operate will be reduced. By continuously carrying out such
performance improvements, the ROK military aims to prepare
the system for the day when it can incorporate remote/
unmanned technologies, as this will allow the military to
operate a consolidated unmanned/manned combat system.
With over 1,000 units already sold to eight countries, the K9
Thunder is proving itself to be a superb artillery system, and it
is anticipated that its export competitiveness will remain
strong and continue to improve in the coming years. K9 Self-propelled Howitzers Display their Firepower during a Target Shooting Exercise

**3)** Side entrance through which people and vehicles such as tanks can move in and out.


-----

**Appendix**

**1**


###### Force Posture of Neighboring Countries

**Overview**

|Col1|United States|Russia|
|---|---|---|
||1,395,350|900,000|
|Army|489,050|280,000|
|Navy|349,600|150,000|
|Air Force|329,400|165,000|
|Others|Marine Corps 179,250 Space Force 6,400 Coast Guard 41,650|Airborne Forces 45,000 Strategic Rocket Forces 50,000 Command/Support 180,000 Railway Forces 29,000 Special Operational Forces 1,000|


**China** **Japan**

2,035,000 247,150

965,000 150,700

260,000 45,300

395,000 46,950

Rocket Force 120,000

Strategic Support Force 145,000 Joint Staff 4,200

Others 150,000


**Army**


|United States|Russia|China|
|---|---|---|
|10 (57 brigades)|11(103 brigades)|13 army groups|
|MBT 6,095|MBT 13,127|MBT 6,400 LT TK 750|
|IFV 4,931|IFV 13,680|IFV 7,200|
|APC 18,607 ASLT 100 RECCE 2,545 AUV 19,516|APC 12,050 RECCE 2,700|APC 4,350 ASLT 1,000 AAV 900|
|1,339 1,539 588 2,507|12,565 6,228 4,276 4,130|1,234 2,910 1,640 2,800|
|SP 1,133|GUN 2,526|SP 1,100 RCL 3,966 GUN 1,788|
|1,187|1,520|614|
|3,812||906|
|218||6|


-----

**Navy**

Marine

corps

|Col1|United States|
|---|---|
||53 14 11 24 68 21 86 8 33 143 13 954 707|
|Marine divisions|3 Marine expeditionary forces|
|Tanks Infantry combat vehicles Assault amphibious vehicles Armored personnel carriers Armored multi-purpose vehicles Field artillery Anti-tank missile carrier UAV·ISR Fighters Tiltrotor transport aircraft Rotary-wing aircraft|215 488 1,254 207 6,129 1,459 106 180 366 309 422|


**Russia** **China** **Japan**

38 53 22
11 6 
1 2 4 3 4

11 36 39
16 45 6

129 196 6

42 57 22
21 58 3
28 60 8

278 157 24
219 446 73
127 109 120

1(13 brigades) 7 brigades

330 80

1,100 10

- 290

400 150

- 
405 40

60 
- - - - 5


**Air Forces**

**Classification** **United States** **Russia** **China** **Japan**

Strategic bombers BBR 123 BBR 137 BBR 176 
Reconnaissance aircraft ISR 38 ISR 58 ISR 52 
Command and control aircraft C2 4 C2 8 C2 5 
Fighters FTR·FGA·ATK 1,451 FTR·FGA·ATK 876 FTR·FGA·ATK 1,629 FTR·FGA 317

Transport aircraft TPT 333 TPT 448 TPT 247 TPT 54

TKR 156 13
Tankers 15 [TKR ] 7

TKR/TPT 82 [TKR ] TKR/TPT 3 [TKR][/][TPT ]

AWACS AWE&C 31 AWE&C 9 AWE&C 19 AWE&C 18

Trainers TRG 1,126 TRG 262 TRG 1,012 TRG 246

ATK 399

CSAR 82 EW 20 MRH 22 SAR 39
Rotary-wing

TPT 62 TPT 333 TPT 31 TPT 15

TRG 69

Civilian Airliner
Civil Reserve Air Fleet - - (International/Domestic) 553

Electronic-warfare aircraft ELINT·EW 35 ELINT·EW 34 ELINT·EW 25 SIGINT·EW 7


*Source: 「The Military Balance 2022」 (International Institute for Strategic Studies, February 2022).


-----

**Appendix**

**2**


###### Comparing Defense Budgets Around
 the World


As of 2021

**Country**

|Defense Budget (USD 100million)|Per-capita Defense Budget (USD)|Defense Budget as a Proportion of GDP (%)|
|---|---|---|
|437|844|2.55|
|7,540|2,251|3.29|
|493|395|0.97|
|2,073|148|1.23|
|458|322|2.78|
|162|688|2.06|
|716|1,084|2.30|
|593|872|2.02|
|561|701|1.33|
|203|2,310|5.05|
|48|45|1.55|
|467|1,342|5.54|
|343|1,329|2.13|
|102|123|1.28|
|39|116|1.05|
|73|105|1.33|
|116|1,972|3.05|
|232|612|1.15|



*Source: 「The Military Balance 2022」 (International Institute for Strategic Studies, February 2022) The ROK data are derived from government

statistics.


**Defense Budget**
**Country**


-----

**Appendix**

**3**


###### Annual Defense Budget

|Main|Supplementary|Main|Supplementary|Main|Supplementary|Main|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|74,524|74,764|3.07|3.08|27.4|23.8|12.3|
|84,100|84,100|3.03|3.03|25.1|25.1|12.8|
|92,154|92,154|2.92|2.92|24.2|24.2|9.6|
|100,753|100,753|2.70|2.70|23.3|23.3|9.3|
|110,744|110,744|2.53|2.53|21.3|21.3|9.9|
|122,434|122,434|2.49|2.49|21.1|20.8|10.6|
|137,865|137,865|2.54|2.54|20.4|20.7|12.6|
|146,275|138,000|2.72|2.57|20.8|18.3|6.1|
|137,490|137,490|2.32|2.32|17.2|16.4|△6.0|
|144,390|144,774|2.22|2.22|16.7|16.3|5.0|
|153,884|153,884|2.18|2.18|16.3|15.5|6.6|
|163,640|163,640|2.09|2.09|15.5|14.9|6.3|
|174,264|175,148|2.08|2.09|15.6|14.8|6.5|
|189,412|189,412|2.09|2.09|16.0|15.8|8.7|
|208,226|211,026|2.17|2.20|15.5|15.6|9.9|
|225,129|225,129|2.24|2.24|15.5|15.3|8.1|
|244,972|244,972|2.25|2.25|15.7|15.7|8.8|
|266,490|266,490|2.31|2.31|15.2|14.8|8.8|
|285,326|289,803|2.37|2.40|14.5|14.2|7.1|
|295,627|295,627|2.24|2.24|14.7|14.7|3.6|
|314,031|314,031|2.26|2.26|15.0|15.0|6.2|
|329,576|329,576|2.29|2.29|14.8|14.8|5.0|
|343,453|344,970|2.29|2.30|14.5|14.3|4.2|
|357,056|357,056|2.28|2.28|14.4|14.4|4.0|
|374,560|375,550|2.26|2.27|14.5|14.3|4.9|
|387,995|388,421|2.23|2.23|14.5|13.9|3.6|
|403,347|403,347|2.20|2.20|14.7|14.2|4.0|
|431,581|431,581|2.27|2.27|14.3|14.2|7.0|
|466,971|466,971|2.43|2.43|14.1|14.0|8.2|
|501,527|483,782|2.58|2.49|14.1|12.4|7.4|
|528,401|522,771|2.55|2.52|13.9|12.3|5.4|
|546,112|531,043|2.53|2.46|13.0|10.7|3.4|
|570,143|-|2.54|-|12.8|-|4.4|


**Proportion of National Budget**
**Defense Budget** **Proportion of GDP (%)** **Annual Increase (%)**

**(%)**

**Year**

**Main** **Supplementary** **Main** **Supplementary** **Main** **Supplementary** **Main** **Supplementary**


-  GDP: Recalculated based on the 2015 National Accounts of the Bank of Korea. (The data from 2022 and 2023 are estimates by the Ministry

of Economy and Finance, Economic Policy Directions, December 2022).

-  National and Defense budgets are based on GAAP (Generally Accepted Accounting Principles).

-  Go to page 254 for ‘Changes in the growth rate of the government budget and the defense budget’.


-----

**Appendix**

**4**


###### Force Posture of the Two Koreas

As of December 2022

Personnel

Major

(Reconnaissance aircraft)

Approx. 30

Approx. 50 Approx. 350

Approx. 3,100,000 Approx. 7,620,000

(including officer candidates, (including Reserve Military

secondment and alternative Red Guards,

service personnel) and Red Youth Guard)

|Classification|Col2|Col3|Republic of Korea|
|---|---|---|---|
|Army|||Approx. 365,000|
|Navy|||Approx. 70,000 (including 29,000 Marine Corps)|
|Air Force|||Approx. 65,000|
|Strategic Force|||-|
|Total|||Approx. 500,000|
|Army|Units|Corps|(including Marine Corps) 12|
|||Divisions|(including Marine Corps) 36|
|||Brigades (independent brigades)|(including Marine Corps) 32|
||Equipment|Tanks|(including Marine Corps) Approx. 2,200|
|||Armored vehicles|(including Marine Corps) Approx. 3,100|
|||Field artillery|(including Marine Corps) Approx. 5,600|
|||MLRS/MRLs|Approx. 310|
|||Surface to Surface Guided Weapons|Approx. 60 launchers|
|Navy|Surface Vessels|Combatants|Approx. 90|
|||Amphibious ships|Approx. 10|
|||Mine countermeasure vessels (mine sweepers)|Approx. 10|
|||Auxiliary ships|Approx. 20|
||Submarines||Approx. 10|
|Air Force||Combat aircraft|Approx. 410|
|||ISR & C2|(including Navy) Approx. 70|
|||Transport aircraft (including AN-2)|Approx. 50|
|||Trainers|Approx. 190|
|Rotary Wing (Army/Navy/Air Force)|||Approx. 700|
||||Approx. 3,100,000 (including officer candidates, wartime labor call, secondment and alternative service personnel)|



-  Units and equipment of the other services are included in the number of units and equipment of the Army to compare the military strength of

the two Koreas.

-  The table above only provides a quantitative comparison of the respective military strengths of Republic of Korea and North Korea. A more

practical comparison would require a qualitative assessment based on a comprehensive consideration of the relevant factors, such as
performance level and years-in-service of equipment, level of training, and operational concepts of joint forces.

-  As for army brigades, independent brigades organized under corps or higher-level echelons such as artillery, engineering, and aviation

brigades are included.

-  The KPA Special Operations Force is included in the Army, Navy, and Air Force.


-----

**Appendix**

**5**


###### Comparing the Economic Indicators
 of the Two Koreas


**Republic of Korea** **North Korea** **Republic of Korea / North Korea**


**Classification**


|2019|2020|2019|2020|2019|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|1,941.1|1,948|35.6|35|54.5 times|
|3,753.9|3,762.1|140.8|137.9|26.6 times|
|2.0|-0.9|0.4|-4.5|5 times|
|10,455.8|9,801.3|32.4|8.6|322.7 times|
|51,765|51,836|25,250|25,368|2 times|


*Source: Major Statistical Indicators of North Korea (2021).
*Gross National Income (GNI): Since 1993, major countries and international organizations, such as the UN and IMF, replaced GNP with GNI

(GNI≒GNP).


-----

**Appendix**

**6**


###### UN Security Council Resolutions on
 Sanctions against North Korea


**Classification** **Background** **Major details (Summary)**

Resolution 1695 Long-range missile -  Requires member states to prevent and monitor the transfer of materials, technologies, and

(July 15, 2006) launch (July 5, 2006) financial resources related to WMD and missile activities.

Resolution 1718

1st nuclear test -  Embargo, shipping inspections, freezing of asset, and travel ban.

(October 14,

(October 9, 2006) -  Sets up sanctions committee on North Korea under the UN Security Council.

2006)

-  Embargo on all arms import except for small arms.

Resolution 1874 2nd nuclear test -  Ban on all financial activities that can services and support that could contribute to North Korea’s

(June 12, 2009) (May 25, 2009) WMD and missile activities.

-  Establish the Panel of Experts to support the North Korea sanctions committee.

-  Direct the North Korea Sanctions Committee to issue an Implementation Assistance Notice

Long-range missile

Resolution 2087 regarding situations when a vessels refuses inspection.

launch

(Jan 22, 2013) -  Reinforce export control against North Korea ("catch-all")

(December 12, 2012)

-  Urge enhanced monitoring of all activities involving North Korean financial institutions.

-  Expand the list of embargoed items related to nuclear weapons and missiles.

Resolution 2094 3rd nuclear test

-  Reinforces financial sanctions (suspension of activities of North Korean banks that violate the

(March 7, 2013) (February 12, 2013)

resolution).

-  Prohibits cooperation with the North Korean military and police.

4th nuclear test (January

-  Introduce mandatory search of shipments to and from North Korea and prohibits the entry of

Resolution 2270 6, 2016)/ North Korea’s

sanctioned vessels or vessels suspected of involvement in illegal activities.

(March 2, 2016) long-range missile

-  Demands the closure of overseas branches and offices of North Korean banks within 90 days.

launch (February 7, 2016)

-  Introduces an import ban on North Korean minerals (coal, iron, gold, etc.).

-  Prohibits scientific and technological cooperation with North Korea.

-  Prohibits the rental of aircraft, vessels and the provision of crew to North Korea; introduces

Resolution 2321 mandatory search of travel baggage to and from North Korea.

5th nuclear test

(November 30, -  Clases all foreign financial institutions in North Korea.

(September 9, 2016)

2016) -  Ban additional mineral items for export (silver, copper, zinc, and nickel), as well as the export of

sculptures.

-  Caps North Korea’s coal exports.

Resolution 2356 IRBM launch

-  Expands the scope of the sanctions.

(June 2, 2017) (May 14, 2017)

-  Adds WMD and conventional dual-use weapons to the list of controlled items.

-  Grants the committee the authority to designate vessels involved in prohibited activities and

Resolution 2371 Ballistic missiles launch requires member states to deny entry to suspected vessels.
(August 5, 2017) (July 4 and 28, 2017) -  Restricts member states from employing North Korean workers.

-  Bans all North Korea’s export of coal, iron, and iron ores.

-  Bans North Korea’s export of lead, lead ores, and seafood.

-  Adds additional dual-use items related to WMD and conventional weapons to the list of

controlled items.

Resolution 2375 -  Urges search of vessels suspected of carrying banned items with the consent of the flag state.

6th nuclear test

(September 11, -  Bans granting of work permits to North Korean workers.

(September 3, 2017)

2017) -  Restricts fuel supply to North Korea. * Petroleum products are capped at 2 million barrels per

year, crude oil capped at the current level.

-  Bans North Korea’s textile export.

-  Introduces the capture, search, and seizure of vessels involved, or suspected of involvement, in

the transportation of banned items or prohibited activities within territories and territorial waters.

-  Repatriates North Korean workers to North Korea within 24 months.

-  Additional Restrictions on fuel supply to North Korea. *Petroleum products are capped at 500,000

Resolution 2397

Launch of Hwasong-15 barrels per year, crude oil products are capped at 4 million barrels per year.

(December 22,

(November 29, 2017) -  Bans North Korea’s export of food, agricultural products, machinery, electronics, minerals, soil,

2017

stone, wood, and vessels.

-  Bans export of industrial machinery, means of transportation, iron, and other metals to North

Korea.

-  Expressly bans the trading of fishing rights.


-----

**Appendix**

**7**


###### Key Denuclearization Agreements Regarding
 the North Korean Nuclear Issues


**Agreement** **Major Details (summary)**

-  Agreement to cooperate in replacing graphite-moderated reactors with light-water reactors.

① Geneva Agreed -  Agreement to work toward the complete normalization of political and economic relations between the

Framework United States and North Korea.

(October 21, 1994) -  Agreement to cooperate for peace and security of a denuclearized Korean Peninsula.

-  Agreement to cooperate for the consolidation of the nuclear non-proliferation regime.

-  Reaffirmation of the verifiable denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.

② September 19 Joint

-  Pledge to promote economic cooperation in energy, trading, and investment.

Statement

-  Pledge to take joint efforts to promote permanent peace and stability in Northeast Asia.

(September 19, 2005)

-  Agreement on phased implementation of the agreement.

-  Agreement on the closure and sealing of nuclear facilities in North Korea, the return of IAEA inspectors

to North Korea, and the preparation of a list on all of North Korea’s nuclear programs.

③ February 13 Agreement -  Start of bilateral talks on the normalization of U.S.-North Korea and North Korea–Japan relations.

(February 13, 2007) -  Agreement to provide economic, energy, and humanitarian aid to North Korea.

-  Agreement to convene an appropriate separate forum with the parties directly concerned to negotiate a

peace regime on the Korean Peninsula.

-  Agreement to disable all existing nuclear facilities and to declare all nuclear programs in a complete,

accurate manner.

④ October 3 Agreement

-  Reaffirmation of North Korea’s pledge not to transfer nuclear materials, technologies, or knowledge.

(October 3, 2007)

-  Agreement to provide economic, energy, and humanitarian aid to North Korea equivalent to 1 million

tons of heavy fuel oil.

-  North Korea agrees to take preliminary measures for denuclearization.

-  The United States agrees to provide 240,000 tons of food aid.

⑤ February 29 Agreement

-  The United States confirms that it does not have any hostile intentions toward North Korea.

(February 29, 2012)

-  Agreement to improve U.S.-North Korea relations and expand civilian exchanges in culture, education,

and sports.

-  Mutual prosperity and self-reliant unification

⑥ Panmunjom Declaration -  Mitigation of military tensions.

(April 27, 2018) -  Establishment of a permanent, stable peace regime on the Korean Peninsula.

-  Realization of a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula through complete denuclearization.

-  Agreement to establish a new basis for U.S.-North Korea relations.

⑦ U.S.-North Korea Joint -  Agreement to make joint efforts to build a permanent, stable peace regime on the Korean Peninsula.

Statement -  North Korea reaffirms the Panmunjom Declaration and agrees to make efforts for the complete

(June 12, 2018) denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.

-  Agreement to recover the remains of POWs and MIAs and repatriate identified remains.

-  Agreement to cease military hostilities and expand exchanges and cooperation.

⑧ Pyongyang Joint

-  Agreement to dismantle the Dongchang-ri missile engine test site and launch platform.

Declaration

-  Agreement to permanently dismantle the nuclear facilities in Yongbyon as the United States takes

(September 19, 2018)

reciprocal measures.


-----

**Appendix**

**8**


###### Progress and Assessment of North Korean
 Nuclear and Missile Development

**|** **Establishing the Nuclear Infrastructure** **|** Immediately following the Korean War, North Korea began the groundwork

for the use of nuclear energy, such as conducting basic research and fostering the nuclear workforce, while carrying out

postwar restoration efforts. The physics department of Kim Il-Sung University opened a nuclear physics course in 1955,

followed by the launch of a nuclear physics lab in the Academy of Sciences of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

(formerly known as the "National Academy of Sciences") in 1956. That same year, North Korea signed a nuclear

cooperation agreement with the Soviet Union and sent scientists to the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna,

thereby establishing the basis for acquiring advanced technologies and training experts. North Korea then signed a nuclear

cooperation agreement with China in 1959, and obtained research reactors with the help of the Soviet Union in 1963, with

which it began the construction of a large-scale nuclear complex in Yongbyon, North Pyongan Province in 1965. At the

same time, North Korea developed its uranium mines and built uranium refineries in Pyongsan, Suncheon, and Bakcheon.

Subsequently, North Korea built a series of additional nuclear facilities capitalizing on its extensive reserves of uranium.

**|** **Full-fledged Nuclear Development** **|** In the 1980s, North Korea launched a

full-fledged nuclear development program by building production facilities for

weapons-grade nuclear materials, training nuclear experts, and expanding its

infrastructure for nuclear weapons development, including nuclear test sites.

The Yongbyon Nuclear Complex saw the construction of key plutonium

production facilities including nuclear reactors, reprocessing facilities, and a

nuclear fuel rod fabrication facility. North Korea developed a 5MWe graphite
moderated reactor on its own, which was completed and activated in 1986, and

started building a radiochemical laboratory capable of reprocessing spent

nuclear fuel in 1985, which was fully activated in 1989. At the same time, North

Korea began the construction of a 50MWe graphite-moderated reactor in the

Yongbyon complex with 1995 as the target year, and established a plan to build

a 200MWe graphite-moderated reactor in Taechon.

5 MWe reactor located in Yongbyon

In 1989, North Korea came under suspicion when the Yongbyon Nuclear Complex

was discovered by a French commercial satellite. Under pressure from the

international community, North Korea signed a safeguards agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in

1991, followed by the dispatch of an investigation team from the IAEA the following year. However, the inspection fueled

suspicions of North Korea’s nuclear development activities as the team identified material inconsistencies in the nuclear

activities declared by North Korea. The IAEA requested a special inspection for further verification, which resulted in North

Korea’s withdrawal from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). The Clinton administration considered all options,

including military action, but the nuclear issue came to a dramatic resolution1) with the conclusion of the U.S.-North Korea

Geneva Agreed Framework in 19942). Under this framework, North Korea halted its nuclear activities until 2002.

1) In exchange for North Korea’s abandonment of its nuclear development program, the United States agreed to provide heavy oil, construct

two modern light-water reactor power plants, and normalize U.S.-North Korea relations.

2) Adopted for the resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue after three meetings between high-ranking officials (October 21, 1994).


-----

Despite the agreement, however, North Korea covertly carried out a uranium enrichment program in the mid-1990s with

support from Pakistan. North Korea denied the existence of the program at first for some time. In 2010, however, it invited

Dr. Siegfried Hecker from the United States and revealed its uranium enrichment facilities, raising concerns in the

international community.

In 2002, the Bush administration withdrew from the agreed framework, citing the incompleteness of the agreement and

suspicion regarding North Korea’s uranium enrichment activities, and discontinued its supply of heavy oil to NK and its

construction of a light-water plant. In response, North Korea also declared its withdrawal from the framework and

resumed its production of nuclear materials after deporting the IAEA inspectors, reactivating the nuclear facilities in

Yongbyon, and reprocessing spent nuclear fuel rods. Subsequently, North Korea secured a significant amount of plutonium

by reprocessing the spent rods twice, in 2003 and 2005. Moreover, North Korea declared its possession of nuclear

weapons in February 2005, and followed this up with its first underground nuclear test in Punggyeri, Gilju-gun, North

Hamgyong Province in October 2006.

The ROK Meteorological Administration measured the strength of the artificial seismic waves emanating from the test site

at 3.9mb, indicating that the yield of the nuclear explosion was below 1kt. Based on the result of the nuclear test, it was

assessed that, although North Korea’s nuclear technology was not (yet) at the level required to deploy a nuclear weapon,

the country had passed the threshold of manufacturing and detonating nuclear explosive devices.

**|** **Advancement of Nuclear Capabilities** **|** Following its first nuclear test, North Korea accelerated its efforts to advance

its nuclear capabilities with the focus on enhancing the yield of its nuclear warheads, mounting warheads on missiles, and

achieving mass production. North Korea disabled the key nuclear facilities in Yongbyon during the Six-Party Talks until the

end of 2008 and temporarily discontinued the production of nuclear materials. However, in 2009, when the talks fell

through due to a disagreement over the verification issue, North Korea reactivated the nuclear facilities that were then in

the process of being disabled and conducted the second nuclear test in May of the same year. Nevertheless, the yield was

still less than the yield of the nuclear bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945, which led to the

assessment that North Korea’s nuclear capability was lacking in terms of actual employment.

After pushing ahead with the 'Byungjin Line', a dual-track policy of economic and nuclear development in 2012, North

Korea once again spurred its efforts to advance its nuclear and missile capabilities, resulting in four additional nuclear

tests in February 2013, January and September 2016, and September 2017. The sixth test in particular recorded an

explosive force of around 50kt - a significantly increased yield which suggests that North Korea carried out a hydrogen

bomb test.

**North Korean Nuclear Tests**

|1st|2st|3st|4st|5st|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Oct. 9, 2006 (Monday) 10:36 a.m.|May 25, 2009 (Monday) 9:54 a.m.|Feb. 12, 2013 (Tuesday) 11:57 a.m.|Jan. 6, 2016 (Wednesday) 10:30 a.m.|Sep. 9, 2016 (Friday) 9:30 a.m.|
|3.9|4.5|4.9|4.8|5.0|
|Approx. 0.8|Approx. 3~4|Approx. 6~7|Approx. 6|Approx. 10|


-----

After the nuclear tests, North Korea stressed its status as a nuclear state and claimed that it had achieved the

standardization, specification, miniaturization, weight reduction, and diversification of nuclear warheads3). It also declared

its intention to mass produce and deploy warheads and missiles.

In April 2018, at a meeting of the Workers Party’s central committee, North Korea claimed 'the victory of the Byungjin Line'

and that it had ‘completed verification of the weaponization of nuclear weapons,’ and also declared that it would suspend

any further nuclear tests and ICBM test launches and dismantle its nuclear test sites. On May 24, 2018, in the presence of

invited domestic and foreign journalists, North Korea demolished the nuclear test site and support facilities in Punggye-ri.

However, when the two Summits between the U.S. and North Korea broke down without recognizing North Korea as a

“nuclear weapons state”, North Korea resumed its production of nuclear materials after restarting its Yongbyon plutonium

production facility in early 2021. Furthermore, in early 2022, North Korea reactivated its Punggye-ri nuclear test site with

the apparent intent to prepare for additional nuclear tests.

3) Meaning of standardization, specification, miniaturization, weight reduction, and diversification claimed by North Korea (published on

Rodong Sinmun on May 21, 2013 / Announced by the Nuclear Weapon Research Center on September 9, 2016)- Standardization: refers to
standardizing warheads for mass production

-  Specification: refers to establishing the specifications of warheads and their components for mass production

-  Miniaturization: refers to producing nuclear weapons with yields less than 15kt

-  Weight reduction: refers to reducing the total mass of nuclear warheads for mounting on missiles

-  Diversification: refers to producing multiple types of nuclear weapons for different military objectives. Nuclear weapons can be divided by

type of nuclear reaction-atomic, hydrogen, and neutron bombs-as well as by yield and range: strategic, tactical, and theater weapons.


-----

**Appendix**

**9**


###### Chronology of Test Launches of Ballistic Missiles by
 North Korea

After 2021


**Date** **Major Details**

Mar. 25, 2021 Launched SRBM from Hamju in South Hamgyong Province.

Sep. 15, 2021 Launched SRBM from Yangdok in South Pyongan Province.

Sep. 28, 2021 Launched MRBM from Uiju in Chagang Province.

Oct. 19, 2021 Launched submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) from Sinpo in South Hamgyong Province.

Jan. 05, 2022 Launched MRBM (North Korea has claimed that it was a hypersonic missile) from Chagang Province.

Jan. 11, 2022 Launched MRBM (North Korea has claimed that it was a hypersonic missile) from Chagang Province.

Jan. 14, 2022 Launched SRBM from Uiju, North Pyongan Province.

Jan. 17, 2022 Launched SRBM from the Sunan District in Pyongyang.

Jan. 27, 2022 Launched SRBM from Hamhung in South Hamgyong Province.

Jan. 30, 2022 Launched IRBM from the Mupyong District in Chagang Province.

Feb. 27, 2022 Launched ICBM-class (North Korea has claimed that it was for testing a reconnaissance satellite) from the Sunan District in Pyongyang.

Mar. 05, 2022 Launched ICBM-class (North Korea has claimed that it was for testing a reconnaissance satellite) from the Sunan District in Pyongyang.

Mar. 16, 2022 Launched unidentified ballistic missile from the Sunan District in Pyongyang.

Mar. 24, 2022 Launched ICBM from the Sunan District in Pyongyang.

Apr. 16, 2022 Launched CRBM from Hamhung in South Hamgyong Province.

May 04, 2022 Launched unidentified ballistic missile from the Sunan District in Pyongyang.

May 07, 2022 Launched submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) from Sinpo in South Hamgyong Province.

May 12, 2022 Launched SRBM from the Sunan District in Pyongyang.

May 25 2022 Launched SRBM and ICBM-class from the Sunan District in Pyongyang.

Launched SRBM from the Sunan District in Pyongyang, Kaechon in South Pyongan Province, Dongchang-ri in North Pyongan
Jun. 05, 2022
Province and Hamhung in South Hamgyong Province.

Sep. 25, 2022 Launched SRBM from Taechon in North Pyongan Province.

Sep. 28, 2022 Launched SRBM from the Sunan District in Pyongyang.

Sep. 29, 2022 Launched SRBM from Sunchon in South Pyongan Province.

Oct. 01, 2022 Launched SRBM from the Sunan District in Pyongyang.

Oct. 04, 2022 Launched IRBM from the Mupyong District in Chagang Province.

Oct. 06, 2022 Launched SRBM from Samsok in Pyongyang.

Oct. 09, 2022 Launched SRBM from Munchon in Kangwon Province.

Oct. 14, 2022 Launched SRBM from the Sunan District in Pyongyang.

Oct. 28, 2022 Launched SRBM from Tongchon in Kangwon Province.

Launched SRBM from Chongju in North Pyongan Province, Pihyun in North Pyongan Province and Wonsan in Kangwon Province.
Nov. 02, 2022

-  One missile landed in the maritime buffer zone south of the NLL.

Launched SRBM from Koksan in North Hwanghae Province and Kaechon in South Pyongan Province and ICBM-class from the
Nov. 03, 2022
Sunan District in Pyongyang.

Nov. 05, 2022 Launched SRBM from Dongrim in North Pyongan Province.

Nov. 09, 2022 Launched SRBM from Sukchon in South Pyongan Province.

Nov. 17, 2022 Launched SRBM from Wonsan in Kangwon Province.

Nov. 18, 2022 Launched ICBM from the Sunan District in Pyongyang.

Dec. 18, 2022 Launched MRBM (North Korea has claimed that it was for testing a reconnaissance satellite) from Dongchang in North Pyongan Province.

Dec. 23, 2022 Launched SRBM from the Sunan District in Pyongyang.

Dec. 31, 2022 Launched SRBM from Chunghwa in North Hwanghae Province.


-----

**Appendix**

**10**


###### Chronicle of Inter-Korean Military Relations

December 1, 2020 ~ December 31, 2022


**North Korea** **Date** **Republic of Korea**

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong**

Dec 09,

*The statement included criticism of ROK's skepticism regarding North Korea’s

2020

emergency quarantine measures

**Temporary suspension of tours of Panmunjom**

Dec 15,

*The tours were suspended due to reinforcement of the COVD-19 quarantine

2020

measures.

**Kim Jong-un presides over the 8th Meeting of the Political Bureau of** **Announcement of an amendment of the Development of Inter-Korean**
**the 7th Central Committee of the WPK** Dec 29, **Relations Act**
*The schedule of the 8th Congress was announced, and the composition of 2020 *Article 24 (Prohibition of Violating the Inter-Korean Agreements) and Article

the execution branch was discussed. 25 (Penalty Provisions) were added to the Act.

**8th Congress of the WPK (January 5-12)**

Jan. 05,

*Announcement of the 5-year plan for defense science and the development

2021

of weapons systems

**Kim Jong-un is elected General Secretary of the Worker’s Party at the**
**1st Plenary Session of the 8th Central Committee of the WPK** Jan. 10,
*The leadership of the Political Bureau was replaced, and the Ministry of 2021

Discipline Investigation and the Ministry of Justice were created.

**2021 New Year’s address by the President**
*President Moon stated that he would strengthen ROK-U.S. Alliance, bring

change to U.S.-North Korea dialogue and inter-Korean dialogue.

Jan. 11,

**Joint Chiefs of Staff respond to media reports on trends observed in**

2021

**the North Korean military parades**
*The intelligence agencies of the ROK and the U.S. are carefully monitoring

how North Korea prepares its military parades.

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong**

Jan. 12,

*The statement included a denunciation of ROK's announcement that the Joint

2021

Chiefs of Staff were carefully tracking North Korea’s military parades.

**Commemorative military parade of the 8th Congress of the**
**WPK(January 5-12)** Jan. 14,
*The first military parade was held to commemorate the party congress, and 2021

the tactical guided weapon, Polar Star 5 was unveiled for the first time.

**2nd Plenary Session of the 8th Central Committee of the WPK**
**(February 8-11)** Feb. 08,
*The agenda included a readjustment of North Korea’s economic goals and 2021

improved management of the economy.

**1st Enlarged Meeting of the 8th Central Military Commission of the WPK**

Feb. 24,

*The agenda addressed the problem of establishing revolutionary moral

2021

discipline in the People’s Army.

**Keynote address by President Moon on the 102nd anniversary of the**

Mar. 01, **March First Independence Movement**

2021 *President emphasized the three principles of inter-Korean relations – zero

tolerance for war, a mutual security guarantee and co-prosperity.

Mar. 08,

**ROK-U.S. Combined Command Post Training (CCPT, March 8-18)**
2021

**Government expresses disappointment with the statement issued by**

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong**

Mar. 16, **Kim Yo-jong**

*The statement included a denunciation of the ROK-U.S. Combined Command

2021 *The government expressed strong disappointment with the statement issued

Post Training (March 8-18).

by Kim Yo-jong, stressing the importance of inter-Korean dialogue.

**ROK-U.S. Foreign and Defense Ministerial Meeting (March 17-18, Seoul)**

Mar. 17,

*The meeting shared an assessment of security on the Korean peninsula and

2021

discussed issues related to the ROK-U.S. Alliance.

**Joint statement issued by the Foreign and Defense Ministers of the**

**Announcement of a statement by the First Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs**

Mar. 18, **ROK and the U.S.**

*Stated North Korea will deal with the U.S. under principle of “power for

2021 *The North Korean nuclear issue is an urgent problem that both countries

power and goodwill for goodwill."

must work closely together on.

Mar. 25,
**Launches SRBM (Hamju in South Hamgyong Province)**

2021

**Keynote address by President Moon on the 6th anniversary of Yellow**

Mar. 26, **Sea Protection Day**

2021 *The President mentioned the deep public concern about North Korea’s missile

launches.


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **Republic of Korea**

**Announcement of a statement by the Secretary of the Central**
**Committee of the WPK (Ri Pyong-chol)** Mar. 27,
*The Secretary claimed that the test launching of new tactical guidance 2021

weapons is within the sovereign rights of an independent state.

**Announcement of a statement by the Director of International**
**Organizations Bureau of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs** Mar. 28,
*The statement denounced the antagonistic policies and double standards of 2021

the U.S. when dealing with North Korea.

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong** **Government expresses disappointment with the statement issued by**
*The announcement criticized the words used by the ROK President to Mar. 30, **Kim Yo-jong**

describe North Korea’s test launch of a tactical guided missile during a 2021 *The government emphasized that etiquette should be observed during inter-
speech given to commemorate the ‘Yellow Sea Protection Day’(March 26). Korean interactions.

Apr. 01, **The ROK government resumed the excavation of human remains at**

2021 **Arrow Head Hill in the DMZ.**

**North Korean defectors’ group launches anti-North Korea propaganda**

Apr. 30, **leaflets in the DMZ area**

2021 *Some 500,000 leaflets and 500 booklets were launched into the DMZ on two

occasions (April 25-29).

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong**
*The announcement criticized the dropping of propaganda leaflets by civilian **Government expresses its position on the statement released by North**

groups as provocations. **Korea’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs**

May 02,

**Announcement of a statement by the Director of United States Affairs** *The government announced that, through close ROK-U.S. cooperation,

2021

**of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs** both nations are hoping for a positive response from North Korea on the
*The announcement criticized the U.S. President for saying that North Korean resumption of U.S.-North Korea dialogue.

threats must be dealt with ‘using diplomacy and resolute deterrence’.

**Government expresses its position on the statement released by Kim**
**Yo-jong**

May 03,

*The ROK and the U.S. emphasized that North Korea is a party to the inter-

2021

Korean summit declaration, the agreement to work together to establish a
lasting peace.

**19th Meeting of Korea-U.S. Integrated Defense Dialogue (KIDD)**

May 12,

*“The ROK-U.S. Alliance is the core axis of security and peace in Northeast

2021

Asia and the Korean peninsula.”

**ROK-U.S. Summit Meeting (Washington DC, U.S.)**

May 21,

*ROK announces the termination of its Revised Missile Guideline following

2021

consultation with the U.S.

**North Korea criticizes the termination of the Revised Missile** May 31,
**Guidelines (Korean Central News Agency)** 2021

**3rd Plenary Session of the 8th Central Committee of the WPK**
**(6.15.∼18.)** Jun. 17,
*Kim Jong-un emphasized that North Korea is ready for “dialogue as well as 2021

confrontation”.

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong**

Jun. 22,

*The announcement criticized the U.S. National Security Advisor’s remarks

2021

that North Korea’s stance on the U.S. is an ‘interesting sign’.

**Announcement of a statement by the Minister of Foreign Affairs**

Jun. 23,

*The Minister dismissed the possibility of talking with the U.S. side and stated

2021

that North Korea would reject any overtures.

Jun. 26, **End of search and recovery of human remains on the ROK side of**

2021 **Arrow Head Hill** **(April 1, 2019-June 24, 2021)**

**The ROK government announces the full restoration of the inter-**

**Restoration of the Inter-Korean military hotline** Jun. 27,

**Korean military communication line**

*The hotline was restored 414 days after it was shut down on June 9, 2020. 2021

*Restored at 10:00 am.

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong**
*Kim announced the restoration of the communication line and stated that Aug. 01,

North Korea would keep a close watch on the resumption of ROK-U.S. joint 2021
military exercises.

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong**
*Kim denounced the resumption of the ROK-U.S. joint military exercise, and

Aug. 10,

warned of serious security threats. **Crisis Management Staff Training(CMST) (August 10-13)**

2021

**Severance of Inter-Korean communication channels (Inter-Korean**
**Joint Liaison Office, military hotline)**


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **Republic of Korea**

**Announcement of a statement by the Director of the United Front** **Government expresses its position on the statement released by North**
**Department of the WPK** Aug. 11, **Korea**
*The Director reiterated Vice-Director Kim Yo-jong’s statement, criticized 2021 *The government emphasized that the joint ROK-U.S. military exercises are

ROK-U.S. joint military exercise. defensive in nature and represent no antagonistic intentions.

**President Moon gives a commemorative address on the 76th**

Aug. 15, **anniversary of National Liberation Day**

2021 *President Moon emphasized the coexistence of North and ROK,

denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and permanent peace.

Aug. 16,

**Combined Command Post Training (CCPT, August 16-26)**
2021

**3rd Enlarged Meeting of the Political Bureau of the 8th Central**
**Committee of the WPK**

Sep. 02,

*Kim Jong-un presided over discussions on the implementation of the party’s

2021

national land management policy, tightening of quarantine measures, and
strengthening of the year’s agricultural output.

Sep. 03, **Phase 1 excavation begins on White Horse Hill in the DMZ to search**

2021 **for human remains (September 3-November 26)**

**Parade of paramilitary and public security forces to commemorate the**
**73rd year since the founding of the DPRK** Sep. 09,
*Kim Jong-un presided over a military parade held on the same scale as a 2021

decadal parade.

**Launches SRBM (Yangdok in South Pyongan Province)**
**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong** **President Moon attends the launching of the ROK's indigenously**

Sep. 15,

*Vice-Director Kim criticized the ROK President’s referral to ‘North Korean **developed SLBM**

2021

provocations’ in a speech he gave while observing the launching of ROK's *”Our missile force can sufficiently deter North Korean provocations.”
SLBM.

**President Moon gives the keynote speech at the 76th UN General**
**Assembly**

Sep. 21,

*President Moon proposed a three- or four-way declaration of the end of the

2021

war to cement "lasting peace" and "irreversible progress" on the Korean
Peninsula.

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong**
*Kim Yo-jong declared that the end of the war is a positive step, but

emphasized that mutual respect, and the ending of hostile policies and

Sep. 24,

double standards must be prerequisites.

2021

**Announcement of a statement by the Deputy Minister of Foreign**
**Affairs**
*Declared that the declaration of the end of war would be premature.

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong**
*Kim reiterated the need to end the use of double standards. If mutual respect

Sep. 25,

were to be maintained, the joint liaison office could be reopened, and inter-

2021

Korean relations could be improved, including the Inter-Korean summit
meeting.

**20th Meeting of the Korea-U.S. Integrated Defense Dialogue (KIDD)**

Sep. 27,

*The dialogue emphasized the need to increase bilateral cooperation for

2021

complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.

**Launches MRBM (Mupyong District in Chagang Province.)** Sep. 28,
**5th meeting of 14th Supreme People’s Assembly (September 28-29)** 2021

**Kim Jong-un delivers the administrative speech of the 5th meeting of**
**the 14th Supreme People’s Assembly**

Sep. 29,

*Kim emphasized that the ROK must cease its use of double standards and

2021

antagonistic policies in inter-Korean relations, and expressed his desire to
see the inter-Korean communication line restored by early October.

**Announcement of a statement by the Director of International**
**Organizations Bureau of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs** Oct. 03,
*The statement included criticism of the UN Security Council’s closed-door 2021

meeting (October 1) regarding North Korea’s launching of ballistic missiles.

**Restoration of the Inter-Korean military hotline** Oct. 04,
*The hotline was restored 55 days after it was shut down on August 10. 2021

**Defense Development Exhibition ‘Self-Defense-2021’ (October 11-22)**

Oct. 16,

*In his keynote speech Kim Jong-un accused the ROK-U.S. side of using “double

2021

standards” and said “the enemy is war, not the ROK or the U.S.”


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **Republic of Korea**

Oct. 19, **Government expresses disappointment with North Korea’s statement**
**Launches SLBM (Sinpo in South Hamgyong Province)**

2021 **on its ballistic missile launches**

**President Moon’s delivers address on the ‘2022 State Budget’**

Oct. 25, *the President stressed that his administration would work towards bringing

2021 peace and prosperity to the Korean Peninsula through dialogue and

diplomacy.

Oct. 27,

**Ulchi Taegeuk Exercise (October 27-29)**
2021

Nov. 30,

**Resumption of tours to Panmunjom**
2021

**53rd ROK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting(SCM)**
*The meeting resulted in an agreement to strengthen the ROK-U.S. joint

Dec. 02,

deterrent posture through tailored deterrent strategies, and the issuance

2021

of new strategic guidelines on suppressing North Korean threats more
effectively.

Dec. 07,

**2021 Seoul UN Peacekeeping Ministerial Meeting**
2021

**President Moon delivers New Year’s address, 2022**
*“During the remaining months of my term, I will do my best to institutionalize

Jan. 01,

peace.”

2022

**One North Korean defector returned to North Korea via the eastern**
**front in Gangwon Province.**

Jan. 05,
**Launches MRBM (Mupyong District in Chagang Province)**

2022

Jan. 11,
**Launches MRBM** **(Heecheon in Chagang Province)**

2022

Jan. 14,
**Launches SRBM** **(Uiju in North Pyongan Province)**

2022

Jan. 17,
**Launches SRBM** **(Sunan District in Pyongyang)**

2022

**6th Meeting of the Political Bureau of the 8th Central Committee of the WPK**

Jan. 19,

*Examined the problem of resuming activities that North Korea had promised

2022

to suspend.

Jan. 27,
**Launches SRBM** **(Hamhung in South Hamgyong Province)**

2022

Jan. 30,
**Launches IRBM** **(Mupyong District in Chagang Province)**

2022

Feb. 27,
**Launches ICBM-class** **(Sunan District in Pyongyang)**

2022

Mar. 05,
**Launches ICBM-class** **(Sunan District in Pyongyang)**

2022

**A North Korean boat (carrying 7 persons) crosses the NLL in the**

Mar. 08, **Yellow Sea and enters ROK, seized at Baengnyeong Island**

2022 *A joint investigation revealed that there was no suspicious motive behind the

incident.

Mar. 09, **The North Korean ship and its crew (7 persons) were repatriated to**

2022 **the North at sea**

**Kim Jong-un takes an inspectional tour of the National Aerospace**
**Development Administration** Mar. 10,
*Kim urged the scientists to intensify the scientific R&D effort to achieve the 2022

nation’s goals in space defense science and technology.

**Government expresses its position on Kim Jong-un’s instructions on**

**Kim Jong-un takes an inspection tour of the Seohae Satellite**

Mar. 11, **the construction and expansion of its satellite launching station**

**Launching Ground**

2022 *‘The government stressed that North Korea must halt actions that raise

*Kim announced the goal of modernizing the satellite launch center.

tensions and return to dialogue.

Mar. 16,
**Launches unidentified ballistic missile** **(Sunan District in Pyongyang)**

2022

Mar. 24,
**Launches ICBM (Sunan District in Pyongyang)**

2022

**Expansion and reorganization of the Army Missile Strategic Command**

Apr. 01,

(formerly the Army Missile Command) and the Air & Missile Defense

2022

**Command (formerly the Air Defense Missile Command)**

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong and Park Jong-chon, a**
**secretary of the WPK**

Apr. 03,

*The statement criticized ROK Minister of Defense for his comments about ‘a

2022

preemptive strike’ and threatened that North Korea could destroy Seoul and
the ROK Armed Forces if ROK attacked North Korea.


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **Republic of Korea**

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong**
*Kim criticized ROK Minister of National Defense for his comments about ‘a Apr. 05,

preemptive strike’ and suggested that North Korea could resort to nuclear 2022
weapons.

Apr. 16,
**Launches SRBM (Hamhung in South Hamgyong Province)**

2022

Apr. 18,

**Combined Command Post Training (CCPT) (April 18-28)**
2022

**Military parade to commemorate the 90th anniversary of the founding** Apr. 25,
**of the Korean People’s Revolutionary Army** 2022

May 04, **Government criticizes North Korea for its missile launchings and**
**Launches unidentified ballistic missile (Sunan District in Pyongyang)**

2022 **urges North Korea to resume dialogue and diplomacy**

**Launches SLBM** May 07,
**(Sinpo in South Hamgyong Province)** 2022

**Launches SRBM (Sunan District in Pyongyang)**
**8th Meeting of the Political Bureau of the 8th Central Committee of the**

May 12,

**WPK**

2022

*Announces a state of national emergency, acknowledges cases of Omicron

and orders a nationwide lock down.

**Kim Jong-un presides over an emergency meeting of the Political**
**Bureau of the Central Committee of the WPK** May 16,
*Issued a special directive to deploy the military medical corps of the People’s 2022

Army to fight the pandemic.

**ROK-U.S. Summit Meeting (Republic of Korea)**

May 21, *Discussed extending the deterrent force, including nuclear, conventional, and

2022 missile defense capabilities, expanding ROK-U.S. joint military exercises, and

restarting the EDSCG.

**Government criticizes North Korea’s ballistic missile launch, Joint**

**Launches ICBM-class, SRBM** May 25, **Chiefs of Staff respond to North Korea’s launching of ballistic missiles**
**(Sunan District in Pyongyang)** 2022 *Carried out the ‘Elephant Walk exercise’ and the ‘ROK-U.S. joint surface-to-

surface missile firing exercise’.

**Launches SRBM**
(Sunan District in Pyongyang, Kaechon area in South Pyongan Province, Jun. 05,
Dongchang-ri in North Pyongan Province, Hamhung in South Hamgyong 2022
Province)

**The ROK and the U.S. execute a combined response to North Korea's**

Jun. 06,

**ballistic missile launch**

2022

*ROK-U.S. fired 8 ATACMs in the Yellow Sea.

**ROK-U.S.-Japan defense ministerial meeting (Singapore)**

Jun. 11,

*The three ministers agreed on the importance of ROK-U.S.-Japan security

2022

cooperation.

**Kim Jong-un presides over the 3rd Enlarged Meeting of the Central**
**Military Commission of the 8th Central Committee of the WPK (first**
**day)** Jun. 21,
*Discussed ways of strengthening party control over the military (direct control 2022

of the military by the vice-chairperson, increasing the role of the military
committee of each branch of the military).

**3rd Enlarged Meeting of the Central Military Commission of the 8th**
**Central Committee of the WPK (second day)** Jun. 22,
*Approved an additional operational mission for front-line units, revised 2022

military operational plans, and discussed reorganization of the military units.

**3rd Enlarged Meeting of the Central Military Commission of the 8th**

Jun. 23,

**Central Committee of the WPK (third day)**

2022

*Discussed military security measures to strengthen the military deterrence.

**Rodong Sinmun reports the results of a study on how COVID-19**
**entered North Korea**
*The report claimed that COVID-19 infections began to occur after people Jul. 01,

came into contact with a strange object in the Geumgang District in Kangwon 2022
Province and then spread nationwide, implying that COVID-19 virus entered
the country via propaganda leaflets.

**Ceremony to commemorate the 69th anniversary of ‘Victory Day’**

Jul. 27,

*Kim Jong-un threatened that North Korea would topple the ROK regime and

2022

defeat its armed forces if the ROK carried out a preemptive strike.


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **Republic of Korea**

**Ministry of National Defense announces its position on the statement**

Aug. 01, **released by Kim Jong-un**

2022 **The three countries hold ‘Pacific Dragon’, an ROK-U.S.-Japan joint**

**exercise (August 1-14).**

**Kim Jong-un presides over a national emergency quarantine review**
**meeting**

Aug. 10,

*The end of COVID-19 was announced at the meeting.

2022

*Kim Yo-jong stated that the ROK is at fault for COVID19 entering North Korea

and promised to seek revenge.

**Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs for International Organization**
**Department makes an announcement**

Aug. 14,

*The statement claimed that CVID is an act that violates the sovereignty of

2022

North Korea for demanding unilateral disarmament, and condemned the UN
Secretary-General for supporting the U.S. policy of antagonizing North Korea.

**President Yoon gives a commemorative address on the 77th**

Aug. 15, **anniversary of National Liberation Day**

2022 *President Yoon urged support for 'Audacious Initiative', the North Korea

denuclearization roadmap.

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong** Aug. 19,
*Criticism of 'Audacious Initiative' 2022

Aug. 22,

**ROK-U.S. joint military exercise (UFS, August 22-September 1)**
2022

**7th Session of the 14th Supreme People’s Assembly (September 7-8)**

Sep. 07,

*In his keynote speech Kim Jong-un declared the legislation of the Nuclear

2022

Force Policy (September 8).

**Ministry of National Defense announces its position on North Korea’s**

Sep. 13, **’Nuclear Weapons Policy Act’**

2022 *“North Korea will be confronted with an overwhelming response if it plans

on using its nuclear weapons.”

Sep. 16, **3rd ROK-U.S. high-level meeting of the Extended Deterrence Strategy**

2022 **and Consultation Group (EDSCG)**

**Announcement of a statement by the Deputy Director of the General**
**Bureau of Equipment of the Ministry of Defense** Sep. 22,
*The statement criticized the U.S. and denied that North Korea supplied 2022

weapons to Russia with.

**Launches SRBM (Taechon in North Pyongan Province)**

Sep. 25,

**10th Meeting of the Political Bureau of the 8th Central Committee of** **Government condemns North Korea’s missile provocations**

2022

**the WPK**

Sep. 26,

**ROK-U.S. joint naval exercise (September 26-29)**
2022

Sep. 28,
**Launches SRBM (Sunan District in Pyongyang)** **Government condemns North Korea’s missile provocations**

2022

**U.S. Vice President Kamala Harris visits the DMZ**

Sep. 29, *Emphasized the importance of achieving a complete denuclearization on the
**Launches SRBM (Sunchon District in South Pyongan Province)**

2022 Korean Peninsula.

**Government condemns North Korea’s missile provocations**

Oct. 01,
**Launches SRBM (Sunan District in Pyongyang)** **Government condemns North Korea’s missile provocations**

2022

**Government condemns North Korea’s missile provocations**

Oct. 04,
**Launches IRBM (Mupyong District in Chagang Province)** *”Violation of the UN Security Council resolutions, a threat to the Korean

2022

Peninsula and international peace.”

Oct. 05, **The ROK and the U.S. respond to North Korea’s launching of an IRBM**

2022 *Four surface-to-surface missiles were fired into the East Sea.

**Launches SRBM (Samseok District in Pyongyang)** Oct. 06,

**Joint Chiefs of Staff responded by scrambling 30 fighter jets**

**Protest flights by 8 fighter planes and 4 bombers** 2022

Oct. 08,
**Protest flights by 150 fighter planes** **Air Force responds by scrambling F-35As**

2022


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **Republic of Korea**

**Government condemns North Korea’s missile provocations**

Oct. 09,
**Launches SRBM (Munchon District in Kangwon Province)** *The Joint Chiefs of Staff strongly criticized North Korea’s provocations and

2022

demanded an immediate stop to the provocations.

**Military training by tactical nuclear operations unit (September 25 –**
**October 9)**

Oct. 10,

*The training exercise was attended by Kim Jong-un, who announced that the

2022

military drills conducted by its tactical nuclear operations unit constituted a
response to the U.S. deployment of strategic assets on the Korean peninsula.

**Launches 2 long range cruise missiles (Onchon District in South**
**Pyongan Province)**

Oct. 13, **ROK-U.S. conduct joint MLRS firing exercise**

*Kim Jong-un attended the launching and issued the following orders: expand

2022 *Firing took place at the Damteo firing range located 5km south of the MDL.

the operating zone of the nuclear strategic force; expand the national nuclear
combat force “infinitely”; and accelerate the improvement of missiles.

**Launches SRBM (Sunan District in Pyongyang)**

**Government condemns North Korea’s missile provocations**

**Fired coastal artillery shells and multiple rocket launchers inside the**

**Joint Chiefs of Staff issue a warning to North Korea**

**coastal buffer zones in the East Sea and Yellow Sea**

**Ministry of National Defense sends a notice to North Korea accusing**

*Violation of the CMA Oct. 14,

**it of violating CMA**

**Announcement of statement by the spokesperson of the Chief of the** 2022

**Government designates additional targets for independent sanctions**

**General Staff**

**against North Korea**

*The statement claimed that the firing of artillery shells was carried out in

*15 individuals, 16 organizations.

response to artillery shells fired from the ROK side.

Oct. 17,

**Hoguk Training exercise (October 17-28)**
2022

**Fires MRLs inside the maritime buffer zone in the East Sea** Oct. 18,
*Violation of the CMA 2022

**Ministry of National Defense sends a notice to North Korea accusing**
**it of violating the CMA**

**Fires artillery shells inside the maritime buffer zone in the Yellow Sea** Oct. 19, **ROK-U.S. hold river crossing training exercise**
*Violation of the CMA 2022 **47th ROK-U.S. Military Committee Meeting (MCM)**

*The MCM meeting once again confirmed the U.S.' commitment to defend the

ROK by through extended deterrence including its nuclear umbrella.

**Fires 10 rounds of MRLs inside the maritime buffer zone in the Yellow Sea**

**One North Korean ship crosses into the northwest corner of the NLL**

*North Korea claimed that MRLs were fired in response to warning shots fired Oct. 24,

*On the orders of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, warning shots were fired at the

by the ROK at a North Korean commercial vessel that crossed the NLL. 2022

ship, after which it was forcibly removed from ROK waters.

*Violation of the CMA

Oct. 28,
**Launches SRBM (Tongchon area in Kangwon Province)**

2022

Oct. 31, **Commencement of Vigilant Storm, an ROK-U.S. joint aerial training**

2022 **exercise**

**Reopening of the North Korea-Russian railway line**

Nov. 01,

*Operation of the line was resumed 2.5 years after its closure due to the

2022

outbreak of COVID-19.

**Announcement of statement by the Vice Chairman of the Central**
**Military Commission (Pak Jong-chon)**
*The statement denounced the ROK-U.S. joint military drill.

**Joint Chiefs of Staff issue a warning to North Korea after one of its**

**Launches SRBM (Yongamjin in North Pyongan Province, Mobong-ri**

**missiles lands south of the NLL and conducts a response**

**and Munchon)** Nov. 02,

*Chief of Operations issued a warning to North Korea and expressed a firm

*One ballistic missile landed in the maritime buffer zone south of the NLL. 2022

determination to respond to its provocation.

*Violation of the CMA

*F-15K and KF-16 fighter jets fired 3 precision air-to-surface missiles.

**Fires around 100 rounds of MRLs inside the maritime buffer zone in the**
**East Sea**
*Violation of the CMA

**Announcement of statement by the Vice Chairman of the Central**
**Military Commission (Pak Jong-chon)** **Government condemns North Korea’s missile provocations**
*The statement denounced the ROK-U.S. extension of Operation Vigilant **54th ROK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting (SCM)**

Storm. Nov. 03, *”No type of nuclear attack, including an attack with non-strategic nuclear

**Launches ICBM-class (Sunan District in Pyongyang),** 2022 weapons, on the United States, its allies and partner nations will be
**Launches SRBM (Kaechon area in South Pyongan Province)** tolerated. will be tolerated. It would mean the end of the Kim Jong-un's
**Fires artillery shells inside the maritime buffer zone in the East Sea** regime.”
*Violation of the CMA


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **Republic of Korea**

**Conducts aerial training involving 180 combat aircraft**
**Announcement of statement by a spokesperson of the Ministry of** **Joint Chiefs of Staff scrambles 80 aircraft in response, including the**

Nov. 04,

**Foreign Affairs** **F-35A**

2022

*The statement warned the ROK and the U.S. to immediately halt the Vigilant **Vigilant Storm Exercise is extended for one more day**

Storm Exercise.

Nov. 05,
**Launches SRBM (Dongrim area in North Pyongan Province)** **End of the Vigilant Storm Exercise (October 31-November 5)**

2022

**Announcement of a military operation to counter Vigilant Storm**

**Taegeuk Exercise (November 7-10)**

*In response to Vigilant Storm, North Korea fired missiles and multiple rocket Nov. 07,

*An annual computer simulation based command post training that is

shells from November 2 to 5, and claimed that its air force had conducted 2022

defensive in nature (CPX)

large-scale aerial exercises involving 500 aircraft.

**Announcement of a statement by the Foreign Ministry International**
**Organization Department** Nov. 08,
*The statement refuted the White House’s assertion that North Korea had 2022

sent military equipment to Russia.

Nov. 09,
**Launches SRBM (Sukchon area in South Pyongan Province)** **Government condemns North Korea’s missile launch**

2022

Nov. 10,

**Joint Chiefs of Staff create the Nuclear/WMD Response Unit**
2022

**ROK, U.S. and Japan heads of state issue a joint statement in Phnom Penh**

Nov. 13,

*The three countries reaffirmed their cooperation regarding the North Korean

2022

missile threats.

**Announcement of a statement by the Minister of Foreign Affairs**
*The North’s Minister of Foreign Affairs denounced the ROK-U.S.-Japan joint Nov. 17,

**ROK-U.S. Missile Defense Training Exercise**

statement made in Phnom Penh. 2022

**Launches SRBM (Wonsan area in Kangwon Province)**

**Government issues a statement condemning North Korea’s ICBM**
**launch**
*The government urged North Korea to cease its provocations immediately

Nov. 18, and respond to the ROK's 'Audacious Initiative'.
**Launches ICBM (Sunan District in Pyongyang)**

2022 **The ROK-U.S. side responded to North Korea’s launch of an ICBM by**

**scrambling its F-35A stealth fighters.**
**Ministry of National Defense holds the 1st ROK-U.S. Missile Response**
**Policy Consultative Meeting**

Nov. 19, **Commencement of the ROK-U.S. Combined Aerial Exercise**

2022 -  B-1B bomber re-deployed to the Korean Peninsula.

**Announcement of a statement by the Minister of Foreign Affairs**

Nov. 21,

*The statement criticized UN Secretary-General António Guterres’ declaration

2022

that North Korea’s ICBM launches are a provocation.

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong**

Nov. 22,

*The statement criticized the UN Security Council’s discussion of North Korea’s

2022

launchings of ICBMs as a ‘clear double standard’.

**9th ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting Plus (Cambodia)**
*Sought support and cooperation on compelling North Korea to abandon its

nuclear ambitions.

Nov. 23,

**ROK-PRC Defense Ministers’ Meeting (Cambodia)**

2022

*The ROK asked the PRC to play a constructive role in pushing North Korea to

come to the dialogue table.

**ROK succeeds in downing a target missile with an L-SAM**

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong**

Nov. 24,

*The statement denounced ROK for contemplating independent sanctions

2022

against North Korea.

Nov. 26, **End of Phase 1 of the Stage II excavation of White Horse Hill in the**

2022 **DMZ to search for remains**

**Kim Jong-un poses for photographs with members of the team that**

Nov. 27,

**developed the North Korean ICBM and distributed prizes**

2022

*Kim Jong-un was accompanied by his second child.

**Kim Jong-un presides over the 11th Meeting of the Political Bureau of**
**the 8th Central Committee of the WPK** Nov. 30,
*Discussed the convening of the 6th Meeting of the Political Bureau of the 8th 2022

Central Committee of the WPK, and decided to convene it in late December.


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **Republic of Korea**

**Government designates additional targets (8 individuals, 7**
**organizations) for independent sanctions against North Korea**

Dec. 02, *Individuals and organizations that participated in financial transactions

2022 related to North Korea’s nuclear and missile development or the

transportation of goods like petroleum products, which were illegally
transferred from one ship to another.

**Announcement by the spokesperson of the KPA General Staff Department**
*The statement described ROK-U.S. firing exercises as a military operation **ROK-U.S. Combined Artillery Firing Exercise (December 5-6)**

near the frontline and issued a warning to halt the exercises. *Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS), K-9 self-propelled artillery.

**Fires 45 rounds (estimate) of MRLs towards the East Sea from the** *Firing took place at the Damteo firing range located 5km south of the MDL.
**Geumgang-gun area in Kangwon Province** Dec. 05, **Joint Chiefs of Staff issue a warning to North Korea about its MRL**
*Shells landed in the maritime buffer zone north of the NLL in a clear violation 2022 **launches**

of the CMA. *JSC stated that the firing of artillery shells into the buffer zones in the East

**Fires 85 rounds (estimate) of MRLs towards the Yellow Sea from the** Sea and Yellow Sea was a clear violation of the CMA and demanded that
**Jangsangot area in South Hwanghae Province** North Korea cease such provocations immediately.
*Shells landed in the sea buffer zone north of the NLL, violating the CMA.

**Announcement by the spokesperson of the KPA General Staff Department**
*The statement described the ROK-U.S., firing exercises as a military operation

near the frontline and issued a warning to halt them.

**General Staff Department issues an order to the coastal artillery to fire**
**live artillery shells**
**Fires 90 rounds (estimate) of MRLs towards the East Sea from the** Dec. 06, **Joint Chiefs of Staff strongly urges North Korea to stop its artillery**
**Kosong area in Kangwon Province** 2022 **shelling**
**Fires 10 rounds (estimate) of MRLs towards the East Sea from the**
**Geumgang area in Kangwon Province**
**Announcement by the spokesperson of the Chief of the General Staff**

-  ROK’s accusation that North Korea violated the CMA is a fallacy and called

on the ROK to halt its aggressive military maneuvers.

**Announced ‘successful testing of high-power solid fuel propelled**
**engine'** Dec. 16,
*The test was conducted on Dec. 15 under watch of Kim Jong-un; North Korea 2022

claims an output of 140tf.

**Government warns North Korea about its missile launchings**

**Launches MRBM (Dongchang-ri in North Pyongan Province)**

Dec. 18, *The government sent a warning to the North Korean regime that it would

*North Korea claimed that it was an important test in the final stage of

2022 incur punishment for continuing to develop nuclear weapons and its

development of a reconnaissance satellite.

provocative actions.

**Announcement of a statement by Kim Yo-jong**
*Kim Yo-jong emphasized that North Korea mastered the atmospheric re-entry Dec. 20,

technology for its ICBMs and hinted towards an ICBM launch in an normal 2022
trajectory, while criticizing the ‘Audacious Initiative’ proposed by ROK.

Dec. 21, **ROK-U.S. joint Aerial Training Exercise (December 21-22)**

2022 *Redeployment of strategic assets such as F-22s and B-52Hs

**Announcement of statement by a spokesperson of the Ministry of**
**Foreign Affairs**
*The statement criticized the U.S. for promoting the Security Council statement

condemning North Korea for exercising its rights as a sovereign state. Dec. 23, **Joint Chiefs of Staff condemn North Korea for launching ballistic**

**Statement issued by a spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs** 2022 **missiles**
*The Ministry accused Japan of making groundless claims about North Korea

trading arms with Russia.

**Launches SRBM (Sunan District in Pyongyang)**

**Joint Chiefs of Staff respond against the intrusion of North Korean**
**UAVs into Gyeonggi Province and Seoul**

**6th Plenary Session of the 8th Central Committee of the WPK** *Searched for intrusions by unmanned drones and carried out operations
**(December 26-31)** involving manned and unmanned reconnaissance assets.
**Five UAVs from North Korea cross the MDL into ROK** Dec. 26, *An unmanned drone was sent on a reconnaissance mission north of the MDL
*Ganghwa region, Gyeonggi Province (4), northern area of Seoul (1) 2022 as a defensive countermeasure in response to North Korean UAVs intrusions
*The intrusion into ROK airspace violated the Korean War Armistice into ROK airspace.

Agreement, Inter-Korean Basic Agreement, and the CMA. *Director of Operations announced that the intrusion by North Korean UAVs

were a clear provocation and expressed ROK’s firm determination to respond
in kind.

Dec. 28, **Ministry of National Defense released the 2023~2027 Mid-Term**

2022 **Defense Plan**


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **Republic of Korea**

**Joint Chiefs of Staff launched a joint air defense training exercise to**

Dec. 29, **better prepare against future intrusions by small UAVs**

2022 **UN Command launches a special investigation of intrusions by North**

**Korean UAVs**

Dec. 30, **Ministry of National Defense announces the successful test flight of a**

2022 **solid fuel space launch vehicle**

**Launches SRBM (Chunghwa-gun area in North Hwanghae Province)**
**Kim Jong-un attends the handover ceremony for a new ‘large-scale**

Dec. 31, **Joint Chiefs of Staff condemn North Korea for its ballistic missile**

**multiple rocket launcher’**

2022 **launches**

*Kim mentioned that all of ROK is within range of North Korea’s tactical

nuclear weapons.


-----

**Appendix**

**11**


###### Chronicle of North Korea’s Incursions and Local
 Provocations against the ROK


**Status of Infiltrations and Local Provocations by Year**


As of December 31, 2022


**Classification** **Total** **1950s** **1960s** **1970s** **1980s** **1990s**

Total 3,121 398 1,336 403 227 250

Infiltrations 2,002 379 1,009 310 167 94

Local provocations 1,119 19 327 93 60 156


|2019|2020|
|---|---|
|0|1|
|0|0|
|0|1|


**Classification** **2000s** **2010~2018**

Total 241 264

Infiltrations 16 27

Local provocations 225 237

**2021** **2022**

0 1

0 0

0 1

**Chronicle of Infiltrations and Local Provocations (December 1, 2020 - December 31, 2022)**


**Date** **Main Contents**

December 26, 2022 Five small North Korean UAVs intruded into the MDL in the Gimpo area.


**Status of Infiltrations and Local Provocations by Year/Type**


As of December 31, 2022


Infiltrations

Local

Provocations

|Col1|Total|1950s|1960s|1970s|1980s|1990s|2000s|2010s~ 2018s|2019s|2020s|2021s|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||3,121|398|1,336|403|227|250|241|264|0|1|0|
|Direct|1,749|375|988|298|38|50|0|0|0|0|0|
|Indirect|214|0|0|0|127|44|16|27|0|0|0|
|Espionage using ROK defectors to NK/ ROK citizens abducted by NK|39|4|21|12|2|0|0|0|0|0|0|
|Subtotal|2,002|379|1,009|310|167|94|16|27|0|0|0|
|Land|503|7|298|51|44|48|42|12|0|1|0|
|Sea|559|2|22|27|12|107|180|209|0|0|0|
|Air|52|10|7|15|4|1|3|11|0|0|0|
|GPS jamming|5|0|0|0|0|0|0|5|0|0|0|
|Subtotal|1,119|19|327|93|60|156|225|237|0|1|0|


-----

**Appendix**

**12**


###### Examples of North Korean Violations of the 9.19
 Comprehensive Military Agreement (CMA)

As of December 31, 2022


Coastal artillery fire in the maritime buffer

zone

Coastal artillery fire

in the maritime buffer zone

26km south of NLL, A missile landed in the maritime buffer zone

57km east from Sokcho south of the NLL in the East Sea

Province UAVs intruded into the ROK airspace

|Date|Location|
|---|---|
|Nov. 23, 2019|Changrin-do Island in North Korea|
|May 3, 2020|ROK GP in the center frontlines|
|Oct. 14, 2022|Majangdong area in Hwanghae Province|
|Oct. 14, 2022|Gueup-ri area in Kangwon Province|
|Oct. 14, 2022|Jangjeon area in Kangwon Province|
|Oct. 14, 2022|Haejooman area in Hwanghae Province|
|Oct. 14, 2022|Jangsangot area in Hwanghae Province|
|Oct. 18, 2022|Jangsangot area in Hwanghae Province|
|Oct. 18, 2022|Jangjeon area in Kangwon Province|
|Oct. 19, 2022|Yeonan-gun area in Hwanghae Province|
|Oct. 24, 2022|Jangsangot area in Hwanghae Province|
|Nov. 2, 2022|26km south of NLL, 57km east from Sokcho|
|Nov. 2, 2022|Goseong area in Kangwon Province|
|Nov. 3, 2022|Geumgang area in Kangwon Province|
|Dec. 5, 2022|Geumgang area in Kangwon Province/Jangsangot area in Hwanghae Province|
|Dec. 6, 2022|Goseong area and Geumgang area in Kangwon Province|
|Dec. 26, 2022|Northern Seoul and Ganghwa area in Gyeonggi Province|



※ North Korea’s violations of the CMA include opening of gun ports on its coastline and a failure to install muzzle covers.


-----

**Appendix**

**13**


###### Combined and Joint Exercises and Training

**ROK-U.S. Combined Exercise**

**Name** **Type** **Purpose** **Description**

Freedom Shield Theater-level combined - Command theater operations and

(FS) command post training gain mastery with battle procedures

under the ROK-U.S. combined

- Joint management of crises.

defense system.

- Transition to wartime.

- Improve ROK-U.S. joint operational

- Execution of war operational plan.

and rear area stabilization

Ulchi Freedom Shield(UFS) command post training + Theater-level combined government exercises - The system for waging all-out war is capabilities, and sustained war fighting capability - During the UFS exercise, government exercises are conducted in parallel and the Chungmu Plan is executed.

mastered through the UFS, which
involves government exercises and
military exercises.


*In July 2022, to continue on the legacy of the ROK-U.S. Military Alliance and re-establish the theater level combined training mechanism, name of

the combined exercise was changed (Combined Command Post Training, CCPT ➡ Ulchi Freedom Shield, UFS).

**Joint Exercises and Training**


**Name** **Type** **Purpose** **Description**

-  National crisis response support.

-  Develop a JCS led operational -  Crisis management procedure
Taegeuk Exercise Theater-level CPX

command capability. Exercise.

-  Execution of war operational plan.

-  Carried out at the theater-level and

-  Operational plan execution training

operational command-level to

in preparation for local provocations

Theater-level and operational enhance the capability to execute

and full-scale war.

Hoguk Training command-level field training combined operations.

-  Practical training to strengthen

exercise -  Build the capability to execute joint

collaboration and jointness in an

operations and provide necessary

actual war situation.

support.

-  Master the ability to execute

combined defense operations and
support activities effectively.
-Master the ability to execute -  Counter-terrorism operations.

Integrated civil–government– combined defense operations and -  Operations to prepare against

Hwarang Training military–police defense training support activities effectively. infiltrations and local provocations.

by area -  Enhance local residents’ security -  Wartime transition and operations

awareness to prepare for full-scale war.

-  Confirm the integrated civil–

government–military–police
defense posture.


-----

**Appendix**

**14**


###### Joint Communiqué of the 53rd ROK-U.S. Security
 Consultative Meeting (SCM)

Dec. 2, 2021

**1. The 53rd Republic of Korea (ROK)-United States (U.S.) Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) was held in Seoul on**

December 02, 2021. ROK Minister of National Defense Suh Wook and U.S. Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin
III led their respective delegations, which included senior defense and foreign affairs officials. On December 01,
2021, ROK Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Won In-Choul, and U.S. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, General Mark Milley, presided over the 46th ROK-U.S. Military Committee Meeting (MCM).

**2. The Minister and the Secretary reaffirmed the vision of the leaders of both nations, for a region governed**

by democratic norms, human rights, and the rule of law, as affirmed in the May 2021 ROK-U.S. Summit.
They shared a common understanding that the U.S.-ROK Alliance is stronger than ever, and is
based on shared values of mutual trust, freedom, democracy, human rights, and the rule of law.
The Minister and the Secretary noted that the SCM has played a pivotal role in the continued development of the
ROK-U.S. Alliance, and will continue to be a cornerstone venue to discuss and affirm national commitments. Both
sides pledged to continue to develop the Alliance—the linchpin of peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula
and in Indo-Pacific region—in a mutually reinforcing and future-oriented manner.

**3. The Minister and the Secretary reviewed the current security environment on the Korean Peninsula**

and in the region and discussed cooperative measures between the two nations. The Minister and
the Secretary assessed that the ROK-U.S. Alliance is strong and reaffirmed the two nations’ mutual
commitment to a combined defense as agreed in the ROK-U.S. Mutual Defense Treaty to defend the ROK.
The leaders discussed the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s (DPRK’s) recent missiles launches and
emphasized the importance of increased cooperation to posture for and defend against omnidirectional
threats. The Secretary reiterated the firm U.S. commitment to providing extended deterrence to
the ROK utilizing the full range of U.S. defense capabilities, including nuclear, conventional, and
missile defense capabilities. Both leaders committed to strengthening the Alliance’s deterrence
posture by leveraging all available Alliance capabilities, including cyber and space capabilities.
The two sides pledged to continue coordination and cooperation toward their shared commitment to the complete
denuclearization of and the establishment of permanent peace on the Korean Peninsula, as well as their common
objective to address the DPRK’s nuclear and ballistic missile programs. The Minister and the Secretary stressed
the importance of efforts to resume diplomacy and dialogue, and called for full implementation of relevant
United Nations Security Council resolutions by the international community, including the DPRK. They reaffirmed
their common belief that diplomacy and dialogue, based on previous inter-Korean, U.S.-DPRK, and multilateral
commitments—such as the inter-Korean 2018 Panmunjom Declaration and the Pyongyang Joint Declaration,
the 2018 U.S.-DPRK Singapore Joint Statement, and the 2005 Six-Party Talks Joint Statement—are essential
to achieve the complete denuclearization and establishment of permanent peace on the Korean Peninsula.
The leaders committed to supporting diplomatic efforts by maintaining combined readiness and international
sanctions. Both leaders urged the DPRK to uphold its international agreements.


-----

**4. The Minister and the Secretary noted that the various measures carried out by the ROK and**

DPRK military authorities for the implementation of the Armistice Agreement, Panmunjom
Declaration, and the Comprehensive Military Agreement (CMA) set conditions for easing tensions,
reducing the threat of war and preventing accidental border clashes on the Korean Peninsula.
The Minister and the Secretary also shared a common understanding that the implementation of
the CMA has effectively contributed to preventing accidental clashes on the Korean Peninsula.
Secretary Austin expressed support for robust inter-Korean dialogue, engagement, and cooperation, and pledged
to continue close coordination and cooperation between ROK and U.S. defense authorities on this matter.

**5. The Minister and the Secretary reaffirmed the role of the United Nations Command (UNC) in maintaining**

and enforcing the Armistice Agreement. Both leaders reaffirmed that the UNC has contributed to
the successful maintenance of peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula for 68 years, and that
it will continue to carry out its mission and tasks with the utmost respect for ROK sovereignty.
The Minister additionally conveyed the ROK position that the Northern Limit Line (NLL) has been an effective
means of separating ROK and DPRK military forces and preventing military tension to date.

**6. The Minister and the Secretary assessed that U.S. forces in the ROK have played a critical role in**

maintaining peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula for more than 68 years, and reaffirmed
that going forward, U.S. Forces Korea (USFK) are to continue to play an important role in preventing
armed conflict on the Korean Peninsula, and in promoting peace and stability in Northeast Asia.
Secretary Austin noted that the Indo-Pacific region is the Department of Defense’s priority theater, and reaffirmed
the unshakable commitment of the United States to the combined defense of the ROK-as enshrined in the Mutual
Defense Treaty. He also highlighted the U.S. commitment to maintain current USFK force levels in order to defend
the ROK.In particular, the Minister and the Secretary assessed that the ROK-U.S. Deterrence Strategy Committee
(DSC) tabletop exercise (TTX) held at the 20th Korea-U.S. Integrated Defense Dialogue strengthened the Alliance
combined deterrence posture and enhanced the Alliance’s ability to execute the Tailored Deterrence Strategy (TDS).
The Secretary reaffirmed that the U.S. extended deterrent remains ironclad. He and the Minister pledged to
enhance the Alliance combined deterrence posture through the TDS to more effectively account for advancing
DPRK nuclear, other WMD, and missile threats.

Moreover, the Minister and the Secretary noted ROK efforts to establish the conditions for the stable stationing

of the Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) battery at Camp Carroll and committed to continuing close
cooperation toward the final goal of routine and unfettered access.

**7. The Minister and the Secretary received a report on the results of the ROK-U.S. MCM from the ROK-U.S.**

Combined Forces Command (CFC) Commander, General Paul J. LaCamera. On this basis, the leaders pledge to
maintain Fight Tonight readiness, enhance combined defense capabilities, and update relevant operation plans
(OPLANs). They also assessed that there was significant progress in effectively responding to a variety of security
challenges following changes to the strategic environment.

**8. On this basis, the Minister and the Secretary approved new Strategic Planning Guidance (SPG) to guide Alliance**

planning efforts—which reflects changes to the strategic environment. The Minister and the Secretary assessed
that the updated planning guidance will guide military OPLANs to more effectively deter—and as necessary
respond to—DPRK threats to the U.S.-ROK Alliance.


-----

**9.  The Minister and the Secretary reaffirmed the need to continue to conduct combined exercises and training**

events on the Korean Peninsula to strengthen Alliance readiness. Both sides assessed that the 21-1 and 21-2
Combined Command Post Trainings (CCPT), despite the COVID-19 pandemic, were conducted successfully in
compliance with social distancing measures. They also assessed that in addition to CCPT, other combined
training events performed throughout the year in a balanced manner added strength to the ROK-U.S. combined
defense posture and military readiness. Both leaders pledged to closely cooperate to conduct both CCPTs in
2022, noting that they are critical component of maintaining Alliance readiness. The two sides assessed that the
ROK-U.S. Alliance must continue to focus on military readiness and on the combined defense posture to address
dynamic changes on the Korean Peninsula.

**10. The Minister and the Secretary emphasized that continuous training opportunities for USFK are critical to**

maintaining a strong combined defense posture. The Secretary and the Minister concurred in the importance of
communication and cooperation between the ROK Ministry of National Defense (MND) and USFK to coordinate
for more effective and productive joint use of ROK facilities and airspace for the USFK training required to
maintain readiness within our strong combined defense posture. The two leaders also committed to continued
cooperation toward the development of a combined joint multi-purpose live-fire training complex.

**11. The Minister and the Secretary expressed appreciation for the CFC, which has played a central role in deterring**

war on the Korean Peninsula and defending the ROK since its establishment in 1978. The Minister and Secretary
reviewed preparations for—and acknowledged joint efforts towards—the relocation of the CFC Headquarters
(HQ) to Camp Humphreys.

The Minister and the Secretary reaffirmed that the CFC HQ relocation to Camp Humphreys will contribute to

enhanced combined operational capabilities and a strengthened combined defense posture, and pledged to
closely cooperate in order to complete the relocation by next year.

**12. The Minister and the Secretary reviewed the progress on directed tasks from the Conditions-based Operational**

Control Transition Plan (COTP). The two sides noted progress made in the COTP and discussed the way
forward for wartime operational control (OPCON) transition to the Future Combined Forces Command (F-CFC)
The Minister and the Secretary reaffirmed that the conditions stated in the bilaterally approved
COTP must be met before the wartime OPCON is transitioned to the F-CFC. The Minister and the
Secretary pledged to conduct a Full Operational Capability (FOC) assessment of the F-CFC in 2022.
In parallel, the two leaders committed to complete the comprehensive joint study on COTP capabilities as
well as the annex and appendix rewrites to COTP Change 1 by the Spring 2022 Korea-U.S. Integrated Defense
Dialogue. They also pledged to complete a ROK-U.S. bilateral assessment on ROK critical military capabilities
and Alliance comprehensive response capabilities against DPRK nuclear and missile threats by the 54th SCM.

**13. The Minister and the Secretary acknowledged that progress has been made toward meeting the conditions for**

wartime OPCON transition through ROK-U.S. joint efforts. Minister Suh emphasized that he will systemically
and actively pursue the critical military capabilities necessary for wartime OPCON transition, while continuously
expanding defense capabilities of the ROK military that are necessary for leading the future combined defense.
Secretary Austin reaffirmed the U.S. commitment to bridging capabilities—until the ROK acquisition of these
capabilities are completed—as well as enduring capabilities consistent with the COTP. Furthermore, the two
leaders noted that the ROK plans to acquire and develop critical military capabilities, and decided to closely
coordinate on ROK acquisitions plan for these capabilities.


-----

The two sides committed to engage in regular evaluation and review of progress in OPCON transition
implementation at the annual SCMs and MCMs in order to maintain a steadfast combined defense system.

**14. The Minister and the Secretary decided to continue strengthening cooperation in various areas, including**

space and cyber, in order to ensure an effective response to emerging threats and to bolster comprehensive
Alliance response capabilities. The Secretary and the Minister concurred that developing and cooperating
in new domains will enhance the Alliance’s combined defense posture against a range of adversary threats.
The Minister and the Secretary acknowledged the efforts of the respective defense authorities working to
promote critical infrastructure, including information and space systems, and to improve the security of such
systems. The two leaders expressed their 

shared vision of fostering closer cooperation in high-tech domains such as cyber and space.

The two sides pledged to explore measures to strengthen space capabilities as an Alliance through the
Space Cooperation Working group and the associated ROK-U.S. space policy joint study. This includes
exploring means of improving space situational awareness information-sharing systems, and expanding
bilateral and multilateral combined exercises and training events to improve the Alliance space operation
capabilities. They also committed to exploring opportunities to develop Alliance space professionals.
The two sides committed to maintaining close communication and coordination regarding the cyber domain—
including the Cyber Cooperation Working group scheduled to meet in February 2022—in order to share trends of
cyber threats and discuss corresponding policy updates. They also pledged to progressively develop cooperation
and exchanges between the respective cyber commands with the aim of discussing and promoting mutual
interests.

**15. The Minister and the Secretary pledged to continue exchange activities between ROK-U.S. consultative**

bodies that address defense research and development, as well as industrial cooperation, capability
acquisition, lifecycle logistics, and technology security, and concurred on the necessity to advance
Alliance priorities in the areas of capability development, interoperability, acquisition, and sustainment.
The two sides reaffirmed their commitment to prioritize revisions of bilateral consultative bodies in order to
strengthen efficacy and timeliness of cooperation in areas of defense industries and research and development.
The two leaders reaffirmed that ROK-U.S. science and technology cooperation has expanded in various domains
such as space, quantum, sensor/electronic warfare, cyber defense, artificial intelligence, automation, and
directed energy. They also pledged to seek cooperative measures in the area of 5G and next-generation mobile
communications (6G). The two sides assessed that such cooperation is continuing to develop in a way that
furthers ROK-U.S. mutual interests.

**16. In consideration of complex regional and global security situation, the Minister and the**

Secretary pledged to continue promoting defense and security cooperation in the Indo-Pacific
region and the world where mutual interests align, in order to better respond to regional and
global security challenges. In this context, the two leaders committed to seeking cooperation
between ROK’s New Southern Policy and the U.S. vision for a free and open Indo-Pacific region.
The two leaders reaffirmed the importance of the rules-based international order and adherence to international
rules and norms, including those of freedom of navigation and overflight. They further expressed their intent
to work together for that purpose. Additionally, the Minister and the Secretary acknowledged the importance
of preserving peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait, as reflected in the May 2021 Joint Statement between
President Biden and President Moon. They also reaffirmed support for Association of Southeast Asian Nation


-----

(ASEAN) centrality and the ASEAN-led regional architecture.

The two leaders decided to promote human rights and the rule of law both at home and abroad. They jointly
condemned violence by the Myanmar military and police against civilians, and committed to continuing to press
for immediate cessation of violence, the release of political prisoners, and a swift return to democracy. They
called on all nations to prohibit arms sales to Myanmar.

The two sides highlighted their commitment to the UN peacekeeping operations (PKO) and pledged to work
together towards the success of the upcoming UN Peacekeeping Ministerial in Seoul. They also reiterated their
commitment to efforts including counter-piracy operations, stabilization and reconstruction efforts, regional
security cooperation initiatives, and humanitarian assistance and disaster relief.

Minister Suh expressed appreciation for the COVID-19 vaccine that the U.S. Government provided to the ROK
military this year, and lauded this as a manifestation of the robustness of the ROK-U.S. Alliance. The two sides
committed to continuing close cooperation to address this global pandemic. Moreover, Minister Suh noted
the close communication and coordination by the U.S. Department of Defense to actively support the ROK
government’s “Operation Miracle,” during which Afghans who assisted the ROK Government, as well as their
families, were transported to the ROK. Minister Suh expressed appreciation to the U.S. Government and all U.S.
service members for their dedicated support in realizing humanitarian values.

**17. Secretary Austin expressed appreciation for the ROK’s dedication and contribution to various global security**

efforts, including the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI).

The Minister and the Secretary applauded the ROK-U.S. Counter Weapons of Mass Destruction (CWMD) efforts

to enhance the Alliance’s combined response capabilities to prevent the acquisition and use of WMD, and, if
necessary, to respond to mitigate WMD threats.

They resolved to continue strengthening cooperation to enhance CWMD capabilities through measures including

ROK-U.S. Counter WMD Committee (CWMDC) and U.S. DoD Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR) programs,
which have enhanced Alliance CWMD capabilities.

**18. The Minister and the Secretary assessed that trilateral security cooperation among the ROK, the United States,**

and Japan remains critical to regional stability, and committed to continuing trilateral defense cooperation such
as information-sharing, high-level policy consultation—including the defense trilateral talks (DTT) and Trilateral
Defense Ministerials—combined exercises, and personnel exchanges to achieve the complete denuclearization
on the Korean Peninsula, as well as to advance the peace and security of Northeast Asia.

**19. The Minister and the Secretary reaffirmed that expedited USFK base relocations and land returns, including**

those of the Yongsan Garrison, are in the interest of both countries and pledged to work together closely on
relevant matters, including environmental conditions and security requirements, to ensure timely base returns in
accordance with the ROK-U.S. Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA).

In particular, the two leaders reaffirmed that both sides will seek to return considerable portions of Yongsan

Garrison by early 2022, following ROK construction of appropriate security fencing. The two sides also pledged
to pursue the return of sections of Yongsan Garrison no longer in use by the United States that can be returned,
when all required transfer and force protection actions are complete.

The Minister and the Secretary applauded that various measures were discussed through SOFA channels, and

pledged to continue discussion on relevant issues through the established processes of the ROK-U.S. SOFA Joint
Committee.


-----

**20. Secretary Austin emphasized that the ROK is contributing toward ensuring a stable stationing environment for**

U.S. forces in Korea, and offered his appreciation for consent to the ratification of the 11th Special Measures
Agreement (SMA) by the ROK National Assembly. Furthermore, the two leaders assessed that the SMA has
greatly contributed to the strengthening of the ROK-U.S. combined defense capabilities.

**21. Minister Suh and Secretary Austin expressed appreciation for the courtesy, hospitality, and work by both sides**

that contributed to the success of this year’s SCM. The Minister and the Secretary both affirmed that the
discussions during the 53rd SCM and the 46th MCM contributed to substantively strengthening the ROK-U.S.
Alliance and further developing the bilateral defense relationship into a comprehensive and mutually-beneficial
Alliance. Both sides expect to hold the 54th SCM and 47th MCM in Washington, D.C., at a mutually convenient
time in 2022.


-----

**Appendix**

**15**


###### Joint Communiqué of the 54th ROK-U.S. Security
 Consultative Meeting (SCM)

Nov. 3, 2022

**1.** The 54th United States (U.S.)-Republic of Korea (ROK) Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) was held in

Washington, D.C. on November 3, 2022. The U.S. Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III and ROK Minister of
National Defense Lee Jong-Sup led their respective delegations, which included senior defense and foreign
affairs officials. On October 19, 2022, the U.S. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Mark Milley, and
ROK Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Kim Seung-Kyum presided over the 47th ROK-U.S. Military
Committee Meeting (MCM).

**2. The Secretary and the Minister reaffirmed the shared vision of both nations for a global comprehensive strategic**

alliance as contained in the May 2022 U.S.-ROK Presidential Summit in Seoul. They emphasized the commitment
of both countries in promoting democratic norms, human rights, and the rule of law in the Indo-Pacific region.
They further shared their common understanding that the U.S.-ROK Alliance is based on the same principles and
shared values including: mutual trust, freedom, democracy, human rights, and the rule of law.

The Secretary and the Minister assessed that the U.S.-ROK Alliance is strong and reaffirmed the two nations'

mutual commitment to a combined defense posture consistent with the U.S-ROK Mutual Defense Treaty to
defend the ROK. The two leaders resolved to continue to strengthen the Alliance to remain postured to defend
against and respond to Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) aggression and preserve stability on the
Korean Peninsula and in the region.

The Secretary and the Minister noted that the SCM has played a pivotal role in the continued development of

the U.S.-ROK Alliance, and is to continue to be a cornerstone venue to discuss and affirm national commitments.
Both sides pledged to continue to develop the Alliance—the linchpin of peace and stability on the Korean
Peninsula and in Indo-Pacific region— into a deep and comprehensive strategic relationship.

In particular, marking the 70th anniversary of the U.S.-ROK Alliance in 2023, the Secretary and the Minister

recognized the value of the Alliance and pledged to hold various joint events to lay a foundation for the
development of the Alliance in the future.

**3. The Secretary and the Minister reviewed the current security environment in and around the Korean Peninsula**

and the region and discussed cooperative measures between the two nations. The Minister expressed concern
about DPRK violations of the 'Comprehensive Military Agreement,' including repetitive multiple rocket launcher
firings. The Secretary and minister strongly condemned the DPRK's escalatory activities and violations of United
Nations Security Council Resolutions, including ballistic missile test launches, multiple rocket launches, and firing
of coastal artillery and called upon the international community to hold the DPRK responsible for its actions.
Both sides also expressed concern that the DPRK's ongoing efforts to develop nuclear and ballistic missile
capabilities, as well as its escalatory rhetoric regarding the use of tactical nuclear weapons, and its proliferation
activities. They noted that these actions present profound challenges to the international community and pose
an increasingly serious threat to the security and stability of the region and the world. Secretary Austin also
expressed his concern on the DPRK's attempts to develop various nuclear weapons, as well as means of delivery.
Secretary Austin reiterated the firm U.S. commitment to providing extended deterrence to the ROK utilizing the


-----

full range of U.S. defense capabilities, including nuclear, conventional, and missile defense capabilities and
advanced non-nuclear capabilities. He noted that any nuclear attack against the United States or its Allies and
partners, including the use of non-strategic nuclear weapons, is unacceptable and will result in the end of the
Kim regime. They pledged to further strengthen the Alliance's capabilities, information sharing, and consultation
process, as well as joint planning and execution, to deter and respond to DPRK's advancing nuclear and missile
threats. Both leaders also reaffirmed the commitment of the U.S. to deploy United States strategic assets to the
Korean Peninsula in a timely and coordinated manner as necessary, to enhance such measures, and identify new
steps to reinforce deterrence in the face of the DPRK's destabilizing activities.

The two leaders assessed that bilateral mechanisms such as the Korea-U.S. Integrated Defense Dialogue (KIDD),

the Extended Deterrence Strategy and Consultation Group (EDSCG), and the Deterrence Strategy Committee (DSC)
serve to strengthen the Alliance combined deterrence posture. They pledged to continue close consultation
through these mechanisms to identify means to further strengthen extended deterrence. The Secretary and the
Minister applauded progress on revising the Tailored Deterrence Strategy (TDS) within the DSC, which upon
completion is to provide a framework on deterrence and response in order to better prepare for the DPRK's
advancing nuclear and missile threats. The two leaders encouraged the DSC to make significant progress toward
completion of the TDS ahead of 55th SCM. The Secretary and the Minister further pledged to conduct the
DSC Table-top-exercise (TTX) annually, which is to include a DPRK nuclear use scenario, in response to recent
changes in DPRK nuclear strategy and capabilities. Going forward, the two leaders concurred on the importance
of focusing efforts to deter DPRK nuclear weapon use and pledged to seek new measures to demonstrate
Alliance's determination and capabilities. The Secretary and the Minister also expressed their determination to
maintain close Alliance coordination, especially with regards to strategic communication, to respond effectively
to any future provocation.

The Secretary and the Minister closely consulted on both nations' policies to effectively deter and respond to

DPRK's nuclear and missile threats, including the U.S. Nuclear Posture Review (NPR), Missile Defense Review
(MDR), and the reinforcement of the ROK 3K Defense System. The Secretary and the Minister noted the efforts
to strengthen Alliance's missile response capabilities and posture by establishing the two subordinate groups
under the DSC: the newly established Counter-Missile Working Group (CMWG) and the reactivated Program
Analysis Working Group for the U.S.-ROK Missile Defense (PAWG) in response to advancing DPRK missile
threats.

**4. The two sides pledged to continue coordination and cooperation toward achieving the complete denuclearization**

of the Korean Peninsula, as well as pursuing steps to encourage the DPRK to choose a path leading to
denuclearization and a brighter future. Secretary Austin welcomed the ROK's Audacious Initiative as a positive
effort to encourage progress towards denuclearization. The Secretary and the Minister stressed the importance
of efforts to resume diplomacy and dialogue, and called for full implementation of relevant United Nations
Security Council resolutions (UNSCRs) by the entire international community, including the DPRK. The Secretary
and the Minister urged the DPRK to abide by its obligations under the existing UNSCRs as well as its previous
commitments and agreements. The Secretary and the Minister also concurred on the need for a concerted effort
by the international community to promote peace on the Korean Peninsula, while noting that next year marks the
70th anniversary of the Armistice Agreement. The Secretary and the Minister concurred that the efforts by the
ROK and the DPRK to faithfully abide by the Armistice Agreement and previous agreements in a mutual manner
is necessary to ease military tensions and build trust on the Korean Peninsula. Minister Lee further conveyed
the ROK's position that the Northern Limit Line (NLL) has been an effective means of separating ROK and DPRK


-----

military forces and preventing military tension. The two leaders reaffirmed that they would continue to closely
cooperate in pursuit of these objectives, expressed their support for diplomatic efforts as the most preferred
path, and concurred that such diplomatic efforts must be backed by a robust and credible combined defense
posture.

**5. The Secretary and the Minister also reflected on the critical role that U.S. forces in the ROK have played for more**

than 69 years, and reaffirmed that U.S. Forces Korea USFK is to continue to play an important role in preventing
armed conflict on the Korean Peninsula, and in promoting peace and stability in Northeast Asia.

Secretary Austin also noted that the Indo-Pacific region is the Department of Defense's priority theater,

reaffirmed the ironclad commitment of the United States to the combined defense of the ROK, and reiterated the
U.S. commitment to maintain current USFK force levels in order to defend the ROK. He highlighted the increased
frequency and intensity of U.S. strategic asset deployments, consistent with the Presidents' commitments
to enhance rotational deployments of U.S. strategic assets in and around the Korean Peninsula, as tangible
evidence of the U.S. commitment to defend the ROK.

Secretary Austin and Minister Lee also reaffirmed the role of the United Nations Command (UNC) in maintaining

and enforcing the Armistice Agreement and coordinating multinational contributions to security on the Korean
Peninsula. Both leaders reaffirmed that the UNC has contributed to the successful maintenance of peace and
stability on the Korean Peninsula for over 70 years, and that it will continue to carry out its mission and tasks
with the utmost respect for ROK sovereignty.

The Secretary and the Minister recognized ROK efforts to establish the conditions for the stable stationing

of the Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) battery at Camp Carroll. The Secretary and the Minister
committed to continuing close cooperation for normalizing routine and unfettered access to the THAAD site.

**6. The Secretary and the Minister received a report on the results of the U.S.-ROK MCM from the U.S.-ROK**

Combined Forces Command (CFC) Commander, General Paul J. LaCamera. Based on the report, they committed
to enhance combined defense capabilities against DPRK threats, strengthen nuclear and WMD deterrence and
response posture of the CFC, conduct the systematic and stable transition of operational control (OPCON), and
update relevant operation plans (OPLANs). The two leaders also assessed that there was significant progress in
effectively responding to a variety of security challenges following changes to the strategic environment.

**7. The Secretary and Minister concurred on the need to enhance combined exercises and training events to**

strengthen readiness against DPRK nuclear and missile threats, particularly given the security environment
following the DPRK's most recent missile tests. The two leaders assessed that the Combined Command Post
Training (CCPT) 22-1 and the Ulchi Freedom Shield (UFS) exercise contributed to maintaining combined readiness.
In particular, they recognized that the UFS exercise restored a realistic theater-level combined exercise system.
They also assessed that the combined field exercise intensively performed in conjunction with the UFS exercise
OPLAN added strength to the U.S-ROK combined defense posture and military readiness. Both leaders pledged
to closely cooperate to return to large-scale field exercises in line with combined exercises in 2023, noting that
training for defensive and deterrent purposes is a critical component of maintaining Alliance readiness. The two
sides assessed that the U.S.-ROK Alliance must continue to focus on combat readiness and on the combined
defense posture to address dynamic changes on the Korean Peninsula.

**8. The Secretary and the Minister emphasized that continuous training opportunities for USFK are critical to**

maintaining a strong combined defense posture. Secretary Austin noted the efforts of the ROK's Ministry of


-----

National Defense (MND) for the improvement of the combined training conditions and the two leaders pledged
to maintain close cooperation to achieve additional progress. Both leaders concurred on the importance of
communication and cooperation between USFK and MND to coordinate the joint use of ROK facilities and
airspace for U.S. and ROK training to maintain effective combined readiness. The two leaders also noted that
the ROK Government's plan to establish a combined joint multi-purpose live-fire training complex is a strategic
approach to significantly improve the training conditions of both nations, and shared a common understanding on
the need to expedite efforts to establish the complex.

**9. The Secretary and the Minister recognized the Combined Forces Command (CFC) as the symbol of the Alliance**

and core of the combined defense system, and its central role in deterring war on the Korean Peninsula and
defending the ROK since its establishment in 1978. The two leaders also expressed their expectation that the
CFC Headquarters relocation would contribute to a stable transition of wartime OPCON in accordance with the
Alliance Guiding Principles and the Conditions-based OPCON Transition Plan (COTP). Furthermore, the Secretary
and the Minister pledged to work together to establish a strong combined defense posture based on further
and enhanced Alliance spirit and operational efficiency capabilities at Pyeongtaek base (U.S. Army Garrison
Humphreys), a new cradle of the Alliance.

**10. The Secretary and the Minister assessed that significant progress had been made in meeting the conditions**

for wartime OPCON transition. After reviewing the progress on directed tasks from the COTP, the two leaders
discussed the way forward for wartime OPCON transition to the Future Combined Forces Command (F-CFC). The
Secretary and the Minister also reaffirmed that the conditions stated in the bilaterally approved COTP must be
met before the wartime OPCON is fully transitioned to the F-CFC.

The two leaders applauded the progress made in completing all eight COTP Annexes and approved the

completed set of the COTP annexes with appendices and tabs recommended by the 22-2 COTP Permanent
Military Committee. The Secretary and the Minister also noted that all assessment tasks met the criteria
after the successful Full Operational Capability (FOC) assessment of the F-CFC and committed to complete
the bilateral evaluation of Conditions #1 and #2 capabilities and systems and to review the overall status of
acquiring bilateral approved-upon levels of capabilities and systems, before discussing FOC certification. They
also confirmed the progress of the joint assessment of the ROK's critical military capabilities and the Alliance's
comprehensive response capabilities against DPRK nuclear and missile threats and assessed that significant
progress had been made in meeting the conditions for the transition. The Minister reiterated that the ROK
military is to continue to acquire defense capabilities necessary to lead the future combined defense and to
pursue efforts to meet the conditions in a systematic as well as stable manner. The Minister and Secretary
concurred that further management of Bridging and Enduring Capabilities is to be accomplished within the
OPLAN planning process. The Secretary and the Minister also committed to cooperate closely to ensure the
development of comprehensive and interoperable Alliance capabilities. The two sides pledged to engage in
regular evaluation and review of the progress in wartime OPCON transition implementation through annual
SCM and MCM to maintain a steadfast combined defense system.

**11.The Secretary and the Minister decided to continue strengthening cooperation in various areas, including**

space and cyber, in order to ensure an effective joint response against newly emerging threats and to bolster
comprehensive Alliance response capabilities. The Secretary and the Minister acknowledged the efforts of the
respective defense authorities working to promote the security of critical infrastructure, including information
and space systems. The two leaders applauded the work of the Space Cooperation Working Group and pledged


-----

to explore measures to strengthen space cooperation given the signing of the U.S.-ROK Space Policy Joint
Study. The two sides pledged to explore further cooperative measures to strengthen space capabilities as
an Alliance, such as space situational awareness information sharing systems, and to expand bilateral and
multilateral exercises and training events including the Space Cooperation TTX. The Secretary and the Minister
reaffirmed their commitment to strengthen Alliance cyber cooperation in light of the increasing scope of cyber
security threats. They highlighted the work of the May 2022 Cyber Cooperation Working Group and committed
to enhance close communication and coordination in the cyber domain including increasing U.S.-ROK combined
response cooperation, the establishment of a bilateral cyber exercises and training, and information security
requirements.

**12.The Minister and the Secretary concurred on the need to strengthen the national defense capabilities of the**

Alliance, and to establish more efficient and effective collaboration in the development, acquisition, and
employment of these capabilities. The two sides noted the importance of expanding and deepening cooperation
in the areas of defense research and development, industrial cooperation, capability acquisition, and logistics
and sustainment, with a focus on strengthening the national defense capabilities of the Alliance as well as
interoperability.

**13.** **The Secretary and the Minister pledged to continue exchange activities between U.S-ROK consultative bodies**

that address defense research and development, as well as industrial cooperation, capability acquisition,
lifecycle logistics, and technology security, and concurred on the necessity to advance Alliance priorities in the
areas of capability development, interoperability, acquisition, and sustainment.

**14.** **The two sides reaffirmed their commitment to evaluate and evolve bilateral consultative bodies to strengthen**

efficacy and timeliness of cooperation in areas of defense industries and research and development. The
two leaders reaffirmed that U.S.-ROK science and technology cooperation has expanded in various domains
such as space, quantum, sensor/electronic warfare, cyber defense, artificial intelligence, automation, and
directed energy. They also pledged to seek cooperative measures in the area of 5G and next-generation mobile
communications (6G). The two sides assessed that such cooperation is continuing to develop in a way that
furthers ROK-U.S. mutual interests. Going forward, the two sides pledged to continue to devise and deepen
cooperative efforts through the regular consultative bodies that support these domains, and to work together on
continued reform of those consultative bodies to strengthen their alignment with Alliance policy and strategy.

**15.** **The Secretary and the Minister shared a common understanding that the U.S.-ROK Alliance plays a critical role**

in the security, stability, and prosperity of the Indo-Pacific region. As such, in consideration of the complex
regional and global security situation, the Secretary and the Minister pledged to continue promoting defense
and security cooperation in the Indo-Pacific region and the world, in order to better respond to regional and
global security challenges. In this context, the two leaders committed to seeking cooperation between the ROK's
Indo-Pacific strategy framework and the U.S. vision for a free and open Indo-Pacific region.

The two leaders reaffirmed their commitment to maintaining peace and stability in the sea, lawful unimpeded
commerce, and respect for international law including freedom of navigation and overflight and other lawful
use of the seas, including the South China Sea and beyond. They further expressed their intent to work together
for that purpose. The Secretary and the Minister also acknowledged the importance of preserving peace and
stability in the Taiwan Strait, as reflected in the May 2022 Joint Statement between President Biden and
President Yoon. They reaffirmed support for Association of Southeast Asian Nation (ASEAN) centrality and the


-----

ASEAN-led regional architecture.

The two leaders concurred on the need to promote democracy, human rights and the rule of law both at home
and abroad, and also reiterated their commitment to ongoing efforts to bring peace, stability, and prosperity
to the region including counter-piracy operations, stabilization and reconstruction efforts, regional security
cooperation initiatives, and humanitarian assistance and disaster relief.

**16.** **The two leaders also committed to seek synergies in U.S. and ROK regional strategies to maintain the peace**

and security of the Northeast Asian region through trilateral and multilateral cooperation. They committed
to continue U.S.-ROK-Japan trilateral security cooperation such as information sharing, high-level policy
consultation, trilateral exercises, and personnel exchanges. In particular, the two leaders committed to continue
missile warning and anti-submarine warfare exercises, which help strengthen the response posture of the
three countries to the DPRK nuclear and missile threat. The Secretary and the Minister also reaffirmed their
commitment to continuing to promote and expand trilateral security cooperation through regular defense
consultations, such as the defense trilateral talks (DTT).

**17. Amidst the DPRK's continued development of nuclear and missile programs, the Secretary and the Minister**

recognized the necessity of continued sanctions monitoring missions in the region and welcomed continued
multinational contributions to counter-proliferation activities in the region. The Secretary expressed appreciation
for the ROK's contribution to various global security efforts, including the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI)
and both leaders concurred on the importance of upholding and fully implementing all relevant UNSCRs. They
reaffirmed their commitment to enhancing cooperation to address existing DPRK sanctions evasion tactics
and illicit cyber activities, and committed to seek additional opportunities for responding to WMD threats
from the DPRK. Additionally, the two leaders resolved to continue strengthening cooperation to enhance
CWMD capabilities through measures including U.S.-ROK Counter WMD Committee (CWMDC) and U.S. DOD
Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR) programs, which have enhanced Alliance CWMD capabilities. The Secretary
and the Minister applauded the work done over the last year in the CWMDC to enhance the Alliance's combined
response capabilities to prevent the acquisition and use of DPRK's WMD, and to respond to mitigate WMD
threats.

Secretary Austin expressed his gratitude that the ROK is contributing towards ensuring a stable stationing
environment for U.S. Forces Korea. The Secretary and Minister also assessed that the Special Measures
Agreement (SMA) has greatly contributed to the strengthening of the U.S.-ROK combined defense posture.

**18. Secretary Austin and Minister Lee expressed appreciation for the courtesy, hospitality, and work by both sides**

that contributed to the success of this year's SCM. Both leaders affirmed that the discussions during the 54th
SCM and the 47th MCM contributed to substantively strengthening the U.S.-ROK Alliance and further developing
the bilateral defense relationship into the U.S.-ROK global comprehensive strategic Alliance. Both sides expect
to hold the 55th SCM and 48th MCM in Seoul at a mutually convenient time in 2023.


-----

**Appendix**

**16**


###### Direct and Indirect Financial Support
 for the Stationing of USFK

**Details of Continuous Financial Support: Approximately KRW 3.4 trillion**
Unit: 100 million

11,833

5,917

Support

97

|Category|Subcategory|Items|
|---|---|---|
|Defense budget|Defense cost sharing|Labor costs (559.8), military construction (436.8), and logistics support (186.7)|
||Budget other than defense cost sharing|Use of US communication lines and combined C4I systems|
|||KATUSA troop support|
|||Base maintenance and relocation expenses|
|||Property support|
|Support from sources other than the defense budget||Maintenance of areas around USFK installations (surrounding road projects and regional development)|
|Total direct support|||
|Opportunity costs||Appraisal of the rent for lands granted free of charge|
|||Opportunity costs for KATUSA|
|||Support for the use of training grounds/fields|
|Waived and reduced expenses||Waivers of tariffs, domestic taxes, local taxes, as well as taxes on the import and sale of petroleum|
|||Reduction of water/sewage bills, electricity bills, gas bills, and phone bills|
|||Waivers of road, port, airport, and railroad fees|
|Total indirect support|||


**Total** **34,430**


-----

**Description by Item**



**Classification** **Description** **Legal Basis**

ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command Agreement on

Cost of using US

Fee for using US communication lines and subsidies the Sharing of Communications Expenses;

communication lines and

for combined C4I systems Implementation Agreement regarding Cost Sharing

combined C4I systems

and the Information Interoperability System.

Support for expenditure on basic wages, clothing, Verbal agreement between the President Rhee

KATUSA troop support and other operational costs for the ROK Armed Seung-man and General MacArthur, then Commander

Forces support group of the United Nations Command.

Articles 2 and 5 of SOFA; Articles 2 and 3 of

Cost of demolishing old facilities inside returned

Understandings; Article 78 of the Act on the

Base maintenance and bases and environmental cleanups, outsourced

Acquisition of and Compensation for Land, Etc. for

relocation expenses services related to the relocation of US military

Public Works Projects; Article 2 of the Act on

bases, etc.

National Defense and Military Installations Projects.

Article 4 of the ROK-U.S. Mutual Defense Treaty;
Articles 2 and 5 of SOFA; Articles 2 and 3 of
Understandings; Article 78 of the Act on the

Expenses for purchase, use, and compensation
Property support Acquisition of and Compensation for Land, Etc. for
of land

Public Works Projects and Article 40 of its
Enforcement Decree; Article 2 of the Act on National
Defense and Military Installations Projects.

Article 4 of the ROK-U.S. Mutual Defense Treaty;
Articles 2, 3, and 5 of SOFA; The Special Act on

Maintenance of areas

Development costs for areas around USFK bases Support for Areas, Etc. Adjacent to Districts Granted

around USFK installations

(surrounding road maintenance and regional to the United States Armed Forces in Korea and the

(surrounding road projects

development support costs) Special Act on Support, Etc. for Pyeongtaek-si, Etc.

and regional development)

Following the Relocation of US Military Bases in
Korea.

Appraisal of rent for lands Article 4 of the ROK-U.S. Mutual Defense Treaty;

Opportunity costs of rent for donated land and
granted free of charge Article 2 of SOFA; Article 32 of the State Property Act
buildings provided to the USFK free of charge

and Article 29 of its Enforcement Decree.

Verbal agreement between the President Rhee

Opportunity costs pf Additional expenses to be borne by the US forces if

Seung-man and General MacArthur, then Commander

KATUSA KATUSA personnel are US military personnel

of the United Nations Command.

Articles 2 and 5 of SOFA; agreements and MOUs

Support for using Costs of supporting the use of USFK live fire training

regarding the use of ROK military training areas and

trainingranges ranges

firing ranges by the USFK.

Waived and reduced Waivers and reductions of various taxes and utility

Articles 6, 10, 14, and 16 of SOFA.

expenses costs


-----

**Appendix**

**17**


###### Status of International Defense Industry
 Cooperation Agreements with ROK


**Countries that have signed defense industry cooperation agreements (MOUs) with the ROK: 48 countries**


As of December 2022


|Signed in|Countries|Signed in|Countries|Signed in|Countries|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Jun. 1988|Thailand|Nov. 1991|Spain|Mar. 1992|France|
|Sep.1993|Philippines|May 1994|Israel|Aug. 1995|Indonesia|
|May 1996|Germany|Nov. 1997|Russia|Nov. 1997|Romania|
|Jun. 1999|Türkiye|Dec. 1999|Venezuela|Dec. 1999|Vietnam|
|Aug.2001|Bangladesh|Jan. 2004|India|Sep. 2005|Pakistan|
|Dec. 2006|Colombia|May 2008|Egypt|Dec. 2009|Ecuador|
|Feb. 2010|Peru|Jun. 2010|UAE|Sep. 2010|Norway|
|May 2011|Poland|May 2014|Chile|Aug. 2015|Czech Republic|
|Jun. 2016|Hungary|Jul. 2016|Botswana|Jan. 2017|Estonia|
|Feb. 2017|Saudi Arabia|Sep. 2017|Kazakhstan|Oct. 2017|Argentina|
|May 2019|Sweden|Jun. 2019|Paraguay|Oct. 2019|Ethiopia|
|Sep. 2021|Jordan|Oct. 2021|Kenya|Aug. 2022|Greece|


**Status of other agreements (MOUs) on defense industry cooperation**


As of December 2022

**Agreements on the provision**

**International technical cooperation and** **Quality assurance agreements**
**Classification** **of the price information**

**protection agreements (21 countries)** **(25 countries)**

**(4 countries)**


USA, UK, Germany, Netherlands

|USA, France, UK, Israel, India, Colombia, Indonesia, Singapore, Australia, UAE, Poland, Egypt, Norway, Multilateral* *Multilateral agreements have been signed with 14 nations including the USA (Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, UK, USA, ROK).|USA, UK, France, Spain, Switzerland, Canada, Netherlands, Denmark, Australia, Philippines, Germany, Israel, Türkiye, New Zealand, Poland, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Sweden, Peru, Norway, Colombia, Vietnam, Pakistan, Uzbekistan, Austria|
|---|---|


-----

**Appendix**

**18**


###### Status of International Defense Cooperation
 Agreements with ROK 4)


As of December 2022

|Signed in|Countries|Signed in|Countries|Signed in|Countries|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|May 1994|Singapore|Dec. 2009|Azerbaijan|Dec. 2013|Myanmar|
|May 1995|Lithuania|Feb. 2010|New Zealand|May 2014|Cambodia|
|Aug. 1995|India|Sep. 2010|Qatar (treaty)|Nov. 2014|Brunei|
|Nov. 1996|Kazakhstan|Sep.2010|Czech Republic|Feb. 2015|Italy (treaty)|
|Nov. 1999|Vietnam|Oct. 2010|Colombia|Mar. 2015|Chile (treaty)|
|Dec. 1999|Romania|Oct. 2010|Bulgaria|May 2015|Bahrain|
|Nov. 2004|Gabon|Oct. 2011|Turkmenistan|May 2015|Oman|
|Mar. 2006|Peru|Oct. 2011|Paraguay|Jan. 2016|Senegal|
|Sep. 2006|Australia|Dec. 2011|Ethiopia|May 2016|Hungary|
|Nov. 2006|Thailand|Mar. 2012|Uganda|May 2016|Russia (treaty)|
|Dec. 2006|China|Jul. 2012|Ecuador|Jul. 2016|Laos|
|Jun. 2008|Saudi Arabia (treaty)|Feb.2013|Botswana|Jan. 2017|Malaysia|
|Apr. 2009|Indonesia (treaty)|Oct. 2013|Fiji|Jan. 2017|Slovakia|
|Jul. 2009|Philippines|Oct. 2013|Egypt|Mar. 2017|Pakistan|
|Oct. 2009|Poland (treaty)|Oct. 2013|Angola|Mar. 2017||



4) Significance: As the basic agreement for promoting mutual defense cooperation, this document sets forth comprehensive provisions such as

the principles of cooperation, scope, and methods.
Contents: Principles of cooperation (mutual reciprocity, etc.), scope of cooperation (military information, exchanges of military personnel,
defense industry, logistics, etc.), and administrative matters (cost burden, initiation of effect, etc.).


-----

**Appendix**

**19**


###### International Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
 Agreements and Organizations

As of December 2022


**No. of Member**

|ssification|No. of Member States (Effective/ Establishment)|Membership Status of the ROK and North Korea|
|---|---|---|
|First Committee of the UN General Assembly|193 (October 1945)|ROK (September 1991) North Korea (September 1991)|
|UN Disarmament Commission (UNDC)|193 (January 1952)|ROK (September 1991) North Korea (September 1991)|
|Conference on Disarmament (CD)|65 (February 1984)|ROK (June 1996) North Korea (June 1996)|
|Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty (NPT)|191 (March 1970)|ROK (April 1975) North Korea (December 1985) * Withdrew in January 2003.|
|International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)|173 (July 1957)|ROK (August 1957) North Korea (September 1974) * Withdrew in June 1994.|
|Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)|174 (not effectuated, signed by 186countires)|ROK (September 1999) North Korea (not a member)|
|Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW)|68 (January 2021)|ROK (not a member) North Korea (not a member)|
|Hague Code of Conduct against the Proliferation of Ballistic Missiles (HCOC)|143 (November 2002)|ROK (November 2002) North Korea (not a member)|
|Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS)|100 (December 1959)|ROK (September 1994) North Korea (not a member)|
|Biological Weapons Conventions (BWC)|184 (March 1975)|ROK (June 1987) North Korea (March 1987)|



193

(April 1997)


**Membership**

**Status of the ROK**

**and North Korea**

ROK (September 1991)

North Korea

(September 1991)

ROK (September 1991)

North Korea

(September 1991)

ROK (June 1996)

North Korea

(June 1996)

ROK (April 1975)

North Korea

(December 1985)

-  Withdrew in January 2003

ROK (August 1957)

North Korea

(September 1974)

-  Withdrew in June 1994

ROK (September 1999)

North Korea

(not a member)

ROK (not a member)

North Korea

(not a member)

ROK (November 2002)

North Korea

(not a member)

ROK (September 1994)

North Korea

(not a member)

ROK (June 1987)

North Korea (March

1987)

ROK (April 1997)

North Korea (not a

member)


**Classification**


**Main Contents**

-  One of six committees at the UN General Assembly (UNGA)

which discuss issues concerning disarmament and
international security.

-  Recommends 50 to 60 draft resolutions annually to UNGA,

most of which are adopted by UNGA.

-  Selects three major issues concerning disarmament and

nonproliferation and submits a report to UNGA after
conducting an in-depth review.

-  A deliberative body that elicits the directions for and

principles of the international community’s agreement
concerning major issues.

-  The only international negotiation body in charge of

multilateral disarmament.

-  The majority of key disarmament-related multilateral treaties

are established through negotiations in CD.

-  Although not an organization directly under UNGA, it is

funded via the regular UN budget, but manages its agendas
and standing rules independently.

-  Submits an annual report to UNGA.

-  Prevent nuclear arms proliferation and realize nuclear

disarmament

-  Promote peaceful use of nuclear energy

-  Provides technological support to promote the peaceful use of

nuclear energy.

-  Prevents the diversion of nuclear materials from civilians to

military purposes.

-  Prohibits all nuclear tests in all environments (including the

atmosphere, outer space, underground, and underwater).

-  Prohibits the acquisition, possession and accumulation of

nuclear weapons by banning their development, testing,
production and manufacture.

-  Prohibits the direct and indirect transfer of nuclear weapons

or their control.

-  Prohibits the use of, or threats to use, nuclear weapons.

-  A voluntary and political code of conduct designed to prevent

the proliferation of ballistic missiles.

-  Provides the basic principles for technical and legal issues

regarding the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space.

-  Complete prohibition of the development, production and

stockpiling of biological weapons (agents or toxins).

-  Prohibits the development, production, stockpiling, and use of

chemical weapons entirely.

-  Mandates the destruction of all chemical weapons within 10

years of accession to the CWC.

-  If inevitable, the deadline may be extended by 5 years.


UN

Organizations

Nuclear

Weapons

Missiles and

Space

Biological and

Chemical
Weapons


Chemical Weapons
Conventions (CWC)


-----

**No. of Member**



Biological and

Chemical
weapons

Conventional

Weapons

Multilateral

Export Control

Regimes

Prevention of

the Proliferation

of WMD


**Main Contents**

-  An executive body set up to monitor and inspect member

states to ensure their compliance with the CWC obligations.

-  Contributes to world peace and security by preventing the

illicit trade of conventional weapons and their diversion.

-  Prescribes matters pertaining to the regulations on the

international trade of conventional weapons.

-  Full title: Convention on the Prohibition and/or Restriction of

the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects.

-  Protocol I: prohibits the use of fragmentary ammunitions
undetectable by X-rays.

-  Protocol II: prohibits or restricts the use of mines, booby traps
and other devices.

-  Protocol III: prohibits and restricts the use of incendiary
weapons.

-  Protocol IV: prohibits the use of blinding laser weapons.

-  Protocol V: regulates the explosive remnants of war.

-  Requires all member states to register their import and export

records and their possession of conventional arms at the UN.

-  Seeks to raise confidence by sharing information on the

transfer of conventional arms and improving transparency
regarding armaments.

-  Prohibits the production, use, stockpiling, and transfer of

anti-personnel mines entirely.

-  Requires the destruction of anti-personnel mines (Stockpiles:

within 4 years; Mines embedded in the ground: within 10
years).

-  If inevitable, the deadline may be extended by 10 years.

-  Prohibits the production, use, stockpiling, and transfer of

cluster munitions entirely.

-  Current stockpiles of cluster munitions must be destroyed

within 8 years.

-  Any exports of nuclear-related materials to non-NPT

members that possess no nuclear weapons are conditional on
the IAEA safeguards.

-  Only NPT members are allowed to join.

-  Export control of nuclear substances, technology,

equipment, and dual-use items.

-  Export control of all non-nuclear weapon states regardless

of their NPT member status.

-  An export control regime designed to prevent the proliferation

of chemical and biological weapon-related substances,
dual-use items, and technologies by states giving cause for
concern.

-  A regime under which the members voluntarily control the

proliferation of rockets, unmanned aerial vehicles, and
related equipment and technology capable of carrying
WMDs.

-  An export control regime regarding conventional weapons,

dual-use items, and technologies.

-  International cooperative activities with the aim of cutting

off the illicit trade of WMDs, missiles, and related supplies
by rogue states and terrorist groups
and preventing the proliferation of such weapons, etc.

|ssification|No. of Member States (Effective/ Establishment)|Membership Status of the ROK and North Korea|
|---|---|---|
|Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)|193 (April 1997)|ROK (April 1997) North Korea (not a member)|
|Arms Trade Treaty (ATT)|113 (December 2014)|ROK (February 2017) North Korea (not a member)|
|Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW)|126 (December 1983)|ROK Protocol I (May 2001) (Amended) Protocol II (May 2001) Protocol V (January 2008) North Korea (not a member)|
|United Nations Register of Conventional Arms (UNRCA)|193 (December 1991)|ROK (March 1993) North Korea (not a member)|
|Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and Their Destruction (Ottawa Convention)|164 (March 1999)|Not acceded by the ROK/North Korea|
|Convention on Cluster Munitions (CCM)|110 (August 2010)|Not acceded by the ROK/North Korea|
|Zangger Committee (ZC)|39 (August 1974)|ROK (October 1995) North Korea (not a member)|
|Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG)|48 (January 1978)|ROK (October 1995) North Korea (not a member)|
|Australia Group (AG)|43 (June 1985)|ROK (October 1996) North Korea (not a member)|
|Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR)|35 (April 1987)|ROK (March 2001) North Korea (not a member)|
|Wassenaar Arrangement (WA)|42 (July 1996)|ROK (July 1996) North Korea (not a member)|
|Proliferation Security Initiatives (PSI)|107 (June 2003)|ROK (May 2009) North Korea (not a member)|


-----

**Appendix**

**20**


###### Status of Overseas Deployment of ROK
 Armed Forces


**Total of 1,005 Personnel Deployed to 13 Regions**


As of December 2022


**No. of** **Initial**
**Classification** **Region**

**Personnel** **Deployment**


**Rotation**

**Cycle**

8 months

1 year


UN PKO

Peace

Operations of
Multinational

Forces

Defense

Cooperation

Activities


1 year

|Units|Dongmyeong Unit in UNIFIL|Col3|278|Tyre|July 2007|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Hanbit Unit in UNMISS||276|Bor|March 2013|
|Individuals|United Nations Military Observer Group In India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP)||6|Islamabad|November 1994|
||United Nations Mission In South Sudan (UNMISS)||10|Juba|July 2011|
||United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)||4|Naqoura|January 2007|
||United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)||3|Laayoune|July 2009|
|Subtotal|||577|||
|Units|Cheonghae Unit on the Coast of Somalia||263|Coast of Somalia|March 2009|
|Individuals|Combined Maritime Forces (CMF) in Bahrain|Staff officers|5|Bahrain|January 2008|
||International Maritime Security Construct (IMSC)|Liaison Officers|2|Bahrain|February 2020|
||Combined Joint Task Force – Horn of Africa (CJTF- HOA)|Coordination officers|1|Djibouti|March 2009|
||US Central Command (CENTCOM)|Coordination groups|3|Florida|November 2001|
||US Africa Command|Coordination officers|1|Stuttgart|March 2016|
||Combined Joint Task Force – Operation Inherent Resolve (CJTF–OIR)|Staff officers|2|Kuwait Camp Arifjan|December 2019|
|||Staff officers|2|Iraq Baghdad|August 2022|
||European Union Naval Force (EU NAVFOR) Somalia (CTF-465)|Staff officers|1|Coast of Somalia|March 2020|
|Subtotal|||280|||
|Units|Akh Unit in the United Arab Emirates||148|Abu Dhabi|January 2011|
|Subtotal|||148|||
||||1,005|||


-----

**Appendix**

**21**


###### Changes in Salary of Conscripted Service Members

Unit: KRW


|Sergeant|Corporal|Private First Class|
|---|---|---|
|900|800|700|
|1,030|920|800|
|1,200|1,050|900|


1973 No Changes

|1,560|1,370|1,170|
|---|---|---|



1975 No Changes

|2,260|1,990|1,700|
|---|---|---|
|2,890|2,540|2,170|
|3,460|3,050|2,600|
|3,800|3,300|2,900|
|3,900|3,400|3,000|



1981 No Changes

|4,200|3,700|3,300|
|---|---|---|
|4,500|3,900|3,500|



1984 No Changes


|Sergeant|Corporal|Private First Class|
|---|---|---|
|19,600|17,700|16,000|
|21,900|19,800|17,900|
|23,100|20,900|18,900|
|34,000|30,700|27,800|
|44,200|39,900|36,100|
|72,000|65,000|58,800|
|88,600|80,000|72,300|
|97,500|88,000|79,500|


|103,800|93,700|84,700|
|---|---|---|
|108,000|97,500|88,200|
|129,600|117,000|105,800|
|149,000|134,600|121,700|
|171,400|154,800|140,000|
|197,000|178,000|161,000|
|216,000|195,000|176,400|
|405,700|366,200|331,300|


2009 No Changes

2010 No Changes

2019 No Changes

|540,900|488,200|441,700|
|---|---|---|
|608,500|549,200|496,900|
|676,100|610,200|552,100|



*Sources:

-  Attached Table 13 (Salary table of military personnel), 1983-2021,

Public Officials Remuneration Regulations (Presidential Decree).

-  Attached Table 2 (Salary table of military personnel), 1970-1982,

Enforcement Decree of the Military Personnel Remuneration Act
(Presidential Decree).

|4,600|4,000|3,600|
|---|---|---|
|4,900|4,300|3,900|
|5,100|4,500|4,000|
|7,500|6,500|6,000|
|8,300|7,000|6,500|
|9,400|8,200|7,300|
|10,000|9,000|8,000|
|10,900|9,800|8,700|
|11,300|10,100|9,000|
|11,700|10,400|9,300|
|12,100|10,700|9,600|
|12,700|11,200|10,100|
|13,300|11,800|10,600|

|13,700|12,200|10,900|
|---|---|---|


1998 No Changes

1999 No Changes


-----

**Appendix**

**22**


###### Changes in the Mandatory Military Service Period

**Period of Service (months)**


Normal implementation of the Military Service Act was impossible
due to the Korean War.

1953 36 36 36 Discharge of long-term service members after the Korean War.

Reduction of the military service period to ease the burden of
military service

Reduction of the military service period to ease the burden of
military service

Extension of the military service period due to the January 21
Incident

Reduction of surplus resources and provision of industrial technical
expert support

Mitigation of the difficulties in acquiring conscript service members
for the Navy and Air Force

Reduction of the military service period to ease the burden of
military service

Mitigation of the difficulties in acquiring conscript service members
for the Navy

Reduction of surplus resources due to the abolition of the
secondary reserve system

Mitigation of the difficulties in acquiring conscript service members
for the Navy

Reduction of the military service period to ease the burden of
military service

Mitigation of the difficulties in acquiring enlisted service members
for the Air Force

Reduction of the military service period by six months to ease the
burden of military service (implemented in phases by 2014)

Adjustment of the previous reduction of six months to three months
due to the sinking of ROKS Cheoan and Yeonpyeong-do Shelling

Transformation of troop-centered military forces into elite military

2018 21 → 18 23 → 20 24 → 22 forces powered by science and technology; reduction of the military

service period to ease the burden of military service

|Army and Marine Corps|Navy|Air Force|
|---|---|---|
|No official discharge policy existed at this time.|||
|36|36|36|
|33|36|36|
|30|36|36|
|36|39|39|
|33|39|39|
|33|35|35|
|30|35|35|
|30|32|35|
|26|30|30|
|26|28|30|
|24|26|28|
|24|26|27|
|24 → 18|26 → 20|27 → 21|
|21|23|24|
|21 → 18|23 → 20|24 → 22|
|18|20|22 → 21|


-----

**Appendix**

**23**


###### ROK National Defense Organization Chart


**Ministry of National Defense**

**(MND)**

**Joint Chiefs of Staff**

**(JCS)**

Army Military Manpower Units and agencies directly controlled by

Administration (MMA) the MND (26)

Navy

Defense Acquisition

Program Administration

Air Force (DAPA)

-  Armed Forces Medical -  Defense Publishing Support -  Korea National Defense

Command Group University

-  Criminal Investigation Command -  Gyeryongdae Service Support -  MND Agency for Killed in

**Subsidiary agencies (3)** -  Defence Agency for Spiritual & Group Action Recovery &

-  Seoul National Cemetery Office Mental Force Enhancemen -  Institute for Military History, Identification

-  Defense Media Agency -  Defense Communication MND -  MND Military Court

-  Defense Computing and Information Agency Command -  Joint Forces Military University -  MND Service Support Group

-  Defense Counterintelligence -  Korea Armed Forces Athletic -  MND Prosecutors Office

**Organizations set up by individual laws (4)** Command Corps -  ROK Cyber Operations Command

-  MND USFK base Relocation Office -  Defense Installations Agency -  Korea Armed Forces Nursing -  ROK CBRN Defense Command

-  Compensation Support Group for Persons who Have -  Defense Integrated Data Center Academy -  ROK Transportation Command

Carried Out Special Military Missions -  Defense Intelligence Agency -  Korea Armed Forces Welfare Command

-  Support Group for Victims of Landmines -  Defense Psychological Agency -  The Armed Forces Financial

-  Compensation Support Group for Non-regular Veterans Operation Group -  Korea Arms Control Verification Management Corps

of Korean War Agency


**Minister**

Policy Advisor to the

Office of the Minister Office of Spokesperson Office of Defense Reform
Minister

Military Structure Reform

**Vice Minister** Bureau

Defense Management

Military Human Rights General Counsel Bureau Inspection Bureau Reform Bureau

Improvement Bureau

Office of Military Force and

Resources Management

Office of Planning and Office of National Defense Office of Personnel and

Coordination Policy Welfare

Logistics Management

General Services Division Planning and Policy Planning Bureau Personnel Bureau

Management Bureau Planning Bureau

Military Installations

Programming and International Policy Bureau Mobilization Planning Bureau
Budgeting Bureau Planning Bureau

Military Force

Intelligent Information Defense Policy Bureau Health and Policy Bureau

Policy Bureau Welfare Bureau

Millitary Airbase

Relocation Bureau


-----

**Assignments and Functions of the MND’s Subsidiary Agencies and Organizations Set Up by Individual Laws**

**Classification** **Assignments and Functions**

- Implements memorial services including burial and enshrinement.

Seoul National - Establishes and implements plans for events to pay respect to the deceased.

- Establishes and implements educational initiatives to honor patriotic martyrs for the country and engages in PR

Cemetery Office activities for the Seoul National Cemetery.

- Manages and operates the facilities, graves, and surrounding forest of the Seoul National Cemetery.

- Engages in military PR activities and education for service members through the Korea Defense Daily, Defense

Subsidiary Defense Media TV, Defense FM radio, etc.

Agencies Agency - Disseminates defense news and current affairs reports and engages in cyber PR activities.

- Takes photographs and manages records related to defense events and activities.

- Develops and maintains defense resources management information systems.

Defense Computing - Procures and operates computing equipment for the MND and its subsidiary agencies and units.

and Information - Procures, operates, and supports computing equipment and software for office use at the MND and its

Agency subsidiary agencies and units.

- Designs and implements Information education programs.

- Establishes implementation plans for USFK installation-related projects.

MND USFK Base - Executes, manages, and supervises USFK installation-related projects.
Relocation Office - Supports the management and operation of special accounts for relocating USFK bases.

- Engages in other affairs related to the pursuit of USFK installation-related projects.

Compensation Support - Prepares and provides support for consultation of the Compensation Deliberation Committee for Persons Who

Have Carried Out Special Military Missions and its subcommittees.

Group for Persons who

- Compiles and executes budgets for compensation payment, and verifies and investigates materials submitted

Have Carried Out Special

Organizations Set Up by Military Missions - Responds to lawsuits and civil complaints in relation to compensation under the laws and regulations.by applicants.

Individual - Prepares and provides support to the consultation committee for victim support, working-level committee for

Laws Support Group for evaluating victims and bereaved families, and working-level committee for determining the degree of disability.

- Compiles and executes budgets for compensation payment, and verifies and investigates materials submitted

Victims of Landmines by applicants.

- Provides support for tasks and responses to civil complaints regarding landmine victims.

Compensation Support - Provides administrative support for the non-regular veterans compensation consultation committee as well as

assisting its preparation of the consultation.

Group for Non-regular

- Compiles and executes budgets for service rewards, and investigates applicants' submitted materials.

Veterans of Korean War

- Responds to lawsuits and civil complaints in relation to compensation under the laws and regulations.


**Assignments and Functions of Public Agencies**


**Classification** **Assignments and Functions**

-  Conducts studies on the security environment and fundamental defense policies and develops alternatives.

-  Conducts studies on military strategies, military force buildup, selection of weapons systems, and

Korea Institute for acquisition policies.

-  Conducts studies on defense workforce, resource management, and defense science and technology

Defense Analyses

management policies.

(KIDA) -  Conducts studies on defense informatization policies and provides support and technical advice on the

development of defense informatization-related projects.

-  Collects and analyzes materials related to national defense and provides information services.

-  Operates and manages the War Memorial of Korea and other monuments.

-  Collects, preserves, manages, exhibits, investigates, and studies war and military relics.

The War Memorial -  Conducts studies on war history and military relics, identifies and honors patriots, and engages in other

Public Agencies

of Korea academic activities.

-  Engages in PR activities and education on commemorative projects; produces and disseminates various

related publications.

-  Offers outplacement training for service members facing retirement and improves the employment

prospects of jobseekers.

-  Promotes the employment of service members facing retirement by such means as providing employment

Military Outplacement information and holding job fairs.

Training Institute -  Manages the database and maintains/analyzes statistics for service members who are facing retirement

and seeking employment.

-  Conducts studies on outplacement support-related policies and systems development for service members

facing retirement.


-----

**Appendix**

**24**


###### Amendment of the Laws and Regulations under the
 Jurisdiction of the MND

**Breakdown of Modified Legislation (December 1, 2020 – December 31, 2022)**

|46|66|
|---|---|


**Total** **Laws** **Presidential Decrees** **Ministerial Ordinances**


**Laws**


**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

Act on the Performance Enactment -  Enacted to prevent infringements of human rights by members of the Military Police during the
of Duties of the Military No. 17680 performance of their duties, and to ensure the lawful execution of their duties by clearly defining

Police (December 22, 2020) their duties and the scope of their control.

-  Designed to promptly address acts involving leaks or infringements of defense industrial

Partial Amendment

Defense Technology technologies by unlawful means, this amendment requires the Minister of the Defense

No. 17683

Security Act Acquisition Program Administration or heads of information and investigation agencies to

(December 22, 2020)

investigate any leaks or infringements defense industrial technologies.

-  Amended to provide the statutory grounds for the establishment and operation of intelligence

centers to support regional operational units by collecting information and judging intelligence
concerning the enemy infiltration, attacks or other circumstances, while coordinating and sharing

Partial Amendment

the duties of anti-communist intelligence among government agencies; and to provide the

United Defense Act No. 17686

grounds for the establishment and operation of joint intelligence and investigation teams to

(December 22, 2020)

undertake the primary interrogation of captured prisoners, while surveying and analyzing the local
situation in the event that any enemy units or personnel appear or when other suspected cases of
communist-infiltration take place.

-  Amended to rightfully recognize the May 18 Democratization Movement a part of the history of

Special Act on the May Partial Amendment the Republic of Korea and thus prevent the division of public opinion by prohibiting acts involving

18 Democratization No. 17823 the dissemination of false information concerning the movement, while upholding the purpose of

Movement (January 5, 2021) the Act and the definition of the movement and clearly providing for suspension of the extinctive

prescription of crimes against humanity.

Special Act on the

Extraordinary

Promotion of Corporals Enactment -  Enacted to boost the pride and honor of those who were discharged from active duty with the

who are Honorably No.17991 rank of corporal despite full service of 30 months or more by exceptionally promoting them to

Discharged after (April 13, 2021) sergeants.

Serving 30 Months or

More

Act on the Excavation -  Although service members from the 21 UN sending states fought alongside the ROK military

Partial Amendment

of the Remains of during the Korean war, there was no statute regulating the recovery of their remains. This Act has

No. 17992

Soldiers Killed in the been amended to provide statutory grounds to recover the remains of UN sending state service

(April 13, 2021)

Korean War members, who made the ultimate sacrifice or are still missing from the Korean war.

-  No proper compensation has yet been made to those persons who performed distinguished

Act on Compensation

services in irregular warfare during the Korean War, or their bereaved family members, by joining

to Persons of

guerrilla units organized voluntarily or intelligence detachments of the 8th Army or the U.S. Far

Distinguished Service

Enactment East Command for the simple reason that they were part of a foreign military or were private

who Conducted

No.17993 citizens and were not part of the ROK military. As such, the Act has been enacted to remember

Operations as Irregular

(April 13, 2021) such persons’ distinguished service of voluntarily participating in the war or performing special

Forces in Enemy

missions by providing the procedure for compensation of those who rendered distinguished

Territories Before and

service as members of irregular warfare units and their bereaved family members and the

During the Korean War

statutory grounds for the payment of a monetary reward for their meritorious services.

Act on the report and -  Amended to help develop a transparent military service culture among senior government

Partial Amendment

Discourse of Military officials by requiring government employees or other public servants and their spouses to

No. 17994

Service Records of disclose information concerning their military service (limited to spouses who have performed

(April 13, 2021)

Public Servants military service during their marriage with someone who is required to declare).


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

Act on Establishment -  Amended to allow discharged service members to contribute to the development of the national

Partial Amendment

of the Korea Armed economy and society and to stabilize their livelihood by promoting the development and utilization

No. 17995

Forces Nursing of human resources while assisting their smooth return to society by extending the age limit for

(April 13, 2021)

Academy admission to the Academy.

-  Amended to properly treat military service persons killed in action or die on duty and to help

stabilize the livelihood of their bereaved family by adding provisions for employment of their
bereaved family members pursuant to the Military Personnel Management Act when career

Act on the Personnel Partial Amendment civilian military employees are hired through competitive recruitment. The Act has been amended

Management of Civilian No. 17996 to vest flexibility in the composition of the members of the committee for the examination on

Military Employee (April 13, 2021) appeals or petitions on personnel management of civilian military employees for the committee's

efficient operation while specifying causes for disciplinary punishment of civilian military
employees and also clearly defining the statutory grounds for entrusting the municipal tax office
head with the collection of default disciplinary surcharges.

Partial Amendment

Act on the

No. 17997 -  Amended to improve the wording of the provisions of the law by replacing the term “입회”

Management of

(April 13, 2021) (“attendance”) with “참관” (“observation”) in accordance with Korean usage and grammar

Military Supplies

Partial Amendment -  Amended to make it easier for the general public to understand the provisions of the law by

Act on the Operation of

No. 17998 replacing the Japanese-style kanji term “감안” (“allowance”) with “고려”

Military Aircraft

(April 13, 2021) ( consideration”) in accordance with Korean usage and grammar

Partial Amendment

Framework Act on - Amended to improve the wording of the provisions of the law by replacing the term “감안”

No. 17999

Military Welfare (“allowance”) with “고려” (“consideration”) in accordance with Korean usage and grammar

(April 13, 2021)

- Amended to improve and complement defects discovered in the operation of the current systems,

Partial Amendment including expanding the parental leave periods counted in the minimum service period required for

Military Personnel

No. 18000 promotion, in order to develop a public service culture that allows a healthy work-family life

Management Act

(April 13, 2021) balance, while adding provision to allow leave for long-term service officer, warrant officer or

NCOs who wish to accompany their spouse going abroad for work, study or training purposes.

- Amended to add cases of release based on a non-referral decision by a judicial police officer to

Act on Assignment to Partial Amendment the reasons for the exceptional recognition of a service period of alternative service personnel, as

and Performance of No. 18001 the Criminal Proceeding Act has been amended and enforced (by Bill No. 16924, enforced on

Alternative Service (April 13, 2021) 01.01.2021) to vest judicial police officers with the authority to close a primary investigation,

including a decision not to refer a case to the prosecution office.

Defense Industry Partial Amendment

-  Amended to improve the wording of the provisions of the law by replacing the term “저리” (“low

Development and No. 18002

interest”) with “저금리” (“low interest rate”) in accordance with Korean usage and grammar.

Support Act (April 13, 2021)

-  Amended to enable discharged service members to contribute to the development of the national

Partial Amendment

Act on the Founding of economy and society and to stabilize their livelihood by promoting the development and utilization

No. 18004

Military Academies of their abilities and assisting their smooth return to society by extending the age limit on

(April 13, 2021)

veterans' admission to military academies.

Act on the Recovery of

Reputation of and

Partial Amendment

Compensation to -  Amended to improve the wording of the provisions of the law by replacing the term “개호”

No. 18005

Samcheong Re- (“caring”) with “간병” (“nursing”) in accordance with Korean usage and grammar.

(April 13, 2021)

education Camp

Victims

Special Act on Support -  Amended to allow the Pyeongtaek Planned International District to be developed into a new

for Pyeongtaek-Si Partial Amendment international city ready for globalization by deploying human and cultural infrastructures that

Following the No. 18007 enable active cultural exchanges between local Koreans and foreigners, and to promote the

Relocation of U.S. (April 13, 2021) establishment of foreign education institutes in the District by supplying land at prices below the

Military Bases in Korea development cost when international schools are founded on land developed within the District.


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amended to improve and complement certain defects that emerged during the operation of the

current military justice systems and to firmly establish a justice system which effectively
balances the service member’s right to a fair trial with the unique nature of the military, by
introducing new systems, including those under which general civilian courts exercise jurisdiction
over crimes involving sexual violence or deaths of military personnel, and crimes committed by
service members before they acquired their military service person identity.
The amendment aims to reinforce the constitutional values of protecting human rights and

Partial Amendment

realizing judicial justice, while recovering public trust in the military justice system, by

Military Court Act No. 18465

establishing general military courts responsible for first instance trials under the Defense

(September 24, 2021)

Minister in order to effectively protect the independence of justice and the service members’
right to a fair trial through the reform of the military justice system, abolishing the high military
courts so that appeal trials are to be heard by the civilian courts, establishing prosecution teams
that reports directly to the Minister of National Defense and Service Chiefs to ensure the fairness
of investigation and independence of military prosecutors, abolishing the systems of Convening
Authority and presiding officers and abolishing the system which requires military prosecutors to
obtain the unit commanding officer's approval when seeking arrest warrants.

Special Act on -  The Special Act on the Examination and Restoration of the Honor of Victims Involved in the

Examination and Honor Full Amendment No. Nogeun-Ri Incident has been wholly amended to provide provisions on the protection of the rights

Restoration of Victims 18486 and interests of the victims and their bereaved families and provisions on assistance aimed at

Involved in the Nogeun- (October 19, 2021) healing their physical and mental damages and restoring the community, while defining the

Ri Incident responsibilities of the state.

-  Amended to discontinue the conscription of substitute service personnel in times of war or

national emergency, or when a mobilization order is issued, and to provide penal provisions for

Partial Amendment violations of service duties violations of service duties by a person who receive a notice of the

Military Service Act No. 18540 call-up of the service alternative to reserve forces, while extending the service suspension period

(December 7, 2021) to two years when a substitute service person takes leave for medical treatment, and limiting the

period of conscription of those selected for the homeland reserve service to a maximum of 180
days, as the Reserve Forces Act has introduced a part-time reserve service system.

Partial Amendment

-  Amended to introduce a part-time homeland reserve forces system and allow the assignment of

No. 18541

Reserve Forces Act certain reserve service persons to key posts of mobilization units by conscripting them for up to

(December 7, 2021)

180 days per year.

Act on the Conferment

Partial Amendment

of Orders of Military -  Amended to introduce a part-time homeland reserve forces system and allow the assignment of

No. 18679

Merit for Distinguished certain reserve service persons to key posts of mobilization units by conscripting them for up to

(January 4, 2022)

Services Rendered 180 days per year.

During the Korean War

-  Amended to improve and complement certain defects that emerged during the operation of the

current system, including classifying all cases of service members dying during the mandatory
service period as “death on duty”, except for cases when the death is due to intentional acts,

Partial Amendment grave negligence or unlawful acts, which are to be classified as “general death”, while providing

Military Personnel

No. 18680 statutory grounds for the expulsion of student candidates of commissioned, warrant or non-

Management Act

(January 4, 2022) commissioned officers and for the founding of education or training institutes to provide

education to officer candidates to reflect the recent Supreme Court ruling that it was illegal for
the Army Cadet Military School to expel a cadet as there exist no statutory grounds for such
actions.

-  Amended to provide military service-related information to persons subject to military service by

Partial Amendment

requiring the government to notify such persons of the fact that they are due to be enlisted in the

Military Service Act No. 18681

Preliminary Military Service or have Reserve Service status, and to notify them of the procedures

(January 4, 2022)

with which they should be acquainted in order to perform their military service.

Act on the

Establishment of -  Amended to provide opportunities for the relevant agency dedicated to divisional informatization
Infrastructure for of national defense to lodge an objection when the agency's designation is revoked, by providing

Informatization of Partial Amendment a revocation hearing procedure, while including the concept of not only prevention, but also those

National Defense and No. 18800 of preparedness, countermeasures and recovery, in the definition of the protection of national

Management of (February 3, 2022) defense information or intelligence, and enabling rapid and stable recovery from an infringement

Informational by including the recovery system in the measures against infringements of national defense

Resources for National information or intelligence.

Defense


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amended to allow the relevant agency to decide whether to promote or employ civilian military

Act on the Personnel Partial Amendment employees who were demoted with consent, if a vacancy arises in a higher job grade; properly

Management of Civilian No. 18801 honor service members who have sacrificed themselves for the country by enabling those who

Military Employees (February 3, 2022) have set an example for others during their military service to apply for employment as a civilian

military employee regardless of their physical impairment.

-  Amended to enhance military capability to treat emergency patients when a war, disaster or other

Partial Amendment

Military Health and extraordinary situation occurs by allowing service members who have completed the related

No. 18802

Medical Services Act education to provide emergency treatment during a war, crisis and other national emergencies or

(February 3, 2022)

during military operations within limited areas such as military facilities.

-  The current Military Pension Act provides the payment of benefits to a retiree’s surviving children

and grandchildren below the age of 19, the Military Accident Compensation Act also follows the

Partial Amendment

same criteria. The Act has been amended to substantially guarantee the livelihood of surviving

Military Pension Act No. 18803

children and grandchildren until they become financially independent by raising the beneficiary

(February 3, 2022)

age limit from 19 to 25, as they can hardly achieve financial independence when they turn 19,
which is defined as age of majority under the Civil Act.

-  Prior to the amendment to the Act, only women who have conspicuous scars remaining on their

skin were conferred the 7th grade of disability under the Enforcement Decree of the Military
Pension Act in the period from July 1, 1994 to October 22, 2006.
The Act has been amended to provide the statutory grounds for the payment of a disability
annuity to male survivors based on the same criteria, since the court recently ruled that it is

Partial Amendment against the doctrine of equality under the Constitution to limit the disability grade eligibility for

Military Accident

No. 18804 conspicuous scars on their skin to women. Under the current Act, those children or grandchildren

Compensation Act

(February 3, 2022) are deprived of the right to receive the injury-or-death-on-duty survivors’ annuity when they reach

19 years of age, unless there is a disability corresponding to the injury grade. As such, the Act
has been amended to raise the beneficiary age limit of the children and grandchildren of those
who are injured or killed on duty for their annuity benefit, as they can hardly become financially
independent because of schooling, etc. even when they reach the age of majority provided under
the Civil Act.

-  The project feasibility study is conducted, based on the Ministry of Strategy and Finance’s

Guidelines on the Management of Total Defense Project Expenditures, in order to compile budget
for new projects, including those for large-scale defense capability improvements and the
Defense Ministry’s maintenance of defense capabilities and facilities. However, the statutory
basis of the feasibility study system is insufficient as defense projects are not specified among

Partial Amendment the projects subject to total project cost management under the National Finance Act. As such,

Defense Acquisition

No. 18805 the Act has been amended to provide the statutory grounds for the project feasibility study and

Program Act

(February 3, 2022) for contributing funds required to perform the project feasibility study, while designating the

Korea Institute for Defense Analysis (KIDA) and the Korea Institute of Science & Technology
Evaluation and Planning (KISTEP) as the agencies responsible for performing project feasibility
studies, in order to improve the problem wherein flexible response and professional reviews of
study demands can hardly be made because the project feasibility study is currently performed by
a single entity.

-  Amended to add services for the maintenance and repair of the defense information system,

Partial Amendment

Korea Institute for which requires security to be maintained for KIDA projects, and to support the development of

No. 18806

Defense Analyses Act strategic plans for the introduction of information services to ensure steady and stable

(February 3, 2022)

maintenance of the national defense information system.

Act on the Excavation

Partial Amendment

of the Remains of -  Amended to replace the term “굴토” (掘土) with “땅파기” (“soil excavation”) in accordance with

No. 19071

Soldiers Killed in the Korean usage and grammar.

(December 13, 2022)

Korean War

-  Amended to disclose the military service information of public servants and other government

Act on the report and

Partial Amendment employees, and to manage their records more transparently, by authorizing the head of declared

Disclosure of Military

No. 19072 agencies to acquire computerized data concerning the family relationship registration held by the

Service Records of

(December 13, 2022) Court Administration Office with the consent of those liable to declare their military service

Public Servants

information.


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

Partial Amendment

National Defense -  Amended to improve the wording of the provisions of the law by replacing the term “감안”

No. 19073

Reform Act (“allowance”) with “고려” (“consideration”) in accordance with Korean usage and grammar.

(December 13, 2022)

Act on the Personnel Partial Amendment

-  Amended to extend the statue of limitation for disciplinary actions against sexual violence,

Management of Civilian No. 19074

harassment or sex trafficking to 10 years to eradicate sexual misconduct by civilian employees.

Military Employee (December 13, 2022)

-  Amended to ensure prompt and accurate investigations by the Military Police, by adding

Act on the Performance Partial Amendment provisions on mutual assistance or cooperation with other law-enforcement agencies other than

of Duties by Military No. 19075 the national police and prosecutors to the scope of duties of the Military Police, while removing

Police (December 13, 2022) problems of disagreement found among the provisions cited during the amendment to the

Military Court Act.

Partial Amendment

Military Secret -  Amended to reflect the items changed along with the renaming of “military prosecution officers”

No. 19076

Protection Act as “military prosecutors” based on the amendment to the Military Court Act.

(December 13, 2022)

-  Amended to improve the wording of the provisions of the law by replacing the term “중심선상부”

Protection of Military Partial Amendment (“the higher part of the center line”) with “중심선의 최상부” (“the top part of the center line”),

Bases and Installations No. 19077 “개폐” (“amending and closing”) with “개정 또는 폐지” (“amending or abolishing”) and “도시(圖

Act (December 13, 2022) 示)하면” (“when illustrated by drawings") with “그림으로 나타내면 (“when expressed with

figures”) in accordance with Korean usage and grammar.

-  Amended to clearly define those who are on leave or who have been reinstated by providing the

statutory grounds for delegating authority for officers’ leave and reinstatement in the Act, the
higher statute, rather than in the Presidential Decree, while raising the age limit for commission

Partial Amendment

Military Personnel into second lieutenants, since those entering service academies with prior service in the military

No. 19078

Management Act can exceed the current age limit of 27.

(December 13, 2022)

-  Inserted a provision for conferring a temporary rank on non-commissioned officers, as in the case

of commissioned officers, to allow the ranks of non-commissioned officers to be replenished in
time of war, crisis or other national emergencies.

-  Amended to guarantee decent living conditions to service members who serve the country and

Framework Act on Partial Amendment

the people by requiring the government to procure and supply the commodities necessary for

Military Status and No. 19079

their meals, clothing, housing, etc. closely related to their life in the barracks with priority

Service (December 13, 2022)

consideration given to their welfare to guarantee their living conditions.

Partial Amendment

-  Amended to improve the wording of the provisions of the law by replacing the term “보철구” (補

Military Accident No. 19080

綴具; prosthesis) with “보조기구” (補助器具; auxiliary instrument or supportive device) in

Compensation Act (December 13, 2022)

accordance with Korean usage and grammar.

-  Amended to unify the entities responsible for bearing medical treatment costs from the central

government and municipal governments into the central government for injuries suffered by

Partial Amendment

reserve force personnel in the course of performing their duties or during training, while providing

Reserve Forces Act No. 19082

clear statutory grounds for delivering notification by mobile phone or text message service in

(December 13, 2022)

addition to personal delivery to heads of households, who receive it on behalf of the reserve force
personnel.

Act on the -  Amended to enable veterans to contribute to the development of the national economy and

Partial Amendment

Establishment of the society and to stabilize their livelihood by promoting the development and utilization of their

No. 19083

Korea Army Academy abilities and to assist their smooth return to society by extending the age limit of veterans'

(December 13, 2022)

at Youngcheon admission into the Korea Army Academy at Yeong-Cheon.

Special Act on Support

for Pyeongtaek-Si Partial Amendment

-  Amended to improve the wording of the provisions of the law by replacing the term “감안”

Following the No. 19084

(“allowance”) with “고려” (“consideration”) in accordance with Korean usage and grammar.

Relocation of U.S. (December 13, 2022)

Military Bases in Korea


-----

**Presidential Decrees**



**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amended to add the Marine Corps Commandant to the ex officio directors of the Korea

Agency for Defense Development (ADD), which currently consists of the Minister of

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment National Defense, the Director of the Agency for Defense Development, the Chairman of

Act on the Agency for No. 31198 the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Service Chiefs of the Army, Navy and Air Force, in order to

Defense Development (December 1, 2020) listen to expert opinions on the defense functions for which the Marine Corps is

responsible, while ensuring their participation in key decisions concerning the operation of
the ADD.

Partial Amendment -  Amended to rename the “Infantry Division Ordinance” as the “Division Ordinance” and to

Division Ordinance No. 31275 reformulate the related terms in order to organize non-infantry divisions in addition to

(December 22, 2020) infantry divisions, including the quick response divisions.

-  Amended to provide the statutory grounds for remote video conferencing between members

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment of the Central Military Personnel Petition Review Committee and the Personnel Petition

Military Personnel No. 31540 Review Committees of each branch of the Armed Forces with petitioners at remote

Management Act (March 16, 2021) locations to review and determine petition cases to operate the Committees more

efficiently.

-  Amended to add heads of Fire Departments to attend the Central United Defense meetings

in order to deploy a smooth cooperation system in performing united defense operations,

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Decree of the while providing for matters delegated under the Act and the items necessary for their

No. 31542

United Defense Act enforcement, including the organization of the Intelligence Centers and Joint Intelligence

(March 23, 2021)

Investigation Teams, based on the amendment to the United Defense Act (by Bill No. 17686
enforced on March 23, 2021).

Enforcement Decree of the -  Enacted to provide matters delegated under the Act and the items necessary for their

Enactment

Defense Science and enforcement, including the methods of promoting defense research and development (R&D)

No.31557

Technology Innovation projects, restriction of participation in projects, criteria for the return of project funds, and

(March 30, 2021)

Promotion Act the management of items developed under defense R&D projects.

-  Amended to correct defects that appeared during the operation of the current system, including

raising the total quota limit that can be increased autonomously using the total payroll expense

Organizational Setup of the Partial Amendment system from 5 to 7 percent, and to streamline the related provisions so that the titles and duties

MND and Its Affiliated No. 31560 of the auxiliary organs responsible for assisting the Deputy Ministers and Directors Generals

Organizations (March 30, 2021) under the Enforcement Rules of the Organization System among the provisions concerning the

auxiliary organs, which were previously regulated under the Organization System, a presidential
decree, while increasing the number of personnel as needed.

-  Amended to allow commanders to grant discretionary disaster relief leave of up to 10 days

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment to service members who are required to recover damages of a large-scale disaster for a
Framework Act on Military No. 31626 long period, and to allow service members to take parental leave of up to 10 days per year

Status and Service (April 20, 2021) when they are required to take care of children or grandchildren, by extending the eligible

persons and the number of leave days permitted for nursing children.

-  Amended to correct or complement certain defects found during the operation of the current

system, including delegation of the Defense Minister's authority to approve the temporary
return of soldiers commissioned to an overseas education institute to the Service Chiefs of
each branch of the Armed Forces, and reduction of the amounts to be reimbursed when

Partial Amendment students are dismissed due to their arbitrary transfer to another education institute or

Regulations on Military

No. 31627 department during their study without approval; and to prevent the family members of or

Entrusted Students

(April 20, 2021) other related persons from sustaining excessive financial damages by abolishing the joint

repayment guarantee system that previously enabled the Service Chiefs to order the return
of study grants by the service members of their joint guarantors when the service member
commissioned to an education institute at home or abroad fail to complete their military
service.

-  Amended to correct or complement certain defects found during operation of the current

system, including the introduction of the concept of Integrated Product Support (IPS) to

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment

systematically manage weapons systems over their entire life cycle; and to add parts

Defense Acquisition Program No. 31674

developed through parts localization projects to the scope of military equipment and

Act (May 11, 2021)

supplies that can be designated by unit part in order to develop the domestic defense
industries, while procuring parts of weapon systems in a stable manner.


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

Enforcement Decree of the

Special Act on Support for Partial Amendment -  Amended to provide the items prescribed under the Act and the items necessary for their

Pyeongtaek-Si Following the No. 31724 enforcement, including a specific definition of the scope of the joint service facilities and

Relocation of U.S. Military (June 8, 2021) resident communities.

Bases in Korea

-  Amended to provide the items prescribed under the Act and the items necessary for their

Enforcement Decree of the Enactment

enforcement, including the kinds, use criteria, standards for loss compensation, amounts to

Act on the Performance of No. 31796

be compensated for hazardous military police equipment that may endanger life or body,

Duties by Military Police (June 22, 2021)

and the organization and operation of the Loss Compensation Review Committee.

-  Amended to correct or complement certain defects found during operation of the current

system, including the education provided for term-based non-commissioned officers to

Operational Regulations of volunteer for long-term service, and to provide the items delegated by the Act and those

Full Amendment

the Term-based Non- required for their enforcement, including the service period, reasons for cancelling selected

No. 31799

Commissioned Officer candidates of term-based non-commissioned officers, and its procedure, as the Military

(June 22, 2021)

System Service Act has been amended to rename “paid volunteer soldiers” as “term-based

non-commissioned officers” and to extend their maximum service period from 1.6 years to 4
years.

-  Amended to correct or complement certain defects found during operation of the current

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment

system, including clarification of the statutory grounds for cooperation by intelligence

Defense Technology Security No. 31800

investigation agencies when a survey is being conducted to check the status of the

Act (June 22, 2021)

deployment and operation of the security systems of defense industrial technologies.

-  Amended to allow the Minister of National Defense to delegate duties related to the

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment payment and return of money paid as compensation for service members' death to the

Military Accident No. 31881 Armed Forces Financial Management Corps Commander, who is directly subordinate to the

Compensation Act (July 13, 2021) Ministry of National Defense (MND) in order to enhance the efficiency of the services,

which was previously entrusted to the Minister of Patriots and Veterans Affairs.

Organizational Setup of the Partial Amendment

-  Amended to extend the period of existence of the Defense Reform Office from July 25, 2021

MND and Its Affiliated No. 31904

to July 25, 2023.

Organizations (July 23, 2021)

Act on the Establishment of Partial Amendment

-  Amended to apply the Education Officials Act to disciplinary action taken against all

the Korea National Defense No. 31908

personnel, including professors who are not active duty or civilian military personnel.

University (July 27, 2021)

-  Amended to correct or complement certain defects found during operation of the current

system, including the renaming of each branch of the Armed Forces’ Printing Shop as the

Full Amendment

Ordinance on the Defense “Defense Publishing Support Group” and the addition of duties related to the production

No.31909

Publishing Support Corps and supply of digital contents for the duties performed by the Group, to allow the diverse

(July 27, 2021)

functions related to digital publishing to be managed effectively by integrating them with
paper-based printing functions.

-  Amended to allow appointment of civilian military employees or general government

Partial Amendment

Organization of the officials to the director posts of departments or offices of the Martial Law Command in

No. 31910

Martial Law Command order to enhance the operational efficiency of military organizations and the martial law

(July 27, 2021)

functions, which are currently fulfilled exclusively by active-duty soldiers.

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Decree of the -  Amended to improve the current regulations concerning the restriction of medical treatment

No. 31924

Reserve Forces Act for reservists at civilian medical installations.

(August 3, 2021)

-  Amended to provide the items delegated by the Act and the items required for their

enforcement and to clarify the number of applications of aggravated dispositions when
heavier penalties are to be imposed based on the number of violations, including those to

Enforcement Decree of the

supply land developed by contractors for the development of the International Planned Zone

Special Act on Support for Partial Amendment

Project, by applying the method and procedure for supplying land under the Enforcement

Pyeongtaek-Si Following the No. 32021

Decree of the Housing Site Development Promotion Act with any necessary modifications,

Relocation of U.S. Military (October 5, 2021)

to follow the prices consulted with the Governor of Gyeonggi Province, when the developed

Bases in Korea

land is supplied to found foreign education institutes at a price below the development cost,
and to compute the development cost by summing up the cost of land, dues, development
costs, and the cost of installing infrastructure facilities.


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amended to specifically extend the age limits for admission to the Army, Navy and Air Force

Academies by providing the upper limits as follows: extension of 3 years for former service

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment

members who are discharged upon completing active service of two or more years;

Act on the Founding of No. 32032

extension of 2 years for former service members who are discharged after completing active

Military Academies (October 14, 2021)

service of one year or more but less than two years; extension of 1 year for former service
members who are discharged upon completing active service of less than 1 year.

-  Amended to specifically extend the age limit for admission to the ROK Armed Forces

Enforcement Decree of the Nursing Academy by providing the following upper limits: extension of 3 years for veterans

Partial Amendment

Act on Establishment of the who are discharged upon completing active service of two or more years; extension of 2

No. 32033

Korea Armed Forces Nursing years for veterans who are discharged upon completing active service of one year or more

(October 14, 2021)

Academy but less than two years; extension of 1 year for veterans who are discharged upon

completing active service of less than 1 year.

-  Amended to add unlawful solicitation, performance of duties based on unlawful solicitation,

Partial Amendment unlawful acts using secrets acquired while performing one’s duties or other confidential

Decree on Disciplinary Action

No. 32034 information, etc. to the scope of malpractices for which the abatement of disciplinary

Against Military Personnel

(October 14, 2021) actions is restricted, so that stern disciplinary actions may be taken against unlawful

solicitation and other malpractices.

-  The Special Act for the Extraordinary Promotion of Corporals Honorably Discharged after

Special Act for the

Serving 30 or More Months (Bill No. 17991 enforced on 14.10.2021) has been enacted to

Extraordinary Promotion of Enactment

exceptionally promote corporals who are honorably discharged upon completing active

Corporals Honorably No.32036

service to the rank of sergeant. The Act has been amended to provide the items prescribed

Discharged after Serving 30 (October 14, 2021)

by the Act and the items required for their enforcement, including the methods of applying

or More Months

for such exceptional promotion and the reasons for restricting such exceptional promotion.

Enforcement Decree of the

-  Regarding the Act on Compensation for Persons of Distinguished Service Who Conducted

Act on Compensation to

Operations as Irregular Forces in Enemy Territories Before and During the Korean War (Bill

Persons of Distinguished

Enactment No. 17993, enforced on 14.10.2021), its Enforcement Decree has been enacted to provide

Service Who Conducted

No.32037 the items delegated by the Act and the items required for their enforcement, including the

Operations as Irregular

(October 14, 2021) organization and operation of the Committee for Review of Compensation for Persons of

Forces in Enemy Territories

Distinguished Service in Irregular Forces, the payment criteria, amount, and method and

Before and During the

procedure for applying for payment of the monetary reward for their meritorious services.

Korean War

-  Amended to specify the scope of spouses subject to declaration, including those who have

Enforcement Decree of the been enlisted in the Preliminary Military Service, but who have not been not conscripted at

Partial Amendment

Act on the report and the time of being married to a person liable to declare; those who have finished or are

No. 32039

Disclosure of Military Service under active, supplementary or alternative service during the period they are married to a

(October 14, 2021)

Records of Public Servants person liable to declare; and those who are exempt or excluded from military service during

the period they are married to a person liable to declare.

-  Amended to provide the items delegated by the Act and the items required for their

enforcement, including provisions which require the providers of specialized housing

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment management services desiring designation as an agency entrusted with the management of
Framework Act on Military No. 32040 military housing or quarters to secure housing managers and other expert personnel for

Welfare (October 14, 2021) housing management, computing systems and other equipment for housing management,

financial resources required to perform the military housing management service, and
security and the level of safety required for military housing management.

-  Amended to provide the procedures for handling the remains of members of the UN Forces

who were killed during the Korean War and to have the Minister of National Defense
directly perform the duties related to the development of basic plans for the survey and

Enforcement Decree of the

Partial Amendment recovery of their remains, which are currently delegated to the Director of the MND Agency

Act on the Excavation of the

No. 32041 for KIA Recovery & Identification, including the identification of members of the UN Forces

Remains of Soldiers Killed in

(October 14, 2021) and their nationality by survey and recovery using methods and procedures identical to

the Korean War

those employed to identify the remains of Korean service members killed during the Korean
War; the taking of action based on the requests of the relevant countries after determining
their nationality in consultation with the countries concerned.

Partial Amendment

Ordinance on the Welfare of -  Amended to appoint a term-based civilian military employee to the post of Director of the

No. 32153

Military Personnel MND Welfare Agency, which has been filled by General and Flag level officers.

(November 30, 2021)


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amended to readjust the rank of the chief of staff of the Army Aviation Command from

General officer to field-grade officer (colonel) in order to enhance the efficiency of military

Partial Amendment

Ordinance on the Army personnel and organizational operations, and to rename the Army Aviation Operation

No. 32154

Aviation Command Headquarters as the Army Aviation Command in order to secure uniformity in the designation

(November 30, 2021)

of units which perform operations in specific fields, such as the Army Missile Command and
the Navy Submarine Command.

-  Amended to correct or complement certain defects found during operation of the current

system, including a provision on the specific requirements for the recruitment of family

Enforcement Decree of the member of service members proven to have been killed in action or on duty as civilian

Partial Amendment

Act on the Personnel military employees to a career position via an open competition, inclusion of the period

No. 32155

Management of Civilian during which a person employed as a civilian military employee served as a civilian

(November 30, 2021)

Military Employee government employee prior to his/her recruitment in the number of years required for

promotion, and improvement of the system of leave for civilian military personnel, taking
into consideration the fact that they have a similar status to that of military personnel.

-  Amended to additionally pay the amount of interest computed at the per annum interest

rate of 1 percent on every saving deposit a person performing mandatory military service
makes for the period from the day of the deposit to the day before the maturity of his

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Decree of the installment savings currently supported by the government, and the relevant amount

No. 32250

Military Service Act corresponding to 33 percent of the installment savings and the interest provided by financial

(December 28, 2021)

companies, in addition to the financial aid currently paid by the government to those who
have subscribed to Soldiers Tomorrow Preparation Installment Savings, to help service
members readapt to civilian life upon completing their mandatory military service.

-  Amended to switch the quota of 2 persons (1 person per A and B group) for professional

career officers at the Ministry of National Defense to the quota of 2 persons for

Organizational Structure of Partial Amendment

administrative and technical job groups (1 person each for class V and VI posts) to enhance

the Defense Ministry and Its No. 32257

the operational efficiency of manpower, and to extend the period of existence of the

Subordinate Agencies (December 28, 2021)

Military Airbase Relocation Project Group temporarily organized under the Ministry of
National Defense from January 30, 2022 to January 30, 2024.

Ordinance on Each Branch of Partial Amendment -  Amended to include the administrative duties related to the payment and retrieval of

the Armed Forces Financial No. 32289 compensation in the event of a service member’s death in the duties of the Armed Forces

Management Corps (December 31, 2021) Financial Management Corps.

-  Amended to correct or complement certain defects found during operation of the current

system, including the extension of sick leave to allow military service members to take sick

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment

leave for the period actually required to guarantee their right to receive medical treatment,

Framework Act on Military No. 32312

to allow sergeants or service members of higher rank to use their leave by the hour to

Status and Service (December 31, 2021)

manage their time rationally, and to increase the amount of leave for fertility treatment
procedures for service members.

-  Amended to improve and supplement certain deficiencies in the operation of the current

system. The details of the amendment are as follows.
To determine the requirements for weapons systems, the amendment stipulates the
submittal of a plan to develop operational performance according to the trend of
technological development along with the request form which the Chairman of the JCS
receives from the requesting organizations, such as the headquarters of each service, in
order to minimize any delay in the deployment of the weapon system concerned.

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment

When establishing a basic strategy for promoting a defense force improvement project, if

Defense Acquisition No. 32408

the requirements for weapons systems, etc. are modified due to budgetary reasons, the

Program Act (February 11, 2022)

requirement determination procedure may be waived on this occasion to increase the
efficiency of project promotion.
Moreover, the amendment includes a provision to allow the Public Procurement Service
Administrator to directly perform duties related to the quality assurance of military supplies,
which are procured by the Administrator based on entrustment by the Defense Acquisition
Program Administrator, to enable the use of the Public Procurement Service Administrator’s
professional expertise.

-  Amended to lower the level of units with professional counselors to handle sexual

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment complaints from that of Corps level to division level; furthermore, allow exception to policy
Framework Act on Military No. 32459 by assigning such counselors to even lower-level echelons when there are cases of

Status and Service (February 22, 2022) exceptional need, so that service members serving in densely populated units or in remote

areas can also receive proper counseling services.


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amended to readjust the quota of 1 professional career officer of the Defense Ministry (1

professional career officer in Group B to the quota of 1 administration or technical job group

Organizational Setup of the Partial Amendment

(1 person of class VII) for efficient personnel operation, and to extend the duration of the

MND and Its Affiliated No. 32467

temporary quota of 2 persons (1 person each in the class V and VII), dealing with the

Organizations (February 22, 2022)

payment of unpaid payroll of service members discharged before 1959, from June 30, 2022
to June 30, 2025.

-  Amended to provide details concerning the call-up, quota, selection and compensation of

part-time reservists, including their classification into “short-term part-time reservists” who

Partial Amendment serve a period of 30 days or less, and “long-term part-time reservists” who serve between

Enforcement Decree of the

No. 32518 30 to 180 days; the quota of the short-term part-time reservists is set at 5,000 persons or

Reserve Forces Act

(March 8, 2022) less and the quota of the long-term part-time reservists is set at 700 persons or less; while

the Minister of National Defense selects part-time reservists once per year and is
authorized to select more when the quota is not filled.

Regulations on the

-  Enacted to enhance the transparency and efficiency of the investigation procedures and to

Guidelines for Investigations Enactment

protect the human rights of service members during the investigation process, by providing

Conducted by Military No. 32519

investigation guidelines which the Military Prosecutors and Military Judicial Police Officers

Prosecutors and Military (March 8, 2022)

must follow during an investigation.

Judicial Police Officers

Regulations on Investigation -  Enacted to provide the procedures and methods for investigating crimes over which the

Procedures, Etc. of Crimes Enactment general civilian courts have jurisdiction, and to set forth the details of cooperation between

Committed by Soldiers Over No. 32520 military law enforcement agents such as military prosecutors and military judiciary police

Whom the General Courts (March 8, 2022) officers and civilian law enforcement agents such as civilian prosecutors and judiciary

Have Jurisdiction police officers.

Regulations on the Full Amendment -  Amended to provide the organization and quota of military prosecutors assigned to the

Organization of the Military No. 32530 MND Military Prosecution Group and to those of each branch of the Armed Forces, as the

Prosecution Group (March 11, 2022) Military Court Act has been amended (by Bill No. 18465, enforced on July 1, 2022).

Regulations on the Full Amendment -  Amended to appoint a chief judge for each regional military court with the rank of a colonel

Organization and Operation No. 32531 and to appoint a colonel or lieutenant-colonel as the presiding judge for each regional

of Military Courts (March 11, 2022) military court.

-  Amended to change the designation of the “Army Missile Command” to the “Army Strategic

Missile Command” to reflect its heightened role and position in order to effectively operate

Partial Amendment more enhanced missile capabilities as the termination of the Revised Missile Guideline

Ordinance on the ROK Army

No. 32560 released restrictions on range and payload weight of missiles; its mission, currently limited

Strategic Missile Command

(April 1, 2022) to “strike operations in deep-battle operation areas,” is expanded to “mission of striking

strategic and operational targets” inclusive of the strategic center of an enemy that
threatens national security.

-  Amended to change the designation of the “Air Defense Missile Command” to the “Air &

Missile Defense Command” to reflect its heightened role and position, in order to

Ordinance on the ROK Air Partial Amendment effectively operate more enhanced defense capabilities such as missile early warning

Force Missile Defense No. 32561 radars and other advanced weapons systems; and to expand and develop its mission, which

Command (April 1, 2022) is currently limited to “ground-to-air defense of territorial airspace and key military

facilities,” to “strategic and operational monitoring of air threats, combined wide-area
multi-tier missile command and regional air defense”.

Enforcement Decree of the

Full Amendment No. -  Wholly amended to reflect such provisions of the Act as those which define the duties of

Special Act on Examination

32580 the state, protect the rights and benefits of the victims and survivors and cure their physical

and Honor Restoration of

(April 19, 2022) and mental damages as well as support the recovery of the local community.

Victims


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Partially amended to rectify those provisions that conflict with the purpose of the newly amended

Military Court Act, including those which stipulate that unit commanders should command or
supervise military prosecutors regarding military prosecution administrative affairs, since the Act

Regulations on the Operation Partial Amendment

has been amended (by Bill No. 18465, promulgated on September 24, 2021 and enforced on July

of Military Prosecution No. 32737

1, 2022) to change the person responsible for commanding or supervising military prosecutors

Administrative Affairs (June 30, 2022)

from the “commander of units in which the military prosecution department is installed” to the
commander of the military prosecution group under the Minister of National Defense or the
Service Chiefs of each branch of the Armed Forces.

-  Amended to exclude the clause concerning “…the operation of peacetime military courts”

from the scope of the duties of assistance of the Head of the Legal Office of the Army
Headquarters, thus disabling the Army Chief of Staff’s authority to exercise military

Partial Amendment command rights over the operation of the peacetime military courts from now on, in

Organizational System of the

No. 32738 conjunction with the recent amendment to the Military Court Act (by Bill No. 18465,

Army Headquarters

(June 30, 2022) promulgated on September 24, 2021, enforced on July 1, 2022) to abolish or merge the

general military courts that are installed at corps level or higher units in peacetime and
responsible for first instance military trials, in order to unify them all under the Minister of
National Defense.

-  Amended to exclude the clause concerning “... the operation of peacetime military courts”

from the scope of the duties of assistance of the Head of the Legal Office of the Navy
Headquarters, thus disabling the authority of Chief of Naval Operations to exercise military

Partial Amendment command rights over the operation of the peacetime military courts from now on, in

Organizational System of the

No. 32739 conjunction with the recent amendment to the Military Court Act (by Bill No. 18465,

Navy Headquarters

(June 30, 2022) promulgated on September 24, 2021, enforced on July 1, 2022) to abolish or merge the

general military courts that are installed at corps level or higher units in peacetime and
responsible for first instance military trials, in order to unify them all under the Minister of
National Defense.

-  Amended to exclude the clause concerning “... the operation of peacetime military courts”

from the scope of the duties of assistance of the Head of the Legal Office of the Air Force
Headquarters, thus disabling the Air Force Chief of Staff’s authority to exercise military

Partial Amendment command rights over the operation of the peacetime military courts from now on, in

Organizational System of the

No. 32740 conjunction with the recent amendment to the Military Court Act (by Bill No. 18465,

Air Force Headquarters

(June 30, 2022) promulgated on September 24, 2021, enforced on July 1, 2022) to abolish or merge the

general military courts that are installed at corps level or higher units in peacetime and
responsible for first instance military trials, in order to unify them all under the Minister of
National Defense.

-  Amended to exclude the clause concerning “... the operation of peacetime military courts”

from the scope of the duties of assistance of the Head of the Legal Office of the Marine
Corps Headquarters, thus disabling the Marine Corps Commandant’s authority to exercise
military command rights over the operation of the peacetime military courts from now on, in
conjunction with the recent amendment to the Military Court Act (by Bill No. 18465,
promulgated on September 24, 2021, enforced on July 1, 2022) to abolish or merge the

Partial Amendment general military courts that are installed at corps level or higher units in peacetime and

Organizational System of the

No. 32741 responsible for first instance military trials, in order to unify them all under the Defense

Marine Corps Headquarters

(June 30, 2022) Minister; and also to reorganize the military prosecution organization from the current

system - wherein a high prosecution department is installed at the Defense Ministry and
headquarters of each branch of the Armed Forces, and a general or ordinary prosecution
department is installed at units where general military courts are installed, and which are
commanded by General officers - into a new system wherein prosecution groups consisting
of high and ordinary prosecution departments will be established under the Minister of
National Defense and the Service Chiefs of each branch of the Armed Forces.

-  The Military Court Act has been amended (by Bill No. 18465, promulgated on 24.09.2022,

enforced on 01.07.2022) to exclude from the jurisdiction of the military courts all sexual
offenses committed by military service members, crimes involving the death of service
members and crimes committed by service members before they joined the military, in order
to allow the civilian courts to exercise jurisdiction over such cases. Therefore, the

Partial Amendment

Regulations on Military Regulations on Students Enrolled on the Commissioned Education Program has been

No. 32742

Entrusted Students amended to rectify the related provisions so as to include not only “cases in which service

(June 30, 2022)

members are pronounced guilty by a military court” but also “cases in which service
members are pronounced guilty by a civilian court during active service” among the reasons
for disqualifying students selected for the Commissioned Education Program in conjunction
with the amendment to the Military Court Act whereby criminal cases involving service
members, etc. will be heard by both the military and civilian courts.


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  The Military Court Act has been amended (by Bill No. 18465, promulgated on 24.09.2021,

enforced on 01.07.2022) to appoint a General or Flag officer military judge or advocate as
the head of the MND prosecution group to unify the prosecution groups currently consisting
of high and ordinary prosecution departments into a single prosecution group belonging to
the Defense Minister in order to ensure the impartiality and fairness of investigations and
the independence of military prosecutions, while having the civilian courts hear the appeal

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Decree of the trials of military court cases by abolishing the high military court in order to substantially

No. 32743

National Defense Reform Act guarantee service members’ right to a fair trial. The Enforcement Decree of the National

(June 30, 2022)

Defense Reform Act has been amended to rectify the provisions concerning the position of
commanders subject to rotating assignment in units directly subordinate to the Defense
Ministry among the Army, Navy and Air Force in conjunction with the of “head of the newly
established MND Prosecution Group,” while the position of ‘head or chief judge of the high
military court’ has been abolished among the positions of commanders of units directly
subordinate to the Ministry of National Defense.

-  To strengthen the provision of information to persons subject to military service, the Military

Service Act has been amended (by Bill No. 18681, promulgated on 04.01.2022, enforced on
05.05.2022) to notify those who have been enlisted into the Preliminary Military Service or
Reserve Service of their enlistment into military service and the procedures with which they
should be fully familiar in order to perform their military service. The Act on the
Establishment of Infrastructure for the Informatization of National Defense and the

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Decree of the Management of Informational Resources for National Defense has also been amended to

No. 32745

Military Service Act rectify certain defects identified during operation of the current system, including the

(June 30, 2022)

mandatory revocation of those vendors who have secured designation as military service
providers by using false or other unlawful means, while providing the contents, method, and
time of notification of enlistment in military service, and the items required for the
enforcement of the items delegated by the Act, and to grant special leave within 10 days to
those who serve as social service personnel to assist the activities of handicapped students
at kindergartens and elementary, junior and senior high schools.

-  This ordinance has been enacted to set forth the mission of the Navy Aviation Command,

the duties of its commander, and the departments and units to be organized under the

Enactment

Ordinance on the Navy Command, and to place the Navy Aviation Command under the Navy by expanding and

No. 32799

Aviation Command reorganizing the existing Navy Air Wing 6 to control and manage naval aviation units

(July 14, 2022)

effectively, while securing the perfect performance of naval aviation operations for maritime
security

-  Amended to set forth the items concerning the mission of the Korea Combat Training Center,

the duties of its commander, and the departments and units to be organized under the

Enactment

Ordinance on the Korea Center, and to upgrade the Center to a 'division-level unit' in order to provide an efficient

No. 32800

Combat Training Center command and control system commensurate with the enlarged scale of training, reflecting

(July 14, 2022)

the reality wherein the size of units trained at the Center have been enlarged from
“battalion-level” to “brigade-level” units.

-  To augment the capabilities to treat military emergency patients in times of war or other

extraordinary situations, the Military Health and Medical Services Act has been amended
(by Bill No. 18802, promulgated on 03.02.2022, enforced on 04.08.2022) to allow service

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment

members who have completed the related education to provide emergency treatment during

Military Health and Medical No. 32834

a war, crisis, and other national emergencies or during military operations within limited

Services Act (August 2, 2022)

areas such as military facilities. The Enforcement Decree has been amended to provide the
items delegated by the Act and those required for their enforcement, including the
education courses and the scope of the first-aid treatment.

-  Amended to provide the statutory grounds for educating cadets of the Army, Navy and Air

Force Academies by dispatching them to civilian universities at home and abroad, other

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment

than military education institutions such as schools or units of other branches of Armed

Act on the Founding of No. 32835

Services, in order to enhance their competencies, and for improving the educational quality

Military Academies (August 2, 2022)

of military academies in order to respond actively to Industry 4.0 and the rapid progress of
science and technologies.


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amended to improve and complement certain defects identified in the operation of the

current system, including a provision on the time of payment of the incentive allowance,

Regulations on the Payment

Partial Amendment including those whose service term is fixed to 4 years among those who have been

of Incentive Allowances to

No. 32919 appointed as term-based non-commissioned officers under Article 20-2 of the Military

Short-term Non-

(September 27, 2022) Service Act in the beneficiary of the incentive allowance, in order to secure skilled

commissioned Officers

personnel with ample military service experience as short-term non-commissioned officers
and enhance the combat capabilities of the Armed Forces.

-  The Military Pension Act has been amended to raise the age limit of the children or

grandchildren of deceased service members, who may receive the veteran survivor pension

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Decree of the annuity, from 19 years to 25 years, to substantially guarantee their livelihood until they

No. 32928

Military Pension Act become financially independent. The Enforcement Decree has also been amended to

(October 4, 2022)

improve the age limits for applying for the pension annuity and for depriving their benefits
in conjunction with the amendment to the Act.

-  The Military Pension Act has been amended to raise the age limit of the children or

grandchildren of injured or deceased service members, who may receive the injured or killed

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment

veteran survivor pension annuity, from 19 years to 25 years, to substantially guarantee their

Military Accident No. 32929

livelihood until they become financially independent. The Enforcement Decree has also

Compensation Act (October 4, 2022)

been amended to improve the age limits for applying for the injured veteran pension annuity
and for depriving their benefits in conjunction with the amendment to the Act.

-  Amended to expand the provision of military medical services for the military service

members and civilian military personnel by including the medical service personnel under

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment the Medical Service Act in the scope of military medical personnel engaged in medical

Military Health and Medical No. 33018 service at military healthcare institutions in addition to service members and civilian

Services Act (December 6, 2022) military personnel equipped with qualifications to serve as medical personnel such as

nursing assistants, pharmacists, medical technicians or paramedics (emergency medical
technician) under the Medical Service Act or other related.

-  Amended to install External Cooperation Office performing such duties as those for

exchange, cooperation and promotion of the National Defense University in Korea and

Enforcement Decree of the overseas as an organization subordinate to the University and to add class[ Ⅳ ]or higher

Partial Amendment

Act on the Establishment of civilian military personnel in those who may be admitted into the basic courses of Security

No. 33019

the Korea National Defense Guaranty and Defense Management Graduate Schools while changing the qualifications for

(December 6, 2022)

University the head of the job training department that conducts job specialized education in defense

field at the University from field-grade officers or professors to class[Ⅲ] or higher civilian
military employee or professors.

-  Amended to delete the military personnel classification of job grades for those subject to

term-based promotion so that rotational assignment among the branches of Armed Forces
may be made based on the statutes concerning the defense reform for the commanders of
units or agencies directly subordinate to the Defense Ministry among positions subject to

Enforcement Decree of the Partial Amendment term-based promotion while changing the five positions at the Joint Chiefs of Staff and

Military Personnel No. 33020 Defense Counterintelligence Command among the relevant positions and deleting two

Management Act (December 6, 2022) positions of the Aviation Resources Management Group Commander of the Air Force

Logistics Command and the International Contracting Department Manager of the Defense
Acquisition Program Administration by reflecting the provisions concerning unit
reorganization and quota adjustment on the positions subject to term-based promotion
which enables promotion by determining the term as required for personnel operation.

-  Amended to decrease the quota of MND and Seoul National Cemetery by 6 persons (2 class

V, 2 class VI, 1 class VII and 1 class VIII) and 1 person (1 class V), respectively to utilize the
same quota for personnel to promote the government tasks and policies based on the plan
for operation of an integrated quota utilization system to efficiently manage the workforce
efficiently at a pan-government level while to increase the quota by 2 persons (2 class V) to
strengthen the functions of the MND Defense Space and Electro-magnetic policies, by 3

Organizational Setup of the Partial Amendment

persons (3 class V) required to promote the advanced defense systems, including the

MND and Its Affiliated No. 33054

development of defense AI technologies and increase of advanced drone systems, to switch

Organizations (December 13, 2022)

2 persons (1 class VI and 1 class VII) out of the temporary quota 3 persons (1 class VI and 2
class VII) increased for supporting the duties of hiring civilian military employees into
regular quota, to decrease the MND quota by 1 person to appoint an officer to a division
head post at the Defense Ministry, to exclude 1 division of the Defense Policy Office
previously installed at MND as an organization subject to appraisal based on the results of
appraisals so far.


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

- Amended to pay an amount corresponding to 71 percent of the sum of the installment

savings and interest instead of 33 percent that has been paid for financial aid money paid
by the government or state to those who subscribe to 'Soldiers Tomorrow Preparation
Installment Savings' so that those who are liable to perform the duty of military service may

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Decree of the smoothly return and adapt to the society while improving the selection criteria of the

No. 33184

Military Service Act vendors designated for military service so that a vendor that may be selected as a research

(December 30, 2022)

institute that enables a specialized researcher to serve for research work when the research
institute attached to a startup business has secured one or more researchers with a master
or higher degree in natural science fields in order to support startup businesses under the
Act on Support to Small and Medium Startup Businesses.

**Ministerial Ordinances**


savings and interest instead of 33 percent that has been paid for financial aid money paid
by the government or state to those who subscribe to 'Soldiers Tomorrow Preparation
Installment Savings' so that those who are liable to perform the duty of military service may
smoothly return and adapt to the society while improving the selection criteria of the
vendors designated for military service so that a vendor that may be selected as a research
institute that enables a specialized researcher to serve for research work when the research
institute attached to a startup business has secured one or more researchers with a master
or higher degree in natural science fields in order to support startup businesses under the
Act on Support to Small and Medium Startup Businesses.


**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amended to provide the items delegated under the Act and the items necessary for their enforcement,

Partial Amendment including provisions requiring the Regional Military Manpower Administrator to check the relevant facts

Enforcement Rules of the

No. 1038 when an appeal is submitted against the re-designation of a service provider, and provisions on the

Military Service Act

(December 30, 2020) organizing of a Committee for the Review of Appeals against the Re-designation of Service Providers at

the regional military manpower administration to decide on the re-designation of service providers.

Enforcement Rules of the -  Amended to provide the items related to alternative service personnel on administrative forms such as

Act on the report and Partial Amendment those related to the Notice of Duty to Report Changes in Military Service-Related Information, as the Act
Disclosure of Military No. 1039 on the Assignment and Performance of the Alternative Service has been enacted and the Military Service

Service Records of Public (December 30, 2020) Act has also been amended to allow alternative service, instead of active, reserve or supplementary

Servants, etc. service, according to the principle of freedom of conscience.

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

the provision of information required to be submitted when a defense contractor seeks approval by the

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment Defense Acquisition Administrator to produce defense commodities before being awarded a procurement

Defense Acquisition No. 1042 contract. When determining the requirements for weapons systems, etc., it is no longer necessary to

Program Act (December 30, 2020) determine the long-term requirements, as both mid- and long-term requirements may now be considered.

In addition, cases where it is proven that new technologies can be utilized for military purposes based on
the results of a trial run are now included in the requirements for determining emergency requirements.

-  Amended to reasonably improve the guidelines for determining the physical grades based on height and

weight and those for assessing the degree of disease or mental or physical impairment in order to
enhance fairness and equity in conscription decisions and physical examinations, including the provisions

Inspection Rules for Partial Amendment

for readjusting the criteria for 4th grade assessment based on the BMI (body mass index) from a BMI

Physical Examination for No. 1043

rating of under 17 or above 33 to a rating of under 16 or above 35; and to provide new physical grade

Conscription (February 1, 2021)

criteria for diffuse parenchymal lung disease (DPLD) caused by toxic substances such as humidifier
sterilizers; to abolish the 4th grade criteria for tattoos; and to strengthen the criteria for determining
mental diseases.

-  Enacted to provide the items delegated under the statutes and those for their enforcement, including the

Enforcement Rules of the

Enactment provisions concerning the methods of applying for subsidies or Post Logistics Support and those

Defense Industry

No. 1044 concerning the organization and operation of working-level consulting meetings to be organized under the

Development and Support

(February 2, 2021) defense industry development counsel, in order for a defense contractor to obtain subsidies or PLS for the

Act

exportation of defense products from the Defense Acquisition Administrator.

-  Amended to prescribe the formation of a new team under the MND Defense Resources Management

Enforcement Rules on the

Partial Amendment Office for compensating human damages caused by military noise, which will exist until March 31, 2024,

Organizational Setup of

No. 1047 utilizing the total payroll system, and to reflect the changes introduced by the amendment to the

the MND and Its Affiliated

(March 30, 2021) Organizational System of the Defense Ministry and Its Subordinate Agencies (by Presidential Decree No.

Organizations

31560, enforced on March 30, 2021).


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

the addition of military medical personnel who treat decompression sickness in pressure chambers; to add

Rules on Special Service Partial Amendment those who are engaged in the operation of intelligence systems for F-35 air operations and cybersecurity

Allowance for Military No. 1048 services to the beneficiaries of the special duty allowance; and to increase the amount of the mobilization

Personnel, etc. (March 31, 2021) bonus paid to payees of the Class A (Gap) service allowance serving on naval vessels or ships among

special job allowances, so as to improve the treatment of service members engaged in dangerous or
special duties.

Enforcement Rules of the

Enactment -  Enacted to provide detailed rules concerning the weapons system R&D projects delegated under the

Defense Science and

No. 1049 Enforcement Decree of the Defense Science and Technology Innovation Promotion Act and the specific

Technology Innovation

(March 30, 2021) procedures for defense R&D projects.

Promotion Act

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment

the improvement of provisions that quote the previous Aviation Act, while requiring those who desire to

Act on the Operation of No. 1050

fly a military aircraft in airspace, where the Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum is applied, to comply

Military Aircraft (April 16, 2021)

with the aviation technology standards determined by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure and Transport.

-  Amended to improve the administrative forms related to the financial affidavit for service members

enrolled on commissioned education programs, as the Regulations on Students of the Military

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment Commissioned Education Program have been amended to abolish the joint guarantee system, whereby

Regulations on Military No. 1052 the Service Chiefs of each branch of the Armed Forces may order service members or their joint guarantors

Entrusted Students (April 16, 2021) to return expenses if they fail to perform mandatory service after receiving commissioned education at

home or abroad, and to change the criterion for students to be admitted to higher courses from the
average scores they receive for individual subjects to their grade point average.

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

the provisions requiring safe transportation and management plans to be submitted when applying for a

Enforcement Rules on the Partial Amendment

permit for the transportation of weapons, and to improve the related provisions, as the Enforcement

Defense Acquisition No. 1053

Decree of the Defense Acquisition Program Act has been amended to introduce the concept of integrated

Program Act (May 11, 2021)

product support to substitute the previous integrated logistics support, in order to allow weapons systems
to be managed systematically throughout their life cycle.

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

the addition of licenses for operators of unmanned aerial or underwater vehicles to the defense operator

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment

licenses, in order to enhance the military personnel’s expertise with technologies in specialized military

Military Personnel No. 1054

areas, and the addition of written tests to the examination for defense operator qualifications so as to

Management (May 14, 2021)

enhance the reliability of such qualifications, which are currently limited to skills tests only, and to mitigate
the standards for determining the successful scores for examinations for defense operator qualifications.

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment

-  Amended to provide certain forms, such as the form requesting attendance at an investigation, as the

Defense Technology No. 1055

Defense Technology Security Act has been amended (by Bill 17683, enforced on June 23, 2021).

Security Act (June 22, 2021)

-  Amended to provide certain forms, such as the form giving notice of an inspection for a conscription

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Rules of the judgment, or the form recommending postponement or cancellation of the conscription of persons who

No. 1056

Military Service Act excel in the fields of sport, popular culture or the arts, as the Military Service Act has been amended (by

(June 23, 2021)

Bill 17684, enforced on June 23, 2021).

-  Amended to improve the form used for written claims for death compensation, and to change the agency

responsible for receiving applications for death compensation to the Armed Forces Financial Management

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment

Corps, as the Enforcement Decree of the Military Accident Compensation Act has been amended (by

Military Accident No. 1058

Presidential Decree No. 31881, enforced on January 1, 2022) to entrust the duties for payment or return of

Compensation Act (July 16, 2021)

service member’s death compensation to the Armed Forces Financial Management Corps, a unit directly
subordinate to the Ministry of National Defense.

-  Amended to reflect the changes introduced by the amendment to the Organizational System of the

National Defense Ministry and Its Subordinate Agencies (by Presidential Decree No. 31904, enforced on
July 23, 2021), to change the designation of the subordinate organizations of the Planning and

Enforcement Rules on the

Partial Amendment Coordination Office and the Defense Reform Office in order to enhance the operational efficiency of the

Organizational Setup of

No. 1059 organization; to readjust some of the duties performed by the two Offices; to change the designation of

the MND and Its Affiliated

(July 23, 2021) the subordinate organizations of the Defense Media Agency, which is an organization filled through open

Organizations

recruitment; to extend the work period of the extended quota of 1 person (1 class[Ⅴ]) for two years by
utilizing the total payroll system from October 31, 2021 to 2023; and to replace some hard-to-read terms in
the current statute with terms which the general public will find easier to understand.


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amended to reasonably improve the degree and assessment criteria for diseases and mental and physical

disorders, which are the standards for determining fitness grades, including further segmentation of the
criteria for determining Pes Cavus subtalar eversion, and adjustment of the assessment criteria for Pes

Inspection Rules for Partial Amendment

Planus inversion by considering equity with subtalar eversion, and to rectify the related provisions so as to

Physical Examination for No. 1061

reflect the amendments to the Military Service Act, and to allow the previous physical examination for

Conscription (July 29, 2021)

enlistment to be applied mutatis mutandis regarding the methods and procedures of the conscription
judgment examination, as the Military Service Act has been amended to introduce a conscription
judgment examination in lieu of the previous physical examination for enlistment in active service.

-  Amended to increase the rate of early promotion of service members with outstanding service

performance by up to 20% in the case of combat units, which is currently limited to 10% of the entire

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment

personnel of the relevant rank promoted, and to allow early promotion of up to two persons in the case of

Military Personnel No. 1062

combat units and up to one person in the case of other units even when the entire personnel of the

Management Act (August 6, 2021)

relevant rank to be promoted is fewer than ten persons, in order to incentivize serving in combat units and
to develop a military culture in which service members serve their duties faithfully.

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Rules of the -  Amended to reduce the size of the certificate of military service (certificate of honorable discharge) with

No. 1063

Military Service Act space added for a photo to enhance their appeal to outgoing service members.

(August 6, 2021)

-  Amended to rectify the provisions and forms related to volunteer services of arts and sports personnel

Partial Amendment using their specialties, in order to reflect the amendment to the Military Service Act (by Bill No. 18003,

Enforcement Rules of the

No. 1065 enforced on 14.10.2021) and to provide a notice form and a form for requests to defer their education on

Military Service Act

(October 14, 2021) basic service or job skills, as the Act has been amended to provide them with education on basic service

and job skills.

Enforcement Rules of the

Act on the report and Partial Amendment -  Amended to rectify the forms related to the written declaration and disclosure of military service records,
Disclosure of Military No. 1066 as the Act on the Reporting and Disclosure of Military Service Records of Public Servants has been

Service Records of Public (October 14, 2021) amended (by Bill No.17994, enforced on 14.10.2021).

Servants

-  Amended to provide forms related to information concerning criminal or investigation records which need

Enforcement Rules of the

Partial Amendment to be submitted to the Alternative Service Review Committee when a person wishes to apply for

Act on the Assignment

No. 1067 enlistment in the alternative service, and to clarify that the personal identity data will be disclosed on the

and Performance of the

(October 14, 2021) website of the Military Manpower Administration in accordance with the Military Service Act when those

Alternative Service

subject to conscription for alternative service fail to respond without justification.

-  Amended to adjust the notification date of the roster of those selected under consultation with the

Minister of National Defense, provided that it does not affect the enlistment of active service officers such

Rules on the Selection of Partial Amendment

as medical and veterinarian doctors when such a roster is notified by the Military Manpower

Medical and Veterinarian No. 1069

Administrator to the Defense Minister, and to add provisions on the procedure for selecting those who

Doctors (November 30, 2021)

volunteer for enlistment as active service officers such as medical and veterinarian doctors while skipping
the courses for medical doctor and veterinarian cadets in accordance with the Military Service Act.

-  Amended to rectify the criteria for reprimanding personnel responsible for handling the outcome of audits

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Rules of the of the reserve force service, including a provision clarifying the types of offenses or malpractices on the

No. 1071

Reserve Forces Act part of personnel who handle reservist education and training in relation to the exemption or

(December 10, 2021)

postponement of the education or training.

-  Amended to reflect the changes introduced by the amendment to the Organizational System of the

Enforcement Rules on the

Partial Amendment Ministry of National Defense and its Subordinate Agencies (by Presidential Decree No. 32204, enforced

Organizational Setup of

the MND and Its Affiliated No. 1074 on 14.12.2021) to increase the quota persons (two class[Ⅴ] personnel) who perform data related duties by

(December 14, 2021) two persons, and to extend the assessment period of the Division on Policies for the Denuclearization of

Organizations

North Korea designated as an organization subject to assessment.

-  Amended to extend the existence of the MND Civil Complaint Counseling Center established at the

Defense Ministry for 3 years according to the total payroll system from February 28, 2022 to February 28,

Enforcement Rules on the 2025; to restore the quota of 1 person (1 class[ Ⅲ ]or[ Ⅳ] personnel) whose job grade has been raised

Partial Amendment

Organizational Setup of according to the total payroll system to the previous job grade (1 class[ Ⅳ]); to readjust the job grade of the

No. 1075

the MND and Its Affiliated quota of persons employed as term-based employees among the quota of MND employees; to have the

(December 28, 2021)

Organizations Information System Convergence Officer handle data-related duties exclusively to promote the duties of

data-based administration, while renaming the title as Information System Data Officer; and to readjust
some of the duties shared among agencies subordinate to the Defense Ministry.


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

Rules for Computing the

Partial Amendment the provisions for computing the direct labor cost by applying general labor workload, whereas the base

Cost of Commodities

No. 1076 labor workload should be applied if the standard work hours required for the production of the contract

Subject to Defense Cost

(December 30, 2021) commodities have been computed to enhance efficiency in calculating the cost of the commodities subject

Analysis

defense cost analysis.

-  Amended to extend the exceptional period for deferred submission of guarantee letters that need to be

submitted by the contractors by 2 years from the initial deadline of December 31, 2021 to December 31,

Rules on the Payment of

Partial Amendment 2023, when the contracting officer pays down payments or progress payments to help mitigate the

Retaining Fee and Interim

No. 1077 shipbuilders' burden of guarantee due to a slowdown of the shipbuilding industry, and to extend the period

Payments for the Defense

(December 30, 2021) for computing the down payment with funds planned for payment within 180 days from the date invoiced

Industry

so far, but to a period of 360 days for the early payment of wages and other expenses when the down
payment is requested by the contractor.

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

Regulations on the

Partial Amendment the utilization of a fitness certification under the National Sports Promotion Act, in order to increase the

Selection of Persons in

No. 1078 convenience of the selection test, improve the methods of verifying physical strength by allowing physical

charge of Reserve Forces

(December 31, 2021) examinations to be conducted at civilian examination institutes in addition to military hospitals, and to

Management

adjust the items and contents of service personnel performance assessments.

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

improvement of the form for requesting issuance (or reissuance) of the military service certificate to enable
easy preparation by applicants, by dividing the information required to be filled in for the application forms

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Rules of the for issuance, reissuance of military service certificates, and reissuance of honorable discharge certificate;

No. 1079

Military Service Act and to adjust the number of annual leave days based on the service period within the total number of

(February 9, 2022)

annual leave days during the mandatory service period, when such inevitable causes as the reinstatement
of civilian jobs or a return to school to assist the smooth reintegration of social service personnel into
society.

-  Amended to improve the documents which applicants are required to attach to their application form for

Enforcement Rules of the

Partial Amendment enlistment into an alternative service, and to dispense with the need to copy records of their elementary

Act on Assignment to and

No. 1080 school life from the documents attached to the application for enlistment in an alternative service, as

Performance of Alternative

(February 9, 2022) copies of middle and high-school life records are now judged sufficient to assess the formation of each

Service

applicant’s beliefs.

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment

-  Amended to change the standard treatment period for the transfer of mentally or physically challenged

Military Personnel No. 1086

persons to military hospitals from 20 or more days to 30 or more days.

Management Act (February 15, 2022)

-  Amended to reflect the changes introduced by the amendment to the Organizational System of the

Ministry of National Defense and its Subordinate Agencies (by Presidential Decree No. 32467, enforced
on Feb. 22, 2022), including the exclusion of the Information Service Planning Officer from the posts
available for open recruitment, and designation of the Soldiers Human Rights Improvement Promotion
Group Director as a post available for open recruitment; to rename and readjust the duties assigned to
organizations subordinate to the Ministry of National Defense to promote the efficient operation of

Enforcement Rules on the

Partial Amendment organizations and personnel; and to establish the new Gender Equality Policy Team, which will exist until

Organizational Setup of

No. 1081 February 28, 2025, while using the total payroll system to strengthen duties related to gender equality, and

the MND and Its Affiliated

(February 22, 2022) abolishing the Barracks Culture Reform Team founded at the Ministry of National Defense according to

Organizations

the total payroll system, extending the terms of existence of the Cyber Response Force Team and the
Digital Communication Team by 2 years from May 1, 2022 to 2024 and from May 6, 2022 to 2024,
respectively, among the MND subordinate organizations established using the total payroll system, and
switching the quota of 1 person (1 class[ Ⅸ]) of the job group for management and operation of the Defense
Media Agency to the quota of 1 professional civilian career officer (1 Group B (Na) professional civilian
career officer).

Enforcement Rules of the -  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

Partial Amendment

Decree on Disciplinary the imposition of stern punishments of unlawful acts involving the use of work-related secrets or

No. 1084

Action against Military undisclosed information, by preparing separate disciplinary guidelines for such acts, although they have

(February 28, 2022)

Personnel hitherto been punished as breaches of the duty of confidentiality or non-disclosure.


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current systems and to

set forth specific detailed provisions required for the enforcement of the Military Court Act, which has
been amended to effectively secure judicial independence and guarantee service member’s right to a fair
trial based on the recent reforms of the military justice system, including the establishment of a military

Partial Amendment

Rules for Handling Military court as the first instance military court under the Minister of National Defense, while the civilian court

No. 1087

Prosecution Cases will hear appeal cases by abolishing the high military court; and the formation of prosecution groups under

(July 12, 2022)

the Minister of National Defense and the Service Chiefs of each branch of the Armed Services to secure
fair investigations and independence of military prosecutions, and cooperation between military
prosecutors and military police on investigations and sustainment of prosecutions of specific criminal
cases.

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, as the

Enforcement Decree of the Military Service Act has been amended (by Presidential Decree No. 32745,
promulgated on 30.06.2022; enforced on 2022.07.05) to provide the statutory grounds for the issuance of
the 'Military Service Record Card', which contains the entire set of military service data, inclusive of
military service dispositions, service records, and awards and punishments; to include a provision on the

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Rules of the specific procedures for issuance of the Card, the grounds for issuance of mobile certificates of military

No. 1088

Military Service Act service or discharge when they are reissued; to verify the 'venture business certificate' through the shared

(July 5, 2022)

use of administrative information among the documents to be attached by research institutes to their
applications for designation as military service vendors; and to change the scope of physically
handicapped persons who require physical examination for military service by reflecting the amendment
to those statutes for their welfare related to the contents for determining the degree of their physical
impairment.

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

partial adjustment of the designation and duties performed by organizations subordinate to the Intelligent
Information Policy Officer who replaced the Information Service Planning Officer of the Planning and

Enforcement Rules on the Coordination Office to perform functions for development of AI systems in the defense field; partial

Partial Amendment

Organizational Setup of adjustment of the designation and duties performed by the organizations subordinate to the Defense

No. 1090

the MND and Its Affiliated Policy Office in order to effectively augment their capacity to address increasing military threats, and the

(July 15, 2022)

Organizations formation of the new Software Convergence Team and the Intelligent Military Logistics Team, which will

exist using the total payroll system until July 31, 2025, in order to promote the reform of digital defense
and information services for military logistics, while abolishing the Cyber Warfare Team under the Ministry
of National Defense using the total payroll system.

-  Amended to provide the grounds for warrant officers and non-commissioned officers to be assigned to

posts belonging to specialized technical and functional areas, including information and communication

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment

and logistics, by enabling their appointment to such specialized jobs among those belonging to the quota

Military Personnel No. 1091

of warrant and non-commissioned officers, although hitherto they could not be assigned to such

Management Act (July 28, 2022)

specialized posts as 'such specialized positions' were previously limited to the quota of company- and
field-grade officers.

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

an increase in the number of payees of the incentive allowance to include operators of special equipment,
in order to improve the treatment of service members engaged in special duties; and determination of the

Rules on Special Service Partial Amendment

monthly amount of the incentive allowance to be paid to drone operators by including them in the list of

Allowance for Military No. 1092

special technicians who receive such pay, and the payment of differentiated allowances to the members

Personnel, etc. (July 28, 2022)

of submarine crews based on their actual service on submarines, as the Rules on Allowances to
Government Employees have been amended to continue payment of the special duty allowance to
submarine crew members for more than three years, which has so far been paid for only one year.

-  Amended to enhance the protection of rough-estimate contractors by mitigating the standards for

readjustment of the rough-estimate contract amount when commodity prices fluctuate by more than 3%
of the base, so as to allow rough-estimate contract amounts to be adjusted regardless of the actual scale

Rules for Handling Partial Amendment of price fluctuations when an increase is caused by changes in the design or contract provisions, as such

Contracting Duties of the No. 1093 difficulties are currently attributed to the contractors because the estimated contract amount is not

Defense Industry (August 4, 2022) adjusted when fluctuations in costs computed based on actual cost data are below 5% of the estimate

contract amount, even if smooth contract performance with the estimated contract amount becomes
difficult as the required budget amount has fluctuated due to design changes etc. during the performance
period of a long-term contract signed in the form of an estimated contract.


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

an increase of the employment opportunities for commissioned and non-commissioned officers discharged
from active duty, by mitigating the eligibility for taking selection tests, including the change of their

Regulations on the eligibility to take tests for the selection of personnel responsible for the management of reserve forces,

Partial Amendment

Selection of Persons in including commanders of homeland reserve units, to active duty of 6 or more years irrespective of whether

No. 1094

charge of Reserve Forces they have served a long period or not, or whether they have completed their mandatory service period; to

(August 9, 2022)

Management unify the agencies responsible for performing physical examinations to those provided under the

Regulations on Physical Examination for the Recruitment of Government Employees; and to change the
criteria to reflect active service performance in the scores of service appraisals from absolute to inclusive
assessment scores.

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment clarification of the method of computing the period and the criteria for computing the number of instances

Act on the Operation of No. 1096 in which an aggravated disposition is imposed in connection with the criteria for aggravated administrative

Military Aircraft (September 13, 2022) disposition according to the number of violations committed by persons qualified as military aircraft traffic

controllers.

-  The Military Pension Act has been amended to raise the age limit of the children or grandchildren of

Partial Amendment deceased service members, who may receive the veteran survivor pension annuity from 19 to 25 to

Enforcement Rules of the

No. 1097 substantially guarantee their livelihood until they become financially independent. The Enforcement

Military Pension Act

(October 4, 2022) Decree has also been amended to improve the age limits for applying for the pension annuity in equal

divisions and to rectify the related document forms in conjunction with the amendment to the Act.

-  The Military Accident Compensation Act has been amended to raise the age limit of the children or

grandchildren of injured or deceased service members, who may receive the injured or killed veteran

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment

survivor pension annuity from 19 to 25 to substantially guarantee their livelihood until they become

Military Accident No. 1098

financially independent. The Enforcement Decree has also been amended to improve the age limits for

Compensation Act (October 4, 2022)

applying for the injured veteran pension annuity in equal divisions and for applying their benefits as the
survivors of injured soldiers in conjunction with the amendment to the Act.

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

the change of the title of “military prosecution officer” to “military prosecutor”, and the addition of officers
who are qualified as lawyers and are appointed as state-appointed attorneys to the scope of defense

Rules on the Methods and

Partial Amendment counsels who may request clerks to review or copy military criminal case records in conjunction with the

Fees for Review of the

No. 1100 amendment to the Military Court Act; and to include a provision allowing the application of whichever is

Copying of Military

(November 18, 2022) the smaller amount between the amount computed based on the Enforcement Rules of the Act on the

Criminal Case Records

Disclosure of Information by Government or Public Agencies and the amount computed based on the
Rules on the Review or Copying of Military Court Records when paying fees for the review or copying of
special media records, such as digital records, among military criminal case records.

-  Amended to secure civilian military personnel serving in special regions including islands and remote

Enforcement Rules of the

Partial Amendment areas and induce them to remain in long-term service in such environments by increasing the scope for

Act on the Personnel

No. 1101 awarding bonus appraisal points to civilian military employees who have served with units performing

Management of Civilian

Military Employee (December 5, 2022) missions in such special areas or environments from 2.5 to 5 percent when class[ Ⅳ ]or lower general

civilian military personnel are appraised when preparing the roster of candidates for promotion.


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  To reflect the changes introduced by the amendment to the Organizational System of the Ministry of

National Defense and its and Its Subordinate Agencies (by Presidential Decree No. 33054, promulgated
and enforced on 13.12.2022), including the provisions to increase by two the number of persons (two class

Ⅴ personnel) required to strengthen the Ministry of National Defense functions for defense space and
electromagnetic warfare policies; to increase by three the number of persons (three class[ Ⅴ ]personnel)
persons required to promote the advancement of defense technologies, including the development of
defense AI systems, expansion of advanced drone warfare, and improvement of acquisition systems; to
switch two (one each from among class[ Ⅵ ]and[ Ⅶ ]personnel) of the three persons (one class[ Ⅵ], two class

Enforcement Rules on the

Partial Amendment Ⅶ personnel), previously assigned under a temporary raise of the quota designed to support the functions

Organizational Setup of

No. 1102 for recruiting civilian military personnel, to regular job posts; to decrease the MND quota by one person

the MND and Its Affiliated

(December 13, 2022) (one class[ Ⅳ ]personnel) in order to appoint an officer to a division head position at the Ministry; to exclude

Organizations

one division of the Defense Policy Office installed as an MND organization subject to appraisal from the
appraisal; to readjust some of the duties of the heads of the Planning and Coordination Office and the
Defense Policy Office to improve their operational efficiency; and to decrease the MND quota by six
persons (two each from class[ Ⅴ ]and[ Ⅵ ]personnel and one each from class[ Ⅶ ]an[d Ⅷ ]personnel) and that of
the Seoul National Cemetery by one person (one class[ Ⅴ ]personnel) in order to deploy them as personnel
for promoting government tasks and pending policy issues based on the Plan for Operation of an
Integrated Quota System so as to manage personnel more efficiently by integrating personnel at the
pan-government level.

-  Amended to improve and complement defects identified during operation of the current system, including

Rules on Calculating the the change of the wage unit of defense service vendors from the unit wage surveyed and published by

Partial Amendment

Cost of Goods Subject to agencies designated to prepare statistics to the unit wage by vendor, and to apply the relevant base labor

No. 1104

the Cost of Defense amount for computing the direct labor cost, in order to enhance efficiency in computing the cost of

(December 30, 2022)

Industry commodities subject to defense cost analysis, when there exists a base labor amount computed by an

agency designated by the Defense Acquisition Administrator.


-----

**Appendix**

**25**


###### Composition and Major Activities of the National
 Assembly Defense Committee


**Committee Chairperson (People Power Party)**

Han Ki-ho (born in 1952, Chuncheon-si, Cheorwon-gun, Hwacheon-gun,
Yanggu-gun election district Eul(B) of Gangwon-do) Third-term (18th, 19th and 21st National Assembly) Main Building,
Korea Military Academy Graduating Class of 31. Room No. 421,
(Current) Chairperson, National Security Committee, People Power Party. 784-1364
Chairperson, Korea-Australia Parliamentary Friendship Association. 6788-5291
Honorary Chair, Korea Boy Scout League. (Former) Secretary-General, People Power Party. Commander, 2nd Division, F)6788-5295
5th Corps, and Education Command, ROK Army.




Members' Office Building

Room No. 745

O)784-9630 6788-6681

F) 6788- 6685

Members' Office Building

Room No. 550

O)784-3874 6788-6126

F) 6788-6130

Members' Office Building

Room No. 423

O)784-6291 6788-6621

F) 6788-6625

Members' Office Building,

Room No. 425

O)784-7911 6788-7106

F) 6788-7110

Members' Office Building,

Room No. 1014

O)784-8450 6788-6066

F) 6788-6070

|Col1|People Power Party|
|---|---|
||Shin Won-sik (born in 1958, proportional representation) First-term Korea Military Academy Graduating Class of 37, PhD Business and Administration, Kookmin University. (Former) 3rd Infantry Division Commander, (Former) Director General for Policy Planning, Ministry of National Defense (Former) Commander, Seoul Defense Command, (Former) Chief Director of Operations, Joint Chief of Staff, (Former) Chair, 4th Policy Coordination Committee for Diplomacy and security, People Power Party.|
|Secretary||
||Kim Gi-hyeon (born in 1958, Electoral district Eul(B), Nam-gu, Ulsan) Fourth-term(17th, 18th, 19th, 21st National Assembly) BA and MA Law, Seoul National University. (Former) Floor Leader, People Power Party, (Former) Mayor, Ulsan Metropolitan City, (Former) Judge, Daegu, Busan and Ulsan District/Branch Court.|
||Sung Il-jong (born in 1963, Electoral district Seohan-si and Taean-gun, Chungnam) Second-term (20th and 21st National Assembly) Management Department, Korea University, PhD, Environmental Engineering, Kwangwoon University. (Current) Chair, People Power Party Policy Committee, (Former) Secretary, National Assembly Defense Committee of the 1st half of 2021, (Former) Member, Emergency Measures Committee, People Power Pary.|
||Lee Hun-Seung (born in 1963, Electoral district Eul(B), Busanjin-gu, Busan) Third-term (19th, 20th, 21st National Assembly). BA Sociology, Korea University (Former) Chair, National Assembly Defense Committee, (Former) Chair, National Assembly Land, Infrastructure and Transport Committee, (Former) Head of Secretariat, Representative, Free Hankook Party, (Former) Chair, Busan City Party, Saenuri Party.|
||Yim Byung-heon (born in 1953, Electoral district Junggu and Nam-gu, Daegu) First-term BA Law, MA Public Administration, Yeongnam University. Passed 23rd Administration Examination, (Former) Head of Planning and Management Office, (Former) Daegu Metropolitan City, Mayor, Namgu District Office (elected 3 times).|

|Col1|Democratic Party of Korea|
|---|---|
||Kim Byung-joo (born in 1962, proportional representative) First-term PhD, Diplomacy and Security, Kyeonggi University, MBA, Jeonnam University Korea Military Academy Graduating Class of 40 (Former), Deputy Floor Leader, Democratic Party of Korea, (Former) Security Spokesperson, (Former) Deputy Commander, ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command.|
|Secretary||
||Kim Yeong-bae (born in 1967, Electoral district Gap(A), Seongbuk-gu, Seoul) First-term Completed PhD course of Politics & Diplomacy, Korea University. (Former) member of the Democratic Party Supreme Council. (Former) Presidential Secretary, Policy Coordination and Civil Affairs, Moon Jae-in administration. (Former) 5th and 6th Mayor elected through popular election, Seongbuk-gu ward.|
||Sul Hoon (born in 1953, Electoral district Eul(B), Bucheon-si, Kyeonggi-do) Fifth-term (15th, 16th, 19th, 20th and 21st National Assembly) BA, History, Korea University (Former), member of the Democratic Party Supreme Council. (Former) Chair, National Assembly Agriculture, Dairy, Food, and Maritime and Fishery Committees. (Former) Chair, National Assembly Education, Culture and Sports Committee. Assistant to Dae-jung Kim, President of the Democratic Party.|
||Song Gab-seok (born in 1966, Electoral district Gap(A), Seo-gu, Kwangju) Second-term (20th, 21st National Assembly) BA, Foreign Trade, Jeonnam University (Former) Chair, Strategic Planning Committee, Democratic Party, (Former) Spokesperson, Central Party, Democratic Party, (Former) Chair, National Assembly Industry, Trade and Resources Committee. (Former) Secretary, National Assembly Small and Medium Venture Business Committee.|
||Song Ok-joo (Born in 1965, Electoral district A, Hwaseong-si, Kyeonggi) Second-term (20th, 21st National Assembly) BA, Journalism, Yonsei University, graduated from Graduate School of Public Administration (Former) Chair, National Assembly Committee of Environment and Labor, Family and Gender Equality Committee. (Former) Standing Vice Chair, Policy Committee, Democratic Party.|
||Ahn Gyu-back (born in 1961, Electoral district Gap(A), Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul) Fourth-term (18th, 19th, 20th, 21st National Assembly) Completed graduate course of Foreign Trade, Sungkyunkwan University (Former) Expert member, Roh Mu-hyeon Presidential Transit Team, (Former) Chair, Organization Committee, Democratic Party, (Former) Chief Deputy Floor Leader, New Politics Democratic Union, (Former) Head, Strategic PR Division, Secretary-General, Supreme Council member, (Former) Seoul City Party Chair, Democratic Party, (Former) Chair, National Defense Committee, National Assembly.|
||Yun Hu-duk (born in 1957, Electoral district Gap(A), Paju-si, Kyeonggi) Third-term (19th, 20th, 21st National Assembly) BA Sociology, MA, Economics, Yonsei University (Former) Chair, Planning and Finance Committee, (Former) Secretary, Budget-Closing Special Committee, (Former) National Defense Committee, National Assembly.|
||Lee Jae-myung (born in 1964, Electoral district Eul(B), Kyeyang-gu, Incheon) First-term BA Law, Joongang University (Former) Governor, Kyeonggi-do province, (Former) 19th and 20th mayor, Seongnam-si.|


Secretary


Secretary


**Independent (1)**

Bae Jin-gyo (born in 1968, proportional representative) First-term Members' Office Building,
Completed Public Administration MA course, Incheon University. Room No. 517
(Current) Chair, People’s Livelihood Special Committee, (Former) Floor O)784-3080 6788-6551
Leader, Justice Party.(Former) Mayor, Namdong-gu, Incheon Metropolitan City. F) 6788-6555


Jung Sung-ho (born in 1961, Electoral district Yangju-si, Kyeonggi-do)
Fourth-term (17th, 19th, 20th, 21st National Assembly)
BA Law, Seoul National University; passed 28th bar exam
(Former) Chair, National Assembly Budget-Closing Special Committee,
(Former) Chair, Planning and Finance Committee, 20th National Assembly,
(Former) Deputy Chair,19th National Assembly Land, Infrastructure &
Transportation Committee, and
(Former) Secretary, Special Committee for Improvement of Soldiers’
Human Rights and Barracks Reform.


Members' Office Building,

Room No. 646

O)784-8991   6788-7201

F) 6788-7205


-----

**Major Activities of the National Defense Committee of the National Assembly (January 2021 ~ December 2022)**

**Session** **Date** **Main Contents**


**21st First Half National Assembly**



-  Business report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense, The May 18

384th Extraordinary February 17, 2021 Democracy Movement Truth Commission, Military Manpower Administration and Defense

Session Acquisition Program Administration).

-  Introduction of the Military Personnel Management Act and other bills.

(February 1 - 28, 2021)

February 23, 2021 -  Introduction of the Military Personnel Management Act and other bills.

385th Extraordinary

Session March 16, 2021 -  Resolution of the Military Academy Installation Act and other bills.

(March 2 - 31, 2021)

386th Extraordinary -  Adoption of the 2020 Parliamentary Audit Report.

Session April 28, 2021 -  Business report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense, Military

(April 1 - 30, 2021) Manpower Administration and Defense Acquisition Program Administration).

387th Extraordinary

-  Issue report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense, Military

Session May 31, 2021

Manpower Administration and Defense Acquisition Program Administration).

(May 3 - June 1, 2021)

388th Extraordinary

Session June 9, 2021 -  Issue report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense).

(June 4 - July 3, 2021)

389th Extraordinary

Session July 26, 2021 -  Issue report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense).

(July 5 - 31, 2021)

-  Business report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense, The May 18

Democracy Movement Truth Commission, Military Manpower Administration and Defense

390th Extraordinary

Acquisition Program Administration).

Session August 20, 2021

-  Introduction of the FY 2020 Financial Settlement Report.

(August 17 - 31, 2021)

-  Report on the progress of the corrections requested in the FY 2019 Financial Settlement Report

-  Introduction of the Defense Acquisition Program Act and other bills.

September 8, 2021 -  Resolution of the FY 2020 Financial Settlement Report.

-  Adoption of the FY 2021 Parliamentary Audit Plan.
September 15, 2021

-  Introduction of the Reserve Forces Act and other bills.

October 5 - 21, 2021 -  Performance of the FY 2021 Parliamentary Audit.

391st Regular Session

November 9, 2021 -  Introduction of the FY 2022 Draft Financial Budget.

(September 1 –

December 9, 2021)

-  Resolution of the FY 2022 Financial Budget.

-  Introduction of the Military Personnel Management Act and other bills.

November 16, 2021 -  Introduction of the motion to dispatch troops to the Gulf of Aden and the motion to extend the

deployment of ROK troops in the UAE to support the UAE Armed Forces.

-  Introduction of the draft resolution to request discontinuance of the ROK-U.S. joint exercises.

-  Resolution of the Military Personnel Management Act and other bills.

December 1, 2021 -  Resolution of the motion to dispatch troops to the Gulf of Aden and the motion to extend the

deployment of troops to support the UAE Armed Forces.

392nd Extraordinary -  Issue report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense).

Session -  Resolution of the Soldiers Disaster Compensation Act and other bills.

January 5, 2022

(December 13, 2021 -  Public hearing on the proposed Act on the Combat Allowance for Soldiers Who Participated in
– January 11, 2022) the Vietnam War.

393rd Extraordinary

Session

February 28, 2022 -  Issue report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense).

(January 27 – February

25, 2022)


-----

**Session** **Date** **Main Contents**

394th Extraordinary March 22, 2022 -  Issue report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense).

Session

(March 7 – April 5,

March 29, 2022 -  Issue report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense).

2022)

397th Extraordinary

-  Issue report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense).

Session May 17, 2022

-  Introduction of the FY 2022 2nd Supplementary Revised Budget.

(May 3 – June 1, 2022)


**The 21th Second Half National Assembly**


398th Extraordinary

-  Business report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense, The May 18

Session

August 1, 2022 Democracy Movement Truth Commission, Military Manpower Administration and Defense

(July 4 – August 2,

Acquisition Program Administration).

2022)

-  Introduction of the FY 2021 Financial Settlement Report.

-  Report on the progress of the corrections requested in the FY 2020 Financial Settlement

Report.

399th Extraordinary August 29, 2022 -  Introduction of the Military Personnel Management Act and other bills.

Session -  Introduction of a draft resolution to request the expedited return of the wartime operation and

(August 16 - 31, 2022) control authority.

-  Issue report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense).

August 31, 2022 -  Resolution of the FY 2021 Financial Settlement Report.

-  Adoption of the FY 2021 Parliamentary Audit Plan.

-  Introduction of the proposed Act on the Protection of Defense Technologies and other bills.

September 19, 2022 -  Resolution to encourage the continued development of the ROK-U.S. Alliance.

-  Introduction of a draft resolution to request the expedited return of the wartime operation and

control authority.

October 4 - 24, 2022 -  Performance of the FY 2022 Parliamentary Audit.

October 31, 2022 -  Introduction of the FY 2023 Draft Financial Budget.

400th Regular Session

(September 1 – -  Resolution of the FY 2023 Financial Budget.

December 9, 2022) -  Resolution of the Act on the Personnel Management of Civilian Military Employees and other bills.

-  Introduction of the Defense Science and Technology Innovation Promotion Act and other bills.

-  Introduction of the motion to dispatch troops to the Gulf of Aden and the motion to extend the

November 4, 2022

deployment of ROK troops in the UAE to support the UAE Armed Forces.

-  Resolution to denounce the North Korean provocation with ballistic missiles and to urge its

discontinuance.

-  Issue report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense).

-  Resolution of the motion to dispatch troops to the Gulf of Aden and the motion to extend the

November 18, 2022 deployment of ROK troops in the UAE to support the UAE Armed Forces.

-  Resolution of the Military Pension Act and other bills.

401st Extraordinary

Session -  Issue report (issues under the authority of the Ministry of National Defense).

December 28, 2022

(December 10, 2022 -  Introduction of a special bill to relocate the Kwangju Military Airbase.

– January 8, 2023)


-----

###### Videos

ROK Armed Forces
Promotional Video
p047

Support for the recovery
of damages caused by
Typhoon Hinnamnor
p072

Test Launch of Solidpropellant Rocket
p127

Redeployment of U.S.
strategic bombers (B-1B) on
the Korean peninsula, ROK-U.S.
combined air training
p163

Armed Forces “Youth
Dream” App, Express
Bus mobile App
p228


Army
Promotional Video
p047

Army KCTC
brigade-level
bilateral training
p087

Enforcement of Mobile
Delivery of Reserve Force
Education/Training
Conscription Notice
p137

Seoul Defense
Dialogue (SDD) 2022
p189

Project to Promote
Families with
Distinguished Military
Service
p232


Navy
Promotional Video
p048

Navy
RIMPAC Exercise
p089

DX KOREA 2022
p146

The UDT of the
Cheonghae Unit during
an exercise on the
Marine Day
p202

Remains recovered at
Arrowhead Hill
p275


Marine Corps
Promotional Video
p048

ROK-U.S. Air Force
Transporter Erector Launcher
Strike Exercise and Combined
Strike Package Flight
p089

54th ROK-U.S. Security
Consultative
Meeting (SCM)
p152

2022 Military Photo
Book Project Our
Formidable Soldiers
p225

KF-21 Boramae
successfully flies at
supersonic speed for
the first time.
p327


Air Force
Promotional Video
p049

Armed Forces AI·SW
Augmentation Project
p119

Combined maritime
exercise in the East
Sea by the ROK and
U.S. Navies
p163

Public interest
advertising “70 Years
of Waiting”
p226


-----

##### INDEX

**A**

African Swine Fever, ASF 69, 73, 74

Agency for Defense Development 68, 127, 143

183, 203, 204, 209, 309, 310, 316,
Akh Unit

317

Alternative Military Service System 231, 295

Anti-corruption Ombudsman 227

Armed Forces Job Fair 249, 279

Armed Forces Trauma Center 214, 216

Army Prepositioned Stocks, APS 50

ASEAN Defense Ministers Meeting, 10, 11, 13, 66, 74, 174, 175,
ADMM-Plus 177, 178, 179, 189, 191, 206, 207

ASEAN Outlook on the Indo Pacific,
13
AOIP

ASEAN Regional Forum, ARF 189

Ashena Unit 200, 209, 309, 310, 313, 314

Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation,
10
APEC

Audacious Initiative 23, 38, 97, 98, 100, 155, 190

AUKUS 19

**B**

Battle Command Training Program, BCTP 88

Biological Weapons Convention, BWC 192

BRICS 18

**C**

CBRN Defense Command 69

Chemical Weapons Convention, CWC 71, 101, 192

184, 188, 200, 201, 202, 209, 309,
Cheonghae Unit

310, 313, 315, 316

Chunmoo Multiple Rocket Launchers 147, 172, 323, 324

Citizens’ Group for Defense Information
226
Disclosure

Citizens’ Group for Policy Design 226

Cobra Gold 88, 91

Collective SecurityTreaty Organization, CSTO 9, 18

Combined Command Post Training, CCPT 54, 92, 166, 167

Command Post Exercise, CPX 91, 166

Commonwealth of Independent States, CIS 18

Condition-Based Maintenance, CBM+ 54, 221, 222


Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction
70
Committee, CWMDC

Cyber Cooperation Working Group, CCWG 18

CYBERNET 67


**D**

Defense Agency for Spiritual and Mental
87, 95
Force Enhancement

Defense AI Center 109, 115, 116, 259

Defense Space Development Committee 122

Defense Startup Competition 247

Demilitarized Zone, DMZ 98, 226, 275

Deterrence Strategy Committee, DSC 161, 162, 163, 165

Disaster Response Safety Korea Training 69, 72

Dongmyeong Unit 196, 197, 198, 209, 309, 310, 311

Drone Delivery 113

Drone-bot Combat Systems 48

**E**

Electronic-Military University, e-MU 246

e-Nav 81

European Union, EU 9, 13

Extended Deterrence Strategy & 161
Consultation Group, EDSCG

**F**

FA-50 146, 147, 323, 324

Flexible Deterrence Option, FDO 50

Forces Improvement Budget 131, 132, 172, 254, 255, 257, 258

Full Operational Capability, FOC 167, 171, 173

Future-leading Defense Technology R&D 127, 139, 140

**G**


General Outposts, GOP 51, 115, 116, 129, 270

General Security of Military Information
174
Agreement, GSOMIA

Global Force Posture, GFP 15


-----

Korea-ASEAN Solidarity Initiative, KASI 153, 177

Korean Amphibious Assault Vehicle,
133
KAAV

Korea-U.S. Integrated Defense
154, 161, 165
Dialogue, KIDD

**L**

Loonshots Project 140

L-SAM 60, 132

**M**

Maritime Defense Industry Exhibition,
146
MADEX

Master Plan for the Development of
263
Civilian Military Workforce

MDL 348, 350, 352

MEDEVAC Helicopters, Medion 216

Medium altitude Unmanned Aerial
49, 51, 58, 130, 132, 258
Vehicle, MUAV

Midshipman Cruise 85, 88, 89

Military Accident Compensation Act 278

Military Facility Protection Zones 228, 239, 240

Military Human Rights Guardian System 290

Military Human Rights Improvement
290, 291
Bureau

Military Pension System 273, 274

Military Personnel Human Rights
291
Protection Officer

Multiple Launch Rocket System, MLRS 47, 50, 132, 133, 258

Agency for Killed in Action Recovery and
274, 275
Identification, MAKRI

Multi-Function Civilian-Military Towns 242, 243

Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement
82, 255
System, MILES

Mutual Defense Treaty 50, 160, 301, 302

Mutual Logistics Support Agreements 195

**N**

National Defense Safety Directive 218, 219

National Aeronautics and Space
127
Administration, NASA

National Competency Standards, NCS 250

National Defense Help Call Center 285, 286


**H**

196, 198, 199, 205, 209,
Hanbit Unit

309, 310, 312, 317

High-Altitude Unmanned Aerial Vehicles,
58
HUAV

Highly Enriched Uranium, HEU 29

Hwarang Training 68, 80, 91, 92

Hypersonic Glide Vehicle, HGV 16

**I**

Influenza 74, 218

Initial Operational Capability, IOC 171, 173

Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles, ICBM 15, 16, 30, 163

Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles, IRBM 31, 155, 164

International Peace Operations Center 205, 206, 207, 208

International Peace Supporting Standby
206, 208, 315
Force

Internet of Things, IoT 54, 65

**J**

Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
9
JCPOA

Joint excavation of the remains of
98
service members

Joint Inter-Korean Liaison Office 23

**K**

Kamandag Exercise 91, 178

KF-21 131, 177, 258, 325, 326

Khaan Quest 91

Kill Chain 57, 59, 130, 172, 255, 258

Korea Air and Missile Defense, KAMD 49, 57, 59, 130, 133, 255, 258

Korea Air Defense Identification Zone,
176
KADIZ

Korea Arms Control Verification Agency 376

Korea Combat Training Center, KCTC 87, 88, 92

Korea Defense Industry Exhibition,
146
DX-Korea

Korea Disaster Relief Team, KDRT 75

Korea Massive Punishment and
57, 60, 61, 108, 130, 255, 258
Retaliation, KMPR


-----

National Defense Human Rights Monitoring
290
Group

National Defense Strategy, NDS 8, 14

National Security Strategy, NSS 8, 14

9, 10, 14, 67, 70, 101, 163,
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, NATO

185, 186

Northern Limit Line, NLL 52, 88

Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty, NPT 101, 192, 305

Nuclear Posture Review, NPR 162


Seoul Aerospace and Defense Exhibition,
146, 158, 178, 182, 187, 225
ADEX

Seoul Defense Dialogue, SDD 11, 66, 101, 126, 183, 188, 189, 190

Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, SCO 8, 9, 18

Smart Factory 54

Smart Human Resources Management
221, 234, 235
System

Soldier-Selective Catering System 264

Space Security Working Group 126, 190

space situational awareness, SSA 18, 124

Special Measures Agreement 156, 157

Standardization of Military Occupational
249, 250, 251
Competencies

Status of Forces Agreement, SOFA 19, 156, 241, 302, 320

Stockholm Agreement 24

Strategic Planning Directive, SPD 54

Strategic Planning Guidance, SPG 54

Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missile,
15, 31, 327
SLBM




**T**

Time Phased Force Deployment Data, TPFD 50

Typhoon Hinnamnor 72, 74

**U**

Ulchi Freedom Shield, UFS 54, 92, 166, 167, 168, 173

UN Global Office of Counter-Terrorism, UNOCT 68

UN Peacekeeping Ministerial 188, 204, 208, 309, 317

United Defense Councils 78, 79

United Nations Mission In South Sudan,
198, 199
UNMISS

United Nations Truce Supervision Organization,
196
UNTSO

Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 18, 49, 51, 58, 130, 132, 133, 208, 258

Unmanned Surface Vehicle, USV 18

Unmanned Underwater Vehicles, UUV 18, 128, 133

**V**


Vigilant Storm 164

Virtual Reality, VR 117, 136, 142


**O**

Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
69, 70, 71, 101
Weapons, OPCW

**P**

Pacific Deterrence Initiative, PDI 15

Performance-Based Logistics, PBL 55, 224

Plutonium 29

Prisoners of war, POW 101, 102, 103

Proactive Public Administration Monitoring
226
Group

Public Relations Expert Group 225

Public-Private Partnership Council for
227
Corruption-free Military

**R**

Rapid Demonstration Acquisition Project 107, 144

Reciprocal Access Agreement, RAA 19

Recognition of Conscientious Performance 139, 140

Regional Humanitarian Assistance and
11
Disaster Relief Coordination Center, RHCC

Relocating Military Air Base 240, 241

Rim of the Pacific, RIMPAC 88, 91, 304

23, 38, 41, 57, 108, 110, 128, 129, 130,
ROK 3K Defense

133, 255, 257, 258

ROK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting, 54, 125, 152, 154, 158, 160, 161, 164,
SCM 165, 170, 172, 173, 194

**S**


Scientific Monitoring System 51

Search and Rescue Exercise, SAREX 89


-----

Yongsan Relocation Plan, YRP 306, 319


-----

**Published Date** June 2023

**Published by** Ministry of National Defense

**Compiled by** National Defense Strategy Division,

Policy Planning Bureau

**Edited & Designed by** DANI Communications

For inquiries about the contents of this booklet, please contact the
National Defense Strategy Division of the Ministry of National
Defense.
(+82-2-748-6237)

22

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|


|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|



ISSN 1017-0650


-----

22, Itaewon-ro, Yongsan-gu, Seoul, 04383, Republic of Korea
TEL: +82-2-748-1111 Help Desk: +82-2-748-6891 FAX: +82-2-748-6895
www mnd go kr


-----

