-----

This English version of _Participatory Government Defense Policy 2003 has_
been translated by the Translating Team of the Department of English,
Korea Military Academy (KMA) on behalf of the ROK Ministry of National
Defense. For comments or questions, please contact KMA English
Department or MND General Policy Division at:

**English Department KMA**
Phone: 82-2-2197-2542/2531
Website: www.kma.ac.kr
E-mail: Jmchoi@kma.ac.kr

**General Policy Division MND**
Phone: 82-2-748-6227
Website: www.mnd.go.kr


-----

##### Message from the Minister of National Defense

Embracing the nation’s aspiration and
historical call for reform and change, the
“Participatory Government”has begun its
voyage full of hope. The longing for a new
order and values is already pervasive in
many walks of Korean society.

In particular, the new government, which
has presented a vision of “ peace and
prosperity,”is rallying the nation’s wisdom
and energy on realizing the two goals of “establishing a peace regime
on the Korean Peninsula”and “building a Northeast Asian hub.”

Meanwhile, recent events around the world have betrayed
humanity’s hopes that the 21[st] century would usher in a new era of
stable co-existence and co-prosperity. Instead, as witnessed in the 9·11
terrorist incidents and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, the vicious
and incessant cycle of conflict is still characterizing the international
political scene.

In Northeast Asia, despite the rise in economic interdependence
within the region, potential sources of conflict surrounding
territorial, resources, environmental and economic issues remain
unresolved. The resulting competition by the countries of the region
to expand their influence and interests as well as pursue a military
buildup is rendering the security environment uncertain.


-----

On the Korean Peninsula, in spite of the progress in inter-Korean
exchanges and cooperation, North Korea’s military threat remains
very real. In particular, North Korea has yet to abandon its nuclear
ambitions despite the efforts by our government and the
international community to find a peaceful resolution to the
problem. Hence, the likelihood of the tension arising from the
nuclear issue still exists.

From the standpoint of national security, it cannot be denied that
the environment we face at home and abroad is fraught with
considerable instability and uncertainty.

Under these circumstances, the Republic of Korea (ROK) Armed
Forces which is responsible for the national security is fully
appreciative of the need to strengthen its ability to meet and
overcome today’s challenges as well as furnish itself with a selfdefense capability that upholds the nation’s interests and prosperity
in the uncertain security environment of the future.

Accordingly, the ROK Armed Forces has designated the
“Realization of an Advanced, Self-Reliant National Defense”as its
defense policy objective in order to support the government’s drive
toward “peace and prosperity”and “establishing a peace regime on
the Korean Peninsula.”The Armed Forces is channeling its efforts to
consistently pursue its defense policy.

While maintaining a firm defense posture to respond to any threat,
the ROK Armed Forces will build a forward-looking defense
capability and posture that is self-reliant in its ability to deal with the
changes in the strategic environment and future mode of warfare. It


-----

will also undertake sustained defense reforms that heighten
organizational efficiency and enhance its orientation toward the
future, both of which will support its objective of realizing a selfreliant and advanced defense. Moreover, it will be unsparing in its
efforts to dramatically improve the barracks and the welfare of
service members, while striving to become an “Armed Forces of the
People”that wins the heart and support of the general population,
mindful that the people are the source from which defense is
derived.

This year’s “Participatory Government Defense Policy,”which
illustrates the policy direction and the blueprint for reforms that the
Armed Forces is planning to pursue, has been published to deepen
public understanding and support.

To further enhance the reader’s understanding and offer assistance
in security-related research, a wide range of defense-related data
have been compiled into the Appendices. With the sincere hope that
this book will be useful in furthering public understanding of, and
consensus on our defense policy, I cordially ask for your continued
support and interest.

July 11, 2003

Cho, Yung-kil
Minister of National Defense
Republic of Korea


-----

**Part One Assessment of Security Situation**

**Chapter One** **Global and Northeast Asia Security Situation** 21

**Chapter Two Security Situation and Military Threat of North Korea** 25

**Part Two Participatory Government’s “Policy of Peace and**
Prosperity”and Defense Policy


**Chapter One Participatory Government's “Policy of Peace and Prosperity”**

31

A. Background and Significance of “Policy of Peace and Prosperity” 31

B. “Policy of Peace and Prosperity”and Self-Reliant Defense 32

C. Policy Goals to Realize “Policy of Peace and Prosperity” 34

**Chapter Two Goals and Direction of Defense Policy** 36

A. Goals and Key Points of Defense Policy 36

**Part Three Establishment of a Firm Defense Posture**


**Chapter One Military Preparedness of the ROK Armed Forces** 47

A. Preparedness against Infiltration and Local Provocation 47

B. Strengthening ROK-US Combined Crisis Management System 49


-----

**Chapter Two Operations of ROK Armed Forces** 51

**Chapter Three Operations of USFK and Augmentation Forces** 56

**Chapter Four Combat Task-Oriented Training and Exercises** 59

A. Combined and Joint Training and Exercises 59

C. Strengthening the Moral Education of Service Members 67

**Part Four Building a Future-Oriented Defense Capability**


**Chapter One Improving Force Structure** 71

**Chapter Two Pursuing Defense Digitization** 75

A. Changes in Defense Digitization Environment 75

B. Pursuit of Defense Digitization and Its Goals 75

C. Building Integrated Defense Digitization System 76

D. Building Support System for Battle Focused Training 79

E. Strengthening Digitization Education of Service Members 80


-----

**Chapter Three Advancing the ROK-US Alliance** 81

A. Developments in the Roles and Characteristics of ROK-US Alliance 81

B. Progressive Adjustment of USFK Base Structure 82

C. ROK-US Combined Forces Modernization 83

**Chapter Four Promoting Foreign Military Exchanges and Cooperation**

86

A. Military Diplomacy with Neighboring Countries 86

B. Participation in International Peace-Keeping Operations 91

C. International Arms Control and Multilateral Security Cooperation Activities 98

D. War against Terror and the Dispatch of ROK Armed Forces 101

**Chapter Five Reducing Tension and Establishing Peace on the Korean**

A. Efforts to Build Military Confidence between the Two Koreas 109

B. Efforts to Peacefully Resolve the North Korean Nuclear Issue 111

C. Military Support for Inter-Korean Exchanges and Cooperation 113

**Part Five Continuous Reform of the Defense System**


**Chapter One Reforming Personnel Management** 119

A. Management of Elite Defense Manpower 119

**Chapter Two** **Restructuring Defense Organization** 123

B. Directions of Organizational Restructuring 123


-----

**Chapter Three Improving Military Service and Reserve Forces System** 125

B. Improvement of Military Manpower Administration 126

C. Improvement of Reserve Forces System 129

**Chapter Four Reforming Military Judicial System** 131

**Chapter Five Enhancing the Efficiency of Defense Build-up** 134

A. Direction of Defense Acquisition and Development 134

B. Applying “Open Decision Making System”to Force Improvement Program 135

C. Policy Improvement of R&D and Defense Industry 137

D. Efficient and Economical Pursuit of Defense Acquisition and Development

**Part Six Improving Service Members' Welfare and Barrack**
Environment


**Chapter One Improving Service Members' Welfare** 143

**Chapter Two Fostering a Desirable Military Culture** 146

**Chapter Three Promotion of Welfare for Veterans** 148


-----

**Part Seven Defense Budget**


**Chapter Two Defense Budget Allocation Trend and Status of Defense**

**Chapter Three Need for Appropriate Defense Budget** 160

A. Preparation for Current and Future Non-Specific Threats 161

B. Preparation for Progressive Readjustment of ROK-US Alliance 161

C. Securing Defense Capability that Corresponds with National Power 162

D. Defense Budget and National Development 163

**Chapter Four Requirement for Advanced Self-Reliant Defense** 165


**Part Eight Realizing the National Defense with the People**


**Chapter One Public Benefits Enhancement and Protection of Rights**


171


A. Enhancing Military's Environment Preservation Activities 171

B. Management of Military Facilities and the Protection of Individual Property

C. Activities of Military Support for the Public 177


-----

**Chapter Two Realizing Open Defense Administration** 182

B. Participation of Civilian Experts in Development of National Defense Policy

189

C. The Korean War and the 50[th] Anniversary Commemoration Project 191

**Appendices**


Appendix 1 Status of Global Conflicts in 2002 199

Appendix 2 Comparison of South and North Korean Military Capabilities 200

Appendix 3 North Korea's Missile Development and Capabilitiy 201

Appendix 4 Combined / Joint Training and Exercises 202

Appendix 5 Chronology of ROK-US Military Affairs 204

Appendix 6 Chronology of Major Foreign Military Exchange and Cooperation 210

Appendix 7 Status of ROK Armed Forces' Participation in the PKO 214

Appendix 8 Status of ROK Armed Forces' Participation in the Iraq War 216

Appendix 9 Organization of the ROK Ministry of National Defense and the Current

Appendix 10 Force Integration Project of Major Military Equipment in 2003 219

Appendix 11 Status of International Defense Industrial Agreements 220

Appendix 12 Status of Investment in Defense Research & Development 221

Appendix 13 Status of Career Guidance Training before Retirement in 2002 222

Appendix 14 Status of Retirees Re-employment in 2002 223

Appendix 15 Composition of MND Budget by FY 224

Appendix 16 Defense Budget of Select Powers 225


-----

**Figures**



[Figure 2-1] Direction and Goals of the Participatory Government 34

[Figure 2-2] Goals and Key Points of National Defense Policy of the Participatory

[Figure 2-3] Main Reform Initiatives for National Defense 41

[Figure 3-3] Organization of the ROK Air Force 54

[Figure 3-4] Command Structure of the Reserve Forces 55

[Figure 4-1] Diagram of National Defense Integrated Information System 76

[Figure 4-2] Organization of the Evergreen Unit 93

[Figure 5-1] Overview of the Defense Acquisition and Development System 134

[Figure 5-2] Three Main Policy Directions for Defense Acquisition and Development

135

[Figure 7-1] Allocation of FY 2003 Defense Budget by Function 153

[Figure 7-2] Proportion of Defense Outlays to GDP and Government Outlays 155

[Figure 7-3] Change in Proportion of Force Investment to Defense Budget 158

[Figure 7-4] Reduction and Delay of Key FIPs 159

[Figure 8-1] Process of information disclosure 183


-----

**Tables**



[Table 4-1] Military Exchanges with Neighboring Countries 90

[Table 4-2] PKO Participation Status of the ROK 92

[Table 5-1] Reduced Service Period According to Enlistment Dates 125

[Table 5-2] Number of Recruits Choosing Enlistment Dates 127

[Table 5-3] Disclosure of Personal Military Service Information 128

[Table 5-4] Improvements in the Reserve Forces Training 129

[Table 5-5] Improvements in the Decision-Making System 136

[Table 7-1] Defense Budget in FY 2003 in comparison to FY 2002 153

[Table 7-2] Defense Outlay of other Countries (FY 2001) 163

[Table 8-1] Military Owned Basic Environmental Facilities/Plan 171

[Table 8-2] Military Employed MOS Personnel/Plan 172

[Table 8-3] Relocation of Military Facilities Unit 173

[Table 8-4] Settlement of Private Land Cases 173

[Table 8-5] Cancellation and Deregulation of Military Facility Protection Areas 177

[Table 8-7] Support for the Public during the Last 5 Years 179

[Table 8-8] Statistics of Support for the Public during the Last 5 Years 179

[Table 8-9] The Current Status on Information Disclosure 184

[Table 8-11] Methods of Civil Petition at MND 186

[Table 8-12] Teenager Organizations National Defense Camping Support Result 188


-----

**Abbreviation**


ACMI Air Combat Maneuvering Instrumentation

ADD Agency for Defense Development

AG Australia Group

AOE Fast Combat Support Ship

ARF Asean Regional Forum

ARS Audio Response System

ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations

ATACMS Army Tactical Missile System

ATM Asynchronous Transfer Mode

AWACS Airborne Warning and Control System

BCTP Battle Command Training Progmam

BIDS Biological Intergrated Detection System

BPR Business Process Reengineering

BWC Biological Weapons Convention

C4ISR Command, Control, Communication, Computer,

Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance

CALS Continuous Acquisition and Life-cycle Support

CBMs Confidence Building Measures

CBT Computer Based Training

CCW Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons

CD Conference on Disarmament

CDIP Combined Defense Improvement Project

CERT Computer Emergency Response Team

CFA Combined Field Army

CFC ROK/US Combined Forces Command

CIO Chief Information Officer

COCOM Coordinating Committee for Mulilateral Export Control

CPAS Command Post Automation System

CPX Command Post Exercise

CRC Control and Reporting Center

CRAC Combined Rear Area Coordinator

CSCAP Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia-Pacific Region

CT Computer Tomography

CTBT Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty

CWC Chemical Weapons Convention


-----

DD Destroyer

DMZ Demilitarized zone

DPAMIS Defense Procurement Agency Management Information System

DPKO Department of Peacekeeping Operation

EC Electronic Commerce

EDI Electronic Data Interchange

EOD Explosive Ordnance Disposal

ERW Explosive Remnants of War

EU European Union

FDO Flexible Deterrence Option

FF Frigate

FMP Force Module Package

FMS Foreign Military Sales

FTX Field Training Exercise

GDP Gross Domestic Product

GMO Genetically Modified Organism

GOP General Outpost

HEU High Explosive Uranium

IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency

ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization

IISS International Institute for Strategic Studies

IMF International Monetary Fund

ISG-CBMs Intersessional Support Group on Confidence Building Measures

IPB Intelligence Preparation of the Battle

IT Information Technology

IW Information Warfare

JSA Joint Security Area

KADIZ Korean Air Defense Identification Zone

KCTC Korea Combat Training Center

KDX Korean Destroyer Experimental

KEDO Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization

KIDA Korea Institute for Defense Analyses

KNTDS Korean Naval Tactical Data System

LAN Local Area Network

LNWFZ-NEA Limited Nuclear Weapons Free Zone for Northeast Asia

LPE Long Range Precision Engagement

LPP Land Partnership Plan

LST Landing Ship Tank


-----

MCM Military Committee Meeting

MCRC Master Control and Reporting Center

MD Missile Defense

MDL Military Demarcation Line

MINURSO UN Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara

MLRS Multiple-Launch Rocket System

MND Ministry of National Defense

MOG Military Observer Group

MOOTW Military Operations Other Than War

MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging

MTCR Missile Technology Control Regime

NATO North-Atlantic Treaty Organization

NEACD North-East Asia Cooperation Dialogue

NEASED North-East Asia Security Dialogue

NGO Non-Governmental Organization

NLL Northern Limit Line

NPT Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty

NSC National Security Council

NVG Night Vision Goggle

OAU Organization for African Unity

OCI Olympic Council of Asia

OEF Operation of Enduring Freedom

OPCW The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons

OSCE Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

PCC Patrol Combat Corvette

PDA Personal Digital Assistant

PGMs Precision Guided Munitions

PKF Peace-Keeping Forces

PKO Peace-Keeping Operations

PPBEES Planning, Programming, Budgeting, Execution, Evaluation System

RIMPAC Rim of the Pacific Exercise

RMA Revolution in Military Affairs

RDL Rapid Deployment Level

RTDS Real Time Display System

SCC Security Cooperation Committee

SCM Security Consultative Meeting

SOFA Status of Forces Agreement

SSM Submarine Midget


-----

START-I,II,III Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty-I,II,III

TACC Theater Air Control Center

TCOG Trilateral Coordination and Oversight Group

TPFDD Time Phased Forces Deployment Data

TF Task Force

UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle

UDT Underwater Demolition Team

UFL Ulchi-Focus Lens

UNMOGIP United Nations Military Observer Group in India & Pakistan

UNOMIG United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia

WA Wassenaar Arrangement

WAN Wide Area Network

WEN Western European Union

WHNS Wartime Host Nation Support

WMD Weapons of Mass Destruction

WRSA War Reserve Stocks For Allies

WTO World Trade Organization

ZC Zangger Committee


-----

#### Part One

## Assessment of Security Situation

**Chapter One**
**Global and Northeast Asia Security Situation**

**Chapter Two**
**Security Situation and Military Threat of**
**North Korea**


-----

Global and Northeast Asia
Security Situation

##### Chapter OneChapter One

### Global and Northeast Asia Security Situation

###### A. Global Security Situation

Despite hopes for co-existence and co-prosperity in the post-Cold War era,
recent world events have shown that the vicious cycle of endless conflict is
still in motion as witnessed by the 9·11 terrorist incidents and the wars in
Afghanistan and Iraq. While the world has seen international cooperation and
competition coexist in the US-led reconfiguration of the world order,
uncertainty and instability still persist due to the changes in regional
dynamics.
Also, while the concept of security has expanded from its traditional
military-oriented notion to the concept of “comprehensive security”that
encompasses economic, diplomatic and social issues, the wars in Afghanistan
and Iraq as well as the turbulent situation in the Middle East and the Chechen
region have demonstrated how military force is still the main tool in
protecting national interests.
Furthermore, the various seeds of conflict that lay dormant during the Cold
War (i.e. territorial, religious, resource, and ethnic disputes) have emerged to
increase the possibility of local conflicts. The rapid advances in globalization
coupled with the deepening of interdependence have diversified transnational
or non-military threats such as terror, environmental pollution, natural
disaster, piracy, and illegal refugees. Recently, new forms of diseases, namely
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) and Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS), have also emerged as new forms of threats. A serious threat
to international peace and security also comes from those states that are
developing and producing weapons of mass destruction (WMD).


-----

Assessment of
Security Situation

The US-led war on Iraq that began on March 20, 2003, albeit in the face of
opposition by the UN and global anti-war/anti-US sentiment, was the first
case in which “pre-emptive action”was employed to eliminate the WMD
capabilities of a rogue state. Such action not only reaffirmed the superiority of
US military power but also provided the momentum to more firmly secure the
uni-multipolar system led by the United States.
With the overwhelming victory in Iraq, the United States is expected to
foster the spread of American democracy in the political field, and control the
Middle East and global order through the stable supply of crude oil in the
economic field. At the same time, the United States is anticipated to bolster
policies on counter-terrorism and WMD non-proliferation toward those states
that support terror or develop/produce WMDs.
Despite its wide range of activities in arms reduction, conflict intervention,
conflict mediation and other peacekeeping activities, the United Nations has
suffered a severe blow in stature as a result of independent action by the
United States in disarming Iraq, and there is rising concern that its role will
continue to diminish.
Meanwhile, with the pioneering developments in science and technology,
the paradigm of war is drastically changing. As recently witnessed during the
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, future warfare is being transformed to focus
less on territorial acquisition and mass destruction through heavily numbered
troops and conventional weapons and more on information paralysis and
center of gravity strikes through sophisticated weaponry such as precision
guided munitions (PGM). As a result, states are working to develop a hightech military based on information and technology, which will determine the
winners and losers on the future battlefield.

###### B. Security Situation in Northeast Asia

Despite the rise in economic interdependence within the Northeast Asian
region, which has emerged as one of the strategically important pillars of the
world, the security environment continues to remain in a state of flux as a


-----

Global and Northeast Asia
Security Situation

result of diverse sources of potential disputes, conflict of interests and
competition for influence among countries.
Some of the diverse sources of potential disputes in Northeast Asia that fuel
instability include territorial disputes such as the Kuril Islands dispute
between Russia and Japan, the Senkaku Islands dispute between Japan and
China, the issue of boundary demarcation as a result of the new 200-nauticalmile Exclusive Economic Zone(EEZ), environmental pollution, Taiwan, and
Missile Defense (MD). On the Korean Peninsula, in particular, despite efforts
to peacefully resolve the North Korean nuclear issue, the possibility of a rise in
tension remains real.
The United States, continuously playing the role of stabilizer and balancer in
Northeast Asia, is focusing on the establishment of MD and the strengthening
of its information, air and space capabilities so as to maintain its military
supremacy. The US is also maintaining the strategy of forward deployment in
the region to help keep Northeast Asia and the Pacific Region stable.
At the same time, the United States is recognizing the need to realign its
forces stationed overseas and to modify its military strategy as a result of the
changing security environment and the enhancement in military capability
following its efforts to transform the US military. Accordingly, partial changes
and modifications to the US forces in the Asia-Pacific region are expected.
Japan, while still under the umbrella of the US-Japan security alliance, is
pursuing an increased military role for its Self Defense Forces as evidenced by
the enactment of the Emergency Law in June, 2003. Japan is also seeking to
actively pursue security dialogues and exchanges with Northeast Asian
countries. In particular, Japan is working to secure an independent
information gathering capability, expand its maritime control and operational
scope and increase its international role by participating in Iraqi
reconstruction and humanitarian assistance.
China, in an effort to build up as well as modernize its forces to a level
congruent to its economic strength, is seeking to transform its strategic missile,
naval and air power to cope with future warfare. At the same time, China is
making every effort to calm the fears of neighboring countries that China is
“emerging as a new regional threat.”Furthermore, recognizing that peace and


-----

Assessment of
Security Situation

stability on the Korean Peninsula is crucial to its own economic well-being,
China is seeking a peaceful resolution to the North Korea nuclear issue by
playing a crucial role as a concerned party and a mediator in the US-led
multilateral approach. China's constructive role in facilitating cooperation
among the related parties is expected to continue.
Russia is espousing a pragmatic foreign policy based on national interest.
Russia is trying to increase its influence through the modernization of its
military and the strengthening of its diplomatic capabilities. Russia is
maintaining a strategic cooperative relationship with China to counterbalance
the US, and is working to strengthen its role on the Korean Peninsula and the
North Korean nuclear issue. Also, to regain its prestige as a military
superpower, the Russian military is undergoing restructuring, downsizing,
and modernizing to make its armed forces more agile, mobile, light, and adept
at long-range power projection.


-----

Security Situation and Military
Threat of North Korea

##### Chapter TChapter Two wo

### Security Situation and Military Threat of North Korea

###### A. North Korean Security Situation

While trying to stir up the people's loyalty to Kim Jong-il, the Chairman of
the National Defense Committee (NDC), the North Korean government is
tightening its military grip over the country based on its “Military First
Policy.”Emphasizing “military-civilian unity,”it is encouraging the people to
arm themselves with the “revolutionary military spirit.”With the recent
deterioration of relations with the United States, North Korea is trying to keep
the country under tight control by maintaining a state of continued tension
within the country by such means as staging nationwide anti-American rallies.
The continuing economic stagnation has pushed North Korea to the
realization that there is a limit to sustaining the inefficient system of a planned
economy. As such, under the orders of Chairman Kim Jong-il, North Korea has
initiated many sweeping reform measures including the following: The
“Directive for Improving Economic Management”(October, 2001), the
“Measures to Improve Economic Management”(July 1, 2002), and the “Basic
Laws for the Sinuiju Special Administrative Zone”that was adopted by the
Supreme People's Assembly (September, 2002).
Such market-oriented measures, while an attempt to ensure the survival of
the North Korean regime, are doubtful to be effective given the structural
deficiency that plagues the North Korean system.
Ever since announcing the termination of the freeze on its nuclear program
on December 12, 2002, North Korea has resorted to such “brinkmanship
tactics”as announcing the withdrawal from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty on January 10, 2003. At the same time, North Korea has also been


-----

Assessment of
Security Situation

focusing on negotiations with the United States, demanding a non-aggression
pact as a means to ensure regime survival. While North Korea's recent
participation in the trilateral talks with US and China offers hope for a
peaceful resolution to the nuclear issue, the outstanding differences between
North Korea and the US still cloud the prospects for a resolution to the issue.
North Korea's relations with Japan which reached new heights with the
summit meeting on September 17, 2002, during which both sides agreed to
reopen talks to normalize relations, have since remained stagnant due to the
issues of North Korea's nuclear program and North Korea's past abduction of
Japanese citizens. Meanwhile, North Korea is strengthening its traditional
cooperative ties with China and Russia to secure political and economic
support.
As regards to inter-Korean relations, North Korea is continuing its
rapprochement strategy with ROK; it is calling for the implementation of “the
June 15 Joint Declaration,”maintaining government talks and civilian
exchanges, as well as sustaining such pragmatic inter-Korean cooperative
projects as the linkage of the Gyeongui (Seoul-Sinuiju) and Donghae interKorean railways and roads. However, internally, North Korea does not seem
to have given up its strategy to communize the South as evidenced by its
lukewarm response to ROK's offers to discuss military confidence building
measures.

###### B. North Korean Military Threat

North Korea's armed forces are comprised of more than 1,170,000 soldiers
(1,000,000 Army, 60,000 Navy, 110,000 Air Force) in active duty, with more
than 7,480,000 in the reserve forces constituting the Reserved Military Training
Units (RMTU), Worker/Peasant Red Guards and the Red Youth Guards. More
than 70% of the ground forces are stationed south of the Pyongyang-Wonsan
line, which enables North Korea to launch a surprise attack and invade the
South without additional deployment of its units.
North Korea, which is also concentrating on WMD development, is


-----

Security Situation and Military
Threat of North Korea

estimated to have acquired the capability to develop crude nuclear explosive
devices and enough plutonium to build these weapons. North Korea is also
believed to have pursued the import of resources and facilities needed to
enrich uranium.
In terms of biological weapons, North Korea is believed to possess 13 types
of bacteria including anthrax, small pox and cholera. As regards to chemical
weapons, North Korea has produced over ten kinds of lethal chemicals that
include nerve, blister, and blood agents. Some 2,500 to 5,000 tons of these
chemical agents are estimated to be stored in six separate facilities.
Meanwhile, North Korea has deployed the Scud B and C missiles whose
maximum range is 300 to 500 km and the Rodong-1 missile with a maximum
range of up to 1,300 km. The 2,000 km range Daepodong-1 was used as a
satellite launch vehicle in August 1998 and the Daepodong-2 with a range of
6,000 km is currently under development.
While recently strengthening its long-range firepower with the addition of a
Rodong missile battalion, it has also forward deployed its 170 mm and 240
mm long-range artillery guns to pose a greater threat to the Seoul
metropolitan area. North Korea is
also continuing its military
buildup with the production of
the Chonmaho tank and the
Shark-class submarines.
Since the revelation of its recent
nuclear program in October 2002,
North Korea has strengthened its
defense-oriented readiness
posture by performing exercises
such as test-firing of ground-to- System (MRLS)
ship guided missiles and nation
North Korea's 240mm Multiple Rocket Launcher
System (MRLS)

wide air raid drills. By stressing national solidarity between the two Koreas
over the nuclear issue, North Korea is also concentrating on psychological
warfare.
Beginning in March 2003, with regards to the US military operations in Iraq,


-----

Assessment of
Security Situation

North Korea has issued orders for increased combat readiness and has
conducted air raid drills. It has also continued to voice strong criticism against
US military operations as well as ROK's dispatch of troops to the region.
Some of the more recent and noteworthy military actions taken by North
Korea with the intent to create tension include the intrusion of the
Yeonpyeong Island airspace by a North Korean MIG-19 fighter aircraft on
February 20, 2003, the test-launch of a ground-to-ship guided missile off the
East Sea Coast on February 24, 2003, and the threatening interceptive
maneuvers on a US RC-135 reconnaissance aircraft by MIG-23/29 fighter
aircraft over the East Sea on March 2, 2003.
During the height of the crab-fishing season, between May 26 and June 3, a
total of 37 North Korean fishing boats crossed the Northern Limit Line (NLL)
on ten occasions. In response, ROK Navy patrol boats fired warning shots on
June 1 and June 3. The northward extension of fishing waters ordered by the
ROK Navy's West Sea Fleet Command, coupled with forceful patrols along the
area, have prevented the North Korean boats from further intruding the NLL.
Considering these recent events, further provocation by North Korea along the
NLL and the Military Demarcation Line (MDL), either intentional or
accidental, cannot be ruled out.
In brief, the military capability and posture of North Korea have not
changed. North Korea is continuing to intensify self-indoctrination under the
“Military First Policy”slogan and is sustaining a vast military apparatus. Also,
the further emphasis on WMD development, military buildup, and increased
readiness all point to the unchanged nature of North Korea's military threat.


-----

#### Part Two

## Participatory Government's “Policy of Peace and Prosperity” and Defense Policy

**Chapter One**
**Participatory Government's “Policy of Peace and**
**Prosperity”**

**Chapter Two**
**Goals and Direction of Defense Policy**


-----

Participatory Government s
“Policy of Peace and Prosperity”

##### Chapter OneChapter One

### Participatory Government's “Policy of Peace and Prosperity”

###### A. Background and Significance of “Policy of Peace and Prosperity”

With the historical wave of the post-Cold
War era and the inter-Korean summit
meeting of June 15, 2000, new opportunities and challenges for the “establishment
of peace”on the Korean Peninsula are
within our grasp. With substantive
progress in inter-Korean relations following
the summit and the rising interest of
neighboring countries on the geoeconomic
significance of the Korean Peninsula as the
central pillar of Northeast Asian prosperity,
President Roh Moo-hyun outlined in his
inaugural address on February 2003 the

Inauguration of President Roh Moo-hyun

“Policy of Peace and Prosperity”to help
build peace and prosperity in Northeast Asia on the basis of a peaceful
resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue and the establishment of an interKorean economic community.
The “Policy of Peace and Prosperity”is a comprehensive national
development strategy that encompasses issues of reunification, foreign policy
and security. In pursuing parallel progress not only in the economic sector but


-----

“Policy of Peace and Prosperity”
and Defense Policy

also in the military/security sector, it explores a balanced approach to peace
and prosperity.
Under the broad objective of advancing peace and pursuing common
prosperity on the Korean Peninsula, the Participatory Government's “Policy of
Peace and Prosperity”will proceed under the following four principles:
① resolution of problems through dialogue, ② mutual trust and reciprocity,
③ international cooperation based on the party autonomy principle of South
and North Korea, and ④ keeping the policy in tune with the public. In the
short term, these principles will serve as guidelines in cooperating with
neighboring countries to bring about a peaceful resolution to the North
Korean nuclear issue.
On such a basis, the mid-term goals would be to advance substantive
cooperation, realize military confidence building between the two Koreas and
establish a peace regime on the Korean Peninsula by supporting the
normalization of relations between North Korea and the US and Japan. These
will be the precursors of the long-term goals to pursue common prosperity,
establish the grounds for peaceful re-unification and develop the Korean
Peninsula into an economic hub of Northeast Asia.

###### B. “Policy of Peace and Prosperity”and Self-Reliant Defense

To establish a peace regime on the Korean Peninsula as sought by the
“Policy of Peace and Prosperity,”ROK needs to further develop its defense
capability. In the context of continued military confrontation between South
and North Korea, the focus must be on deterring a military attack by North
Korea.
During the course of pursuing a national security strategy with the ROK-US
alliance as its central fixture, the ROK's military has been inevitably dependent
in many aspects on the United States and its forces in Korea. Some South
Koreans who came to recognize this problem, have raised concerns on the
political and military weakness of ROK. In order to be able to firmly defend


-----

Participatory Government s
“Policy of Peace and Prosperity”

itself and restore public confidence, ROK needs to pursue a self-reliant
defense. By doing so, ROK can actively respond to the changes in the ROK-US
alliance and play a leading role in inter-Korean relations.
The concept of self-reliant defense aims to achieve a self-reliant deterrence
capability against North Korea while complementing this capability by
strengthening the ROK-US alliance and security cooperation with neighboring
states. In order to realize this, ROK needs to overcome its military
disadvantage vis-｀a-vis North Korea in terms of autonomous forces, manage
the military in a more efficient manner, and rationally address such important
matters as improving the combined command system of the alliance in
anticipation of changes and developments in the future.
As regards to uncertain security threats other than North Korea, a self-reliant
defense capability must form the basis on which to address these threats in
tandem with the ROK-US alliance and cooperation with neighboring
countries. The constantly maturing ROK-US alliance should gradually
delineate roles for the two parties: ROK will play the leading role in deterring
a North Korean attack with the US playing a supporting role, and the United
States will play the balancing role in the region. During their recent ROK-US
summit, the presidents of the two countries took note of the opportunity
provided by ROK's growing national strength to continue expanding the role
of the ROK Armed Forces in the defense of the Korean Peninsula. In brief, selfreliant defense does not, in any way, translate into the withdrawal of US forces
from Korea or the weakening of the ROK-US alliance.
Self-reliance in defense should be sought in a way that satisfies the following
three points. First, it should lead to the establishment of a force that can deter
North Korean aggression. Second, military reforms are needed to improve the
organization and management system of the armed forces. Third, on the basis
of the first two points, the combined command system must be further
developed. While self-reliant defense deals with material aspects, the spiritual
aspect is just as vital and important. The ROK Armed Forces should
demonstrate a strong will to realize self-reliant defense and thereby evolve into
the “Armed Forces of the People”that is deeply trusted and loved by the people.


-----

“Policy of Peace and Prosperity”
and Defense Policy

###### C. Policy Goals to Realize “Policy of Peace and Prosperity”

The goal of the “Participatory Government”is to achieve the following:
“Democracy with the People,”“A Society of Balanced Development,”and
“Era of Peace and Prosperity in Northeast Asia.”In order to realize these
goals, sector-specific policy goals were also designated. Of these goals, “to
establish a peace regime on the Korean Peninsula”is a policy goal to be
pursued by the foreign, reunification and defense policy sectors to realize the
“Policy of Peace and Prosperity.”For the Ministry of Unification, the sub-goal
is to institutionalize peace through the improvement of inter-Korean relations.
For the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the sub-goal is to “cultivate the
international environment that is favorable to the establishment of peace on
the Korean Peninsula.”For the Ministry of National Defense (MND), the subgoal is to “firmly establish a defense posture to ensure peace.”

**[Figure 2-1] Direction and Goals of the Participatory Government**


**Direction and Goals of the**
**Participatory Government**

**Goals** **Tenets**

- Democracy with the People - Principles and Trust

- A Society of Balanced - Fairness and Transparency
Development - Dialogue and Compromise

- Era of Peace and Prosperity in - Decentralization of Power
Northeast Asia and Autonomy

**Policy Goals (12)**

**Establishment of a Peace Regime on the Korean Peninsula**
ㅇ Institutionalize peace through inter-Korean rapprochement
ㅇ Cultivate the international environment that promotes the

establishment of peace on the Korean Peninsula

ㅇ **Firmly establish a defense posture to ensure peace**

-  Early solidification of self-defense capability

-  Development and strengthening of the ROK-US alliance

-  Inter-Korean military confidence building

※ Foreign Policy / Reunification / Security(1), Politics / Administration(3), Economy(4), Social
/ Culture / Women(4 Policy Goals)


-----

Participatory Government s
“Policy of Peace and Prosperity”

In order to realize the goal of “firmly establishing a defense posture to
ensure peace,”the ROK Armed Forces has designated the following as central
objectives for national defense: ① early solidification of self-defense capability,
② development and strengthening of the ROK-US alliance, and ③ pursuing
inter-Korean military confidence building. Also, recognizing the need to
reform the military sector congruous with the Participatory Government's
drive and direction, the ROK Armed Forces is contriving a direction for reform
in all fields of national defense and will reflect this in detail for each specific
area.


-----

Policy of Peace and Prosperity
and Defense Policy

##### Chapter TChapter Twowo

### Goals and Direction of Defense Policy

###### A. Goals and Key Points of Defense Policy


In order to demonstrate
the President's governing
will and carry out the
national defense policy, as
well as support the
government's effort to

on the Korean Peninsula

Conference of the Major Military Commanders

and pursue the “Policy of Peace and Prosperity,”our military has set as its
objectives the realization of an “advanced, self-reliant defense.”
Self-reliant and advanced

maintaining a mutually

relationships with foreign
militaries based on a selfdefense capability and
national defense posture.

advanced operation system



**[Figure 2-2] Goals and Key Points of National Defense**
**Policy of the Participatory Government**

**Objectives of National**
**Defense Policy**

Realizing a Self-Reliant and Advanced National Defense

**Key Points**

ㅇ To Establish a Firm National Defense Posture

ㅇ To Build a Future-Oriented Defense Capability

ㅇ To Continuously Reform National Defense System

ㅇ To Improve Service Members' Welfare and Barracks Life

※ To Procure an Appropriate Defense Budget


-----

Goals and Direction of Defense
Policy

based on rationality and efficiency. It also sets a standard our military must
attain as well as the aim that we must pursue.
The key points in achieving our goals are the following: ① establishing a
firm national defense posture, ② building a future-oriented defense capability,
③ continuously reforming national defense system, and ④ improving service
members' welfare and barracks life. The ROK military is concentrating its
energy to consistently pursue these points. Moreover, in order to achieve these
goals, an appropriate defense budget needs to be procured, on which our
military is making efforts to build a national consensus.

###### B. Direction of Defense Policy

1. Establishing a Firm National Defense Posture

Our military is maintaining a firm national defense posture to cope with any
conceivable threat. On the one hand, the ROK and the US have adhered to the
principle of peaceful resolution concerning the North Korean nuclear issue,
and have pursued dialogue with North Korea to settle the problem. On the
other hand, however, the situation remains unpredictable and the possibility
that North Korea might stage a surprise provocation to enhance its negotiating
power cannot be ruled out.
Accordingly, our military will establish a firm defense posture against North
Korea's infiltration, limited provocation, terrorist and non-military activities,
and will strengthen combat military training, while reinforcing the civilgovernment-military integrated defense posture.
In particular, the ROK-US combined forces operation system will play an
essential role in deterring war, during the process of coping with North Korea's
nuclear issue. Therefore, our military plans to strengthen the ROK-US
combined readiness posture by enhancing ROK-US combined surveillance and
intelligence capability and improving combined crisis management systems.
High-level units centered around the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) have made
plans to employ joint forces and develop force structures to effectively


-----

“Policy of Peace and Prosperity”
and Defense Policy

respond to current threats as well as those non-specific threats of the future.
Accordingly, the ROK military will develop the necessary doctrines, force
structures and force requirements.
In addition, to establish a firm sense of security in terms of maintaining
readiness posture, commanders are placing emphasis on moral education for
service members while holding firm national views and soldiership for
themselves.

2. Building a Future-Oriented Defense Capability

In order to guarantee the survival of a nation and uphold its national
interests, the military needs to maintain a certain level of force capability.
However, enhancement of force capability is a long-term process which
requires 10~20 years of preparation, and investments must be made at the
earliest date to obtain an appropriate level of combat power that can be
deployed whenever needed. Moreover, for the security of our nation,
maintaining appropriate and cooperative relations with neighboring countries including the ROK-US alliance - as well as obtaining combat power is also
necessarily required. Taking this fact into consideration, our military is striving
to build up its future-oriented defense capability that can cope with changes in
the strategic environment and adjust to the characteristics of future war.
In order to achieve this, our military has set the goal of securing a selfsustainable defense capability that can respond to existing and future
unspecified threats, actively carrying out improvements in force structure
which involve transforming the military into a technology-intensive force,
cultivating the ability to rapidly react to present threats, procuring sufficient
combat defense power, and reinforcing the basis of R&D (research and
development) and defense industry.
As a core strategy to establish a self-reliant and advanced national defense
system in preparation for future information warfare, our military will
construct an integrated information system of national defense based on
intelligence, arrange an actual training support system, and strengthen


-----

Goals and Direction of Defense
Policy

information-oriented education for our soldiers.
Appreciating the contribution the ROK-US alliance has made in deterring
war and maintaining peace on the Korean Peninsula for the past half-century,
the ROK Armed Forces, to further develop ROK-US military relations, will
continue to conduct serious research on the common objective and direction to
be pursued by the alliance in the future. Above all, coordination and
cooperation between the ROK and the US on the basis of mutual respect are
crucial. Through “The Future of the ROK-US Alliance Policy Initiative,”the
military will formulate a blueprint of the alliance for the 21st century and
explore ways to better cope with the security environment of tomorrow.
The direction for further developing the overall ROK-US alliance focuses on
consolidating the future ROK-US alliance and strengthening deterrence on the
Korean Peninsula by jointly preparing and adjusting to the changing regional
and global security environment and exploring a plan to develop an alliance
that reflects both the US global strategy and the ROK's security situation.
As regards to the relocation of USFK (US Forces Korea) military bases, i.e.
whether to integrate and/or close USFK military bases, especially concerning
the redeployment of the 2nd US Infantry Division, careful consideration
should be made in connection with the security situation in Korea. As for the
LPP (Land Partnership Plan), modifications will be made when required,
while the early relocation of Yongsan Garrison will be pursued in a manner
that maximizes the efficient use of national property and contributes to the
improved conditions for the US forces and to a strengthened combined
defense posture.
The development of the combined command system is a critical security issue
which forms the central pillar of ROK-US military cooperation, and so any
misunderstanding or friction should be avoided in the process of carrying out
its development program. When Korea becomes fully capable of executing
operations independently, this issue could be settled in a smooth manner.
Therefore, in the long term, the development of the combined command system
should be pursued under broad public support and under close consultation
with the US, in a manner that does not weaken the ROK-US alliance.


-----

“Policy of Peace and Prosperity”
and Defense Policy

For foreign military cooperation, military diplomacy activities that are
objective-oriented need to be pursued while a future-oriented partnership will
be pursued with Japan, a broad cooperative relationship with China, and
diversified military exchange and industry cooperation with Russia. Through
these plans, our military will seek policy coordination with the US and Japan,
and induce China and Russia to play a more constructive role vis-｀a-vis North
Korea. Additionally, our military will bolster activities to increase practical
benefits such as defense export diversification, and also actively participate in
international arms control and multilateral security cooperation.
With the purpose of enhancing our nation's stature in the international
community and advancing our national interest, our military will actively
dispatch troops abroad. However, when it is not a UN PKO (Peace Keeping
Operation), the government will decide whether to dispatch troops after
considering the circumstances in the area of conflict or war, the support from
international society, public opinion and its feasibility.
Currently, the number of troops sent abroad exceeds 1,473 in seven regions
around the world, including troops sent to support UN PKO and to
participate in the international coalition against terrorism. They play an
important role in uplifting our military's stature and in strengthening selfdefense capabilities. In order to keep up with overseas troop dispatches whose
importance is growing, our military will build an international peace support
center, actively participate in UN stand-by arrangement reserve system, and
legislate and supplement related regulations.
For substantial peace on the Korean Peninsula to take root, confidence
building and reduction of tension between the two Koreas are essential, and
on that account, our military will take actions to gradually build military
confidence based on firm deterrence against the North.

3. Continuous Reform of National Defense System

The military of a nation is the cornerstone of national defense, and therefore
its response posture and capability needs to be strengthened through


-----

Goals and Direction of Defense
Policy

continuous self-evaluation and self-reform in preparation for changing
battlefield environments and the challenges they represent. By doing so, the
military can set clear directions and objectives to maintain vigilance in the
organization and continue to serve as an engine for development.
Defense reform is a mission to satisfy the aim of “enhancing combat
capabilities” by improving efficiency, effectiveness and future-oriented
mindset of the defense organization. In other words, it is a continuous task of
advancing the entire system of defense in order to invigorate the military's
mission-accomplishing posture.
For the past 50 years, our military has provided the basis for national
development by maintaining a strong defense posture, and has continuously
developed into today's elite fighting force. However, notwithstanding the
growth and dramatic development achieved by the ROK Armed Forces, we
are deeply conscious of the calls for a change in times and growing demand by
the people for a change in the armed forces.
Based on this recognition, the MND is closely looking to see whether there
are unreasonable procedures, practices or inefficient aspects in management to
set the basic aims of “moral reform,”“national defense system improvement,”
“combat power structure consolidation,”and has selected and is implementing main reform initiatives.

**[Figure 2-3] Main Reform Initiatives for National Defense**

①Personnel Management Reform

②Defense Organization Consolidation

③Reform of Military Service and Reserves System

④Improvement of the Military Judicial System

⑤Efficiency Enhancement in Building Military Power


First, to reform the personnel management system, we will rationalize the
hierarchical structure in the military and make personnel management more
efficient. To achieve this goal, the rules of fair competition will be upheld; the
rank system of each military service will be readjusted to guarantee


-----

“Policy of Peace and Prosperity”
and Defense Policy

appropriate promotional rate; the number of those who failed in promotion
will be gradually reduced and those who failed to get timely promotion will
get certain benefits to bolster their service in the military.
Second, “the restructuring of defense organization”is a plan to make our
nation more flexible to future defense surroundings. To this end, our military
aims to reach the level where it can cultivate elite forces. By reinforcing and
reorganizing the function of the MND, JCS and the headquarters of the three
services, our national defense will be able to function actively and effectively.
Third, by reforming the military service and reserve forces system, our
military intends to lessen the burden on taxpayers and enhance the capability
of our reserves. With the service period of the military and other alternative
services being reduced by 2 months, our military is seeking a plan to secure
sufficient military manpower. As for the reserve forces system, an
improvement plan will be proposed in 2003 and implemented in 2004,
considering the required number of reserves according to the current security
situation.
Fourth, reforming the military judicial system aims to protect the rights and
interests of both officers and service members by employing “a circuit pool of
military judges,”which works directly under the MND, limiting the
commander's authority for confirmation, and expanding the trial defense
counsel program.
Finally, with the purpose of raising efficiency in force enhancement, the
decision-making process in the Force Improvement Programs (FIPs) will be
changed into the form of “an open decision-making system.”In order to
invigorate national defense R&D, our military will review all relevant matters
and work to strengthen the foundation of defense industry.
In past years, there have been numerous national defense reform initiatives.
Some were successful while others were altered or discontinued. The main
reason why some of these initiatives failed was because they were planned
and carried out by a small number of people, which lacked full coordination
and cooperation. In the forthcoming future, all reforms will be planned and
carried out only when every member of an organization participates actively,


-----

Goals and Direction of Defense
Policy

and when a consensus is formed through various discussions and
negotiations. The pursuit of the initiative, “a reform in which everybody
participates,”will hopefully result in success.

4. Improving Service Member's Welfare and Barracks Environment

The Republic of Korea has achieved exponential economic growth in the
past few decades. As a result, overall living standards and welfare conditions
have shown great improvement. Our military has also made various efforts to
improve the welfare of service members and their barracks life within the
purview of available resources. However, these improvements are still greatly
shy compared to the current economic and social development and service
members' expectations. The morale and welfare of soldiers are the basis of
combat power in wartime. In order for the military to perform its duties
without fail, conditions where soldiers can fully concentrate on their duties are
imperative. Thus, the military has made it one of its top priorities to make
innovative improvements in service members' welfare and barracks life
during the term of the participatory government.
First, welfare improvements will be focused on renovating outdated
barracks and officer's quarters, increasing service members' pay to a realistic
level at which basic needs can be met, and balancing welfare benefits among
each of the military services.
In addition, the military plans to foster a “more desirable military culture.”
In other words, the military will take measures to do away with unreasonable
conventions, to create a sound environment for normal duty performance and
to establish firm vocational ethics and instill military values amongst officers,
thereby nurturing an advanced military culture.
The military is also working to guarantee employment and stable living
conditions for retired and discharged service members, a task that calls for
immediate attention. To do so, the military plans to broaden employment
opportunities, while at the same time systemizing career guidance programs
to help enhance social adaptation.


-----

“Policy of Peace and Prosperity”
and Defense Policy

5. Procuring an Appropriate Level of Defense Budget

Maintaining a firm security posture is vital for the government to push
ahead with the “Policy of Peace and Prosperity”and to establish a peace
regime on the Korean Peninsula. To meet these ends, the military will set clear
policy objectives in defense, designate key points around which detailed plans
will be formulated. The ROK Armed Forces will channel its efforts to
consistently pursue these points.
The ROK Armed Forces, in particular, will focus on improving welfare and
increasing morale of service members, preparing defense capabilities fit for
future warfare, and enhancing combat readiness through substantial exercise
and training. It also aims to maintain a firm defense posture that can
guarantee peace by continuous and sweeping defense reforms. Furthermore,
the military will realize “a self-reliant and advanced national defense”which
is our military's blueprint for the future in ensuring the nation's survival and
upholding the national interests in an uncertain security environment.
To do so, the military must first procure a sufficient defense budget.
Currently, the national defense budget is appropriated at around 2.7% of the
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) as of 2003. This allocation rate has been
declining for the past few years, rendering overall maintenance and
investment in future defense buildup even more problematic.
The ROK Armed Forces projects that, in order to overcome these impediments and build a military force that can guarantee the nation's survival and
prosperity, a budget at the 3.2~3.5% level of GDP must be appropriated for
national defense.
Internally, the military will explore ways to make efficient use of the national
defense budget by scientifically analyzing defense planning and raising
awareness of service members. Externally, it will also strive to forge a public
consensus of the need for an appropriate defense budget whilst endeavoring
to elicit the full support at the government level.


-----

#### Part Three

## Establishment of a Firm Defense Posture

**Chapter One**
**Military Preparedness of the ROK Armed Forces**

**Chapter Two**
**Operations of ROK Armed Forces**

**Chapter Three**
**Operations of USFK and Augmentation Forces**

**Chapter Four**
**Combat Task-Oriented Training and Exercises**


-----

Military Preparedness of the ROK
Armed Forces

##### Chapter One Chapter One

### Military Preparedness of the ROK Armed Forces

North Korea, which has continued to increase its military capability and
strengthen its combat readiness posture despite economic difficulties, broke
off from the 1994 Agreed Framework and is continuing its nuclear
development, thereby heightening the level of tension on the Korean
Peninsula.
Pursuant to such posture undertaken by North Korea, the ROK Armed
Forces is reinforcing its military preparedness through the maintenance of
enhanced surveillance of North Korean military activities and the strong ROKUS combined defense posture, in order to simultaneously respond to both
military threats (such as infiltration, local provocation, and all-out war) and
non-military threats such as terrorism.

###### A. Preparedness against Infiltration and Local Provocation

As witnessed by the Gangreung submarine infiltration attempt in 1996,
infiltrations along the East Sea and on Ganghwa Island, the semi-submersible
infiltration attempts on Yeosu and armed infiltration on Mukho in 1998, the
Yeonpyeong Sea Battle in 1999, the violation of ROK territorial waters by
North Korean commercial boats in 2001, and the West Sea skirmish in 2002,
North Korea has constantly perpetrated acts of provocation on the ROK.
Without any major change in North Korea's strategy to communize the ROK,
such acts are expected to continue in the future. In particular, there is a
possibility that such military adventurism may be used to influence the


-----

Establishment of a Firm
Defense Posture

negotiations regarding the nuclear issue.
Also, during the season of thick crab
foliage, the possibility of a military clash is
inherent.
Through the use of ROK-US combined
surveillance assets, the ROK Armed Forces
maintains a 24-hour surveillance posture on
all North Korean military movements and
potential infiltrators in order to respond in
a timely and effective manner to any form
of military or non-military aggression. In
particular, in preparation against the
possibility of any intended or unintended
military clash in the West Sea during the

Coast Barrier Guard

crab fishing season, the ROK Armed Forces
has enhanced combat readiness according to the new guidelines for military
engagement issued in 2002. In addition, the quality of patrol forces along the
DMZ, the coastlines and riverbanks is being improved, while measures for the
response system in the Korea Air Defense Identification Zone (KADIZ) are
being supplemented. Furthermore, contingency plans at the construction sites
of the Gyeongui (Seoul-Sinuiju) and the Donghae inter-Korean railways and
roads have been put in place. Also, counter-terrorism forces are readily
available in case of terrorist activities and any other non-military aggressions,
with the cooperation from other related agencies.
As regards to establishing an integrated civilian-government-military
defense posture, central and local meetings were held on integrated defense
(in January and February of 2003) to promote the importance of integrated
defense and to forge a consensus. By revising the Integrated Defense Law,
applying the decrees and guidelines of this law, and conducting the
comprehensive rear-area exercise called the Hwarang Training, the MND is
enhancing the implementation posture of integrated defense operations and
strengthening defense posture on major national facilities.


-----

Military Preparedness of the ROK
Armed Forces

###### B. Strengthening ROK-US Combined Crisis Management System

The strength of the ROK-US
combined readiness posture has
been maintained and reinforced
through cooperative efforts of
ROK-US CFC, ROK JCS and
Strategic Operations Command.
The importance of the ROK-US
combined crisis management
system is based on its role in
putting a quick end to a crisis Defense Minister's Inspection of CFC
situation and deterring war upon

Defense Minister's Inspection of CFC

unforeseen political, economic, diplomatic, or military crisis that either
threaten national security or create a crisis situation that necessitates the use
of military assets and troops. To more actively respond to the current security
situation, the ROK Armed Forces has been strengthening the ROK-US
combined crisis management system based on the shared sense of importance
for the ROK-US policy coordination system.
To ensure that the ROK and the US can take consistent measures from a
shared perspective at a time of crisis on the Korean Peninsula, the combined
crisis management consultative body will be strengthened in its crisis
management and military coordination functions. The two countries will also
continue to enhance the abilities of crisis management personnel to react to
such crises. They will undergo periodic training on different types of potential
crisis scenarios. In addition, we are planning to improve the performance level
of the Command Post Automation System (CPAS) and make it interoperable
so as to guarantee prompt situation awareness and an effective remedy for the
situation through timely information sharing between the crisis management
units of the MND, JCS and CFC.


-----

Establishment of a Firm
Defense Posture

###### C. Readiness Posture for All-Out War

Regardless of any changes in
inter-Korean relations or the
national security environment,
the mission of the ROK Armed
Forces remains the same: to
defend the homeland and to
protect the lives and properties
of its people. While tension on
the peninsula is increasing due
to the North Korean regime's Air Defense System
continuing efforts to reinforce its

Air Defense System

military strength through its “Military First Policy”and the pursuit of nuclear
weapons, the ROK Armed Forces remains ready to deter any aggression by
the North and counter any such act of aggression.
First, in preparation of a military attack by North Korea, the ROK Armed
Forces is making preparations to respond to North Korea's long-range artillery
and WMD in order to address the threat posed on the capital region in the
early phase of the war. Also, operational plans (OPLAN) are being updated to
reflect the new security and the fast changing operational environments.
Based on the ROK-US combined defense posture, surveillance on enemy
activities and permanent war readiness are at hand, while the ability to carry
out OPLANs are enhanced through more virtual and scientific training and
exercise as well as other tactical discussions. At the same time, measures have
been taken to deter any possibilities of the construction sites of the Gyeongui
(Seoul-Sinuiju) and the Donghae inter-Korean railways and roads being used
by the North as maneuver paths, and C4I and information operations systems
are being updated to reflect the advances in the fields of information
technology and science.


-----

Operations of ROK Armed Forces

##### Chapter TChapter Two wo

### Operations of ROK Armed Forces

###### A. Army

The ROK Army constitutes the core of our national defense. Its mission in
peacetime is to deter war, along with the Navy and the Air Force; its wartime
mission is to achieve victory in all ground combat.
Organized into the ROK Army Headquarters, three Field Army Commands,
the Army Aviation Operations Command, the Special Warfare Command, the
Capital Defense Command, and units to support these commands, the ROK
Army consists of 10 corps, 47 divisions, 19 brigades, with approximately
560,000 personnel, 2,400 tanks, 2,300 armored vehicles, and 5,200 pieces of
field artillery.


|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Troops|Tanks|Armored Vehicles|Field Artillery|Missiles|Helicopters|
|560,000|2,400|2,300|5,200|20|610|



**[Figure 3-1] Organization of the ROK Army**

ROK Army HQ

Field Army Army Aviation Special Warfare Capital Defense
Commands Operations Command Command Command

Corps Logistics Training and
Command Doctrine Command

**[Table 3-1] Army Manpower/Equipment**

**Troops** **Tanks** **Armored Vehicles** **Field Artillery** **Missiles** **Helicopters**

※ Field Artillery: MRLs included, Missiles: ATACMS included


-----

Establishment of a Firm
Defense Posture

The First and Third Field Armies have the mission to defend the region that
spans from the Military Demarcation Line (MDL) to the Capital area. The
mission of the Second Field Army is to defend the entire rear area, including
the coastlines. The Army Aviation Operations Command provides maneuver
forces with fire, airlift, and reconnaissance support, while the Special Warfare
Command is tasked to collecting intelligence, locating enemy targets, and
carrying out other designated missions. The Capital Defense Command has
the mission of maintaining the security of the Seoul area as well as protecting
the infrastructure of the city.
Each field army, corps command, and division has its own artillery units
that provide effective fire support for the maneuver forces under it. These
artillery units possess various sorts of artillery, targeting equipment, fire
control systems, and high-tech weapons that make them capable of timely and
sustained fire support.

###### B. Navy

Aside from deterring war in peacetime, the ROK Navy's missions include
upholding national sovereignty, protecting maritime rights, supporting
government's foreign policies, and enhancing national prestige. Its wartime
missions include exercising control over the seas, ensuring the safety of our
maritime activities, denying enemy's maritime activities, protecting the

nation's lifeline which is the sea lines of communications (SLOC), and carrying
out surprise landing operations on the enemy's flanks and rear areas.
The ROK Navy Headquarters, the ROK Naval Operations Command,
Marine Corps Command, and support units make up the ROK Navy. It
consists of three fleets under the ROK Naval Operations Command, two
divisions and one brigade under the Marine Corps Headquarters, with 67,000
troops, 180 vessels, and 70 aircraft.


-----

Operations of ROK Armed Forces



**[Figure 3-2] Organization of the ROK Navy**

ROK Navy HQ

Operations Command Marine Corps HQ Logistics Command Education and Training

Command

Fleet Command Marine Corps
divisions/brigade


**[Table 3-2] Navy Manpower/Equipment**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Troops|Submarines/ Submersibles|Combat Vessels|Support Vessels|Aircraft|
|67,000|10|150|20|70|



The ROK Naval Operations Command has vessels and aircraft to conduct
major naval component operations such as anti-submarine warfare (ASW),
mine operations, landing, salvage, and special operations. Each fleet possesses
combat vessels such as destroyers, frigates, corvettes and high-speed boats, to
guard its operational zone of responsibility. The marines possess fire support
capabilities of its own and a wide range of landing equipment including
amphibious tanks with which they conduct landing operations.

###### C. Air Force

The Air Force constantly keeps a watchful eye on the enemy and maintains a
high-level combat readiness posture that allows for response, such as
retaliatory strikes, to any enemy provocation. The mission of the Air Force
during war is to achieve air superiority so as to prevent the enemy from
gaining access to air space, to neutralize the enemy's will by destroying its
principal and potential war-fighting capability, and finally, to give full support


-----

Establishment of a Firm
Defense Posture

to ground and naval operations.
The ROK Air Force Headquarters, Operations Command, and Support
Command constitute the ROK Air Force. The ROK Air Force Headquarters
has two wings subordinated to it, and the Operations Command has the Air
Defense Artillery Command, Air Defense & Control Wing as well as nine
tactical fighter wings with approximately 63,000 personnel and 840 aircraft
including KF-16 fighters.

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Troops|Fighters(550)|Special Aircraft(70)|Support Aircraft (220)|
|63,000|KF/F-16(150)|RF-4C(20)|Transport(30) / Training(160) / Helicopters(30)|



**[Figure 3-3] Organization of the ROK Air Force**

ROK Air Force HQ

Operations Composite Tactical Airlift Logistics Education &
Command Wing Wing Command Training Command

Air Defense Air Defense & Tactical
Artillery Command Control Wing Fighter Wings

※ Education & Training Command operates 1 Training Wing.

**[Table 3-3] Air Force Manpower/Equipment**

**Troops** **Fighters(550)** **Special Aircraft(70)** **Support Aircraft (220)**

63,000 KF/F-16(150) RF-4C(20) Transport(30) / Training(160) / Helicopters(30)


Air operations are under the direct control of the Theater Air Control Center
(TACC). Currently, the Air Force operates aircraft that are capable of precision
bombing and carrying long-range air-to-air missiles. It can also provide
support to ground and naval forces with close air support as part of joint airground-sea operations.


-----

Operations of ROK Armed Forces

###### D. Reserve Forces

Based on the “Local Reserve Forces Establishment Law”of 1961, the first
Reserve Forces were created immediately after the armed infiltrators from
North Korea attempted an assault on Cheong Wa Dae (Presidential Residence)
in January 1968. Since then, the Reserve Forces have played a pivotal role in
deterring North Korea's war provocations. Currently, the Reserve Forces stand
at 3.04 million strong, organized into regional and workplace units. The MND,
through the Army and Navy Headquarters, commands the Reserve Forces,
and the Military Manpower Agency is responsible for maintenance of their
structure. During peacetime, reservists receive regular education and training,
while maintaining their ability to defend their homeland. During wartime,
reservists become supplementary manpower to create new units, reinforcing
the existing units and serving as replacements for combat losses.

**[Figure 3-4] Command Structure of the Reserve Forces**


Command Operation

Ministry of National Defense Organization Resource

Management

Army HQ Navy HQ Military Manpower
Agency

Designated Reserves Designated Reserves Designated Reserves

Local MMA

Training Unit Training Unit(Navy) Training Unit(Marines) Offices

Regiment
Regiment

Battalion Battalion

Regional and Workplace
Reserve Forces


-----

Establishment of a Firm
Defense Posture

##### Chapter ThreeChapter Three

### Operations of USFK and Augmentation Forces

Since its arrival in Korea after the establishment of the “ROK-US Mutual
Defense Treaty”in October 1953, US Forces Korea (USFK) has remained a
symbol of the ROK-US alliance and continues to contribute to the peace and
stability of Northeast Asia including the Korean Peninsula.

###### A. United States Forces in Korea

The Commanding General of the United Nations Command (UNC)/
Combined Forces Command (CFC) also commands USFK. Eighth US Army
(EUSA), US Naval Forces Korea, US Air Force Korea, US Marine Forces Korea,
and the Special Operations Command Korea make up USFK. In case of a

**[Figure 3-5] Organization of USFK**


USFK Operational

Control

US Naval US Marine US Air Forces US Special
8th US Army
Forces Korea Forces Korea Korea Operations
Command
Korea

2nd US Infantry 17th Aviation 6th Cavalry 19th Theater 7th US Air Force
Division Brigade Brigade support Command Command

8th Military 501st Military 1st Signal 18th Medical 8th Combat 51st Combat
Police Brigade Intelligence Brigade Command Wing Wing
Brigade


-----

Operations of USFK and
Augmentation Forces

contingency on the Korean Peninsula, the USFK Commanding General is in
full control of the operations of the seventh US Air Force.
USFK stands at 37,000 men strong, made up of 28,000 in the Army, 8,700 in
the Air Force, and 400 in the Navy as well as the Marines. EUSA, centered
around the Second Infantry Division and two aviation brigades, possesses 140
M1A1 tanks, 170 Bradley armored vehicles, 30 155mm self-propelled
howitzers, 30 MRLs, 70 AH-64 helicopters as well as a wide range of surfaceto-surface and surface-to-air missiles such as the Patriot, adding up to the
capability to perform any required tasks under any circumstances.
US Air Force possesses approximately 100 aircraft: 70 advanced fighters
such as F-16, 20 A-10 anti-tank attack aircraft, and other reconnaissance
aircraft including U-2s. With this kind of highly modern equipment, US Air
Force Korea has sufficient capability to launch all-weather attacks and to
conduct air support operations under any circumstances. Limited manpower
and equipment are allocated to US Naval Forces Korea, US Marine Forces
Korea, and Special Operations Command Korea in peacetime. However, the
US Pacific Command will augment these forces and assume command should
a crisis or war erupt, thus providing them with a higher combat capability.

###### B. Augmentation Forces

US augmentation forces, including the army, navy, air force, and marine
corps, are composed of approximately 690,000 troops. The augmented forces
comprise 2 army corps that can execute rapid multi-dimensional maneuver; 5
carrier battle groups with highly advanced fighters capable of executing multidimensional naval operations; 32 tactical fighter wings that can secure air
superiority, attack enemy's targets in depth, and respond to weapons of mass
destruction; and 2 marine expeditionary forces stationed in Okinawa and on
the continental US.
There are three types of augmentation capability: Flexible Deterrence


-----

Establishment of a Firm
Defense Posture

Options (FDOs), Force Module Packages
(FMPs), and the Time-Phased Forces
Deployment Data (TPFDD). These are
executed through a unit integration
process, when the Commanding General of
CFC requests them and the US JCS orders
them in case of a crisis on the Korean
Peninsula.
FDOs are ready to be implemented when
war is imminent. They can be classified
into political, economic, diplomatic, and
military options. Approximately 150
deterrence options are ready to be Aircraft Carrier, USS Kitty Hawk
employed. FMPs are measures that

Aircraft Carrier, USS Kitty Hawk

augment combat or combat support units that need the most support in the
early phase of the war should war deterrence efforts through FDOs fail.
Included in the FMPs are elements such as rapid deployable aircraft and
carrier battle groups. Under TPFDD, in which FDO and FMP are included,
key forces are planned ahead of time to be deployed in case of an outbreak of
war. The types of forces under TPFDD are, in-place force, or forces currently
deployed to the peninsula; pre-planned forces, or forces of time-phased
deployment in a contingency; and on-call forces, which could be deployed if
needed.
Since 1994, ROK forces and US forces have been maintaining reception and
logistical procedures of augmented forces in the case of contingency through
the annual RSOI exercise.
Furthermore, USFK plans to implement a revolutionary force augmentation
plan in order to enhance CFC's ability to deter North Korean aggression and to
safeguard the security of the ROK.


-----

Combat Task Oriented Training
and Exercises

##### Chapter FourChapter Four

### Combat Task-Oriented Training and Exercises

###### A. Combined and Joint Training and Exercises

The ROK Armed Forces is increasing its ability to carry out military conflicts
through combined and joint training and exercises that apply scientific
methodology. Major combined training and exercises include the Ulchi Focus
Lens (UFL) Exercise, the Reception, Staging, Onward Movement and
Integration (RSOI) Exercise, the Foal Eagle (FE) Exercise, and the Rim of the
Pacific (RIMPAC) Exercise. Major joint training and exercises include the
Corps-level field training exercises (FTX), the Amnokgang Exercise, and
Hwarang Training.

1. Ulchi Focus Lens (UFL) Exercise

The Ulchi Focus Lens Exercise
is a comprehensive Command
Post Exercise (CPX) designed to
enhance wartime leadership
and war-fighting capabilities as
well as to ensure fluidity in
performing specific warfare
procedures. The exercise has
been performed annually since

combination of the Focus Lens


ROK-US Combined River Crossing Training


-----

Establishment of a Firm
Defense Posture

Exercise, which has been conducted under the control of the United Nations
Command since 1954, and the Ulchi Exercise that has been held by the ROK
since North Korea attempted an armed commando raid on Cheong-Wa-Dae
on January 21, 1968.
During the Ulchi Focus Lens Exercise, the ROK government's crisis
management and ROK-US combined crisis management processes during the
early stages of war are depicted through various situations from each
operational phase.

2. Reception, Staging, Onward Movement and Integration (RSOI)
Exercise

The RSOI Exercise is a command post exercise conducted under the control
of the ROK-US Combined Forces Command (CFC). Contents of this computersimulated exercise include the processes of reception, staging, movement to
the forward area, and integration of US augmentation forces that would be
deployed to the peninsula during war. Also included in these exercises are
wartime support, mutual logistics support, mobilization, combined rear area
coordination (CRAC) tasks and mastery of the restoration procedures of
combat power on the part of the ROK Armed Forces. The RSOI Exercise has
been conducted annually since 1994. The ROK MND, JCS, headquarters of
each service, and operational commands participate in the exercise. The US
has CFC, USFK, Space Command,
Transportation Command and
augmentation forces taking part in
the exercise.

3. Foal Eagle (FE) Exercise

The Foal Eagle Exercise is an
annual ROK-US combined field
training exercise conducted since
1961. Its purposes are to demonstrate Foal Eagle Exercise


Foal Eagle Exercise


-----

Combat Task Oriented Training
and Exercises

ROK-US military resolve to deter war on the Korean Peninsula and to improve
the combined and joint operational posture. Since 2002, it has been conducted
simultaneously with the RSOI Exercise in late March in order to guarantee
realistic exercise conditions and improved results.

4. Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC) Exercise

Conducted biennially (every
even year) under the leadership of
the US Third Fleet, RIMPAC is a
multinational, combined sea
maneuver exercise in which the
ROK, the US, Australia, Canada,
Chile, the United Kingdom, and
Japan have participated since 1971.
The ROK Navy has participated in
the exercise seven times from 1990 Rim of the Pacific Exercise

Rim of the Pacific Exercise

to 2002. The exercise is held with
the objective to increase mutual cooperation and enhance the combined
operations capabilities among the countries around the rim of the Pacific
Ocean so that they can ensure the safety of major sea lines of communications
(SLOCs) and improve their combined response capabilities in the event of
conflict at sea.

5. Amnokgang Exercise

As the ROK military's CPX under the command of the JCS since 1996, the
Amnokgang Exercise is conducted every May, with the JCS and the
operational commands playing central roles. The CPX is used to master the
war execution procedures and enhance the operational command capabilities
of the ROK military. During the Amnokgang Exercise, the JCS and operational
commands participate as the supervisory body while other units and
organizations are grouped into either a response team or an execution team


-----

Establishment of a Firm
Defense Posture

and conduct the exercise based on the war game model in their respective
command posts and combat simulation center.
With the Amnokgang Exercise, the JCS has improved wartime combat
capability restoration procedures and the wartime support requirement
production and support system by mastering the operational command and
staff activity procedures and wartime transition procedures. In particular, JCS
has considerably increased the productivity of these exercises by operating
CPAS since 1999.

6. Hoguk (“Guarding the Nation”) Exercise

Conducted under the command of the ROK JCS since 1996, Hoguk Exercise
is a large-scale joint exercise in which all services gather to jointly execute
operation plans along coastal and inland axes of movement.
Since 2001, fast and fair evaluation has been made possible by adopting the
Joint Battle Evaluation war game model produced in Korea. Also, by reflecting
the results of the tactical discussion of operational plans on the draft of new
training plans, it has significantly enhanced the results of training.

###### B. Major Training of the Three Services

In a bid to maximize individual capabilities to perform combat missions,
exercises and training on varying scales are conducted in each service on
specific training areas, land or sea, with the characteristics of Korean terrain
and North Korea's tactics being taken into account.

1. Army

ROK Army training is classified into two main types: individual training
and collective training. All army training is conducted according to unit size,
type, function, and branch in order to maintain operational capability for
enemy's infiltration and local provocation in peacetime and to win all ground


-----

Combat Task Oriented Training
and Exercises

combat in wartime. Individual
training puts emphasis on
Military Occupational Specialty
(MOS) training necessary for
individuals to master basic
combat skills. It equips soldiers
with professionalism towards
their duties based on mental
discipline and physical strength.
In collective training, intense and

Air Assault Training

practical training consists of small
unit tactics training including live-fire exercises and two-side training using
Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement System(MILES) equipment per platoon
and squad.
Battalion training focuses on field maneuver training and situational
training. Cold weather regimental training includes Regimental Combat Team
(RCT) training designed to perfect combined arms and joint forces operations
execution capabilities and is conducted between December and February of
the following year.
Division-level field training exercise is carried out under the supervision of a
corps commander for one week or more during the term of a division
commander. Division training is focused on integrated battle execution and
firepower coordination, obstacle construction and denial operations, chemical
and biological operations, and combat service support.
The corps and division-level Battle Command Training Program (BCTP) is
used to nurture the combat command capabilities of corps and division-level
unit commanders and staff. BCTP includes mastering tactical decision-making
processes, strengthening the operational capabilities of integrated combat
power, and assessing battlefield experiences and field standing operating
procedures. In addition, BCTP significantly enhances the corps and divisionlevel commanders' leadership and their staff capabilities by applying
“Changjo (Creation) 21 Model”that fits the characteristics of Korean terrain


-----

Establishment of a Firm
Defense Posture

and operational concepts. BCTP is held under direct supervision of the ROK
Army Headquarters within one year after the arrival of a new unit
commander.
Cooperative and joint training is conducted by each operational unit, and
the training includes anti-tank attack training, joint air-ground operations
training, joint air-ground-sea operations training, joint amphibious training,
and river-crossing training. Conducted in close consultation with USFK,
combined forces training include air assault training, NBC training, and
counter-fire operations training.
Miscellaneous training is carried out in extreme situations simulating
combat during the year in each unit as well: night training, cold weather
training, ranger training, NBC training, and search-and-rescue training. These
types of miscellaneous training are conducted in every unit at each level
according to the annual training program.
To create an atmosphere where one can be fully responsible for the training
and education given to soldiers and officers and to encourage creative
programs of instruction, subordinate commanders of every unit are entrusted
with the full responsibility for the proper education and training of their men.
A comprehensive development plan on training areas has been drawn up.
Based on this plan, the ROK Army is promoting the establishment of
integrated regional training areas for administrative or military districts. The
Army is also in the process of building the Korea Combat Training Center
(KCTC) where actual combat training using MILES equipment can be
conducted against specialized opposing forces.

2. Navy

The ROK Navy enhances its combat execution capability through various
types of naval component operational training events such as anti-submarine,
anti-surface vessel and amphibious operations, mine warfare, search and
rescue, and special operations.
Vessels larger than corvettes are mainly used for anti-submarine, anti-air,


-----

Combat Task Oriented Training
and Exercises

and electronic warfare training. All
battleships are utilized primarily
for offensive and defensive training
with a special focus on threedimensional and comprehensive
maneuver training in order to deter
large-scale enemy maritime
provocations, thus upgrading naval
wartime capabilities. The navy's
amphibious operations capabilities Naval Maneuver Training

Naval Maneuver Training

are being upgraded through
amphibious assault and surprise amphibious raid training which employs
landing craft. Mine warfare craft are used to foster mine-sweeping and minelaying capabilities, which will enable the navy to respond effectively to
already laid enemy mines.
Special warfare units are trained to enhance their capabilities to conduct
special operations by training for coastal reconnaissance, surprise attack, and
survival. Submarine units receive virtual combat training on such missions as
port blockades, anti-submarine operations, surveillance of enemy surface
activities, and torpedo launching.
Aviation units concentrate on enhancing their capabilities to conduct threedimensional operations through the execution of surface patrol operations and
anti-submarine training in conjunction with surface vessels, and through
training on guiding missile attacks on targets beyond radar range.
Once a year since 1993, the ROK Navy has been conducting a large-scale
Integrated Surface Maneuver Training in which all available naval forces as
well as the army and the air force participate. Through this training, the navy
is developing joint operations execution capabilities based on multiple combat
concepts under multiple crisis situations. Three-dimensional training for
surface, underwater, and air assets is being intensified in order to block enemy
infiltration of special operations forces by high-speed landing craft.
The ROK Navy is vigorously conducting combined training and exercises


-----

Establishment of a Firm
Defense Posture

with the navies of the US and other allies with an eye to establishing a
combined maritime defense posture. We continue to exert our efforts in
upgrading the combined operations system between the navies of the ROK
and the US by improving the existing ROK-US combined training.
The ROK Navy is also in the process of increasing the frequency of Naval
Academy cadets' cruise training and expanding observer exchanges with
neighboring countries. When Korean warships visit a foreign country, or when
warships from a foreign country visit Korea, the navies of the two countries
conduct combined training, which not only raises Korea's international status
but also enhances the ROK Navy's operational capabilities.

3. Air Force

All ROK Air Force training is
conducted under the presence of
actual combat environment and
situation in order to successfully
secure air superiority and provide
ground and naval forces with
favorable conditions for operations
and seizing the initiative of war at
its earliest phase possible. To
achieve this end, ROK Air Force Patrol Flight Training of KF-16 Fighter

Patrol Flight Training of KF-16 Fighter

performs air defense, offensive
flight group, moving target attack, counter fire operations, close air support,
air reconnaissance, tactical airlift and search and rescue training, either alone
or through combined training with the US Air Force.
To create a real combat environment, air defense training utilizes simulated
enemy aircrafts using enemy infiltration tactics to detect, identify, intercept,
and destroy any enemy aircraft that intrudes by air. Offensive flight group
training is designed to enhance our ability to conduct deep operations and to
launch decisive attacks against enemy strategic targets. To reach this goal, low

-----

Combat Task Oriented Training
and Exercises

and medium-altitude navigation and tactical firing training are performed
against tactical targets.
In addition, through the use of KF-16 fighters that can carry out precision
attack, night and all-weather close air support training and joint anti-ship
attack trainings are conducted in order to facilitate joint operational capability.
Also, visual intelligence collection and distribution procedures are exercised
through air reconnaissance training as well as the ability to move forces and
supplies through tactical airlift training. Practical training is emphasized
through night search and rescue using NVG, NBC warfare training, and nonconventional warfare training.

###### C. Strengthening the Moral Education of Service Members

The ROK Armed Forces is taking steps to strengthen the moral education of
its officers and enlisted men serving under such an uncertain security
environment so as to make sure that their concept of national security and
value system are in agreement with the desired state of war readiness.
First, in order to secure the correct concept of the enemy, the current security
situation surrounding the Korean Peninsula as well as the unchanging threat
posed by North Korea are being educated, while the Government's “Policy of
Peace and Prosperity”must be pursued based on military strength. Also, in
regard to the ROK-US alliance, which forms one of the most important
foundations of our security, the necessity of the ROK-US alliance as well as the
role of USFK in the security of the Korean Peninsula are explained, along with
the economic and military benefits that USFK accompanies. Finally, the aim of
such moral education is to nurture a real soldier who has a desirable career
goal based on right values and ethics.
In order to realize such goals, former education system is being reformed to
reflect the changing realities. Second, the content of the education is being
reorganized according to its audiences, and text materials and learning tools


-----

Establishment of a Firm
Defense Posture

such as CATV are being utilized to maximize the result. Third, in
consideration of the trend that values individualism, the share of audio-visual
content is being increased while the number of books available through camp
libraries is being increased. Fourth, through the use of Defense Net and the
Defense satellite TV, a cyber education system is being constructed to enhance
the efficiency of moral education on a real-time basis. Finally, as a part of the
defense readiness posture, the importance of moral and psychological
education by the commanders of each level is being stressed with the aim of
nurturing leaders that will take full responsibility for their own men's
education status.
The importance of the role of the commander as the focal point of troop
moral education is well reflected in the curricula of service academies and
other officer candidate schools as well as various levels of post-graduate
officers training courses.


-----

#### Part Four

## Building a Future-Oriented Defense Capability

**Chapter One**
**Improving Force Structure**

**Chapter Two**
**Pursuing Defense Digitization**

**Chapter Three**
**Advancing the ROK-US Alliance**

**Chapter Four**
**Promoting Foreign Military Exchanges and Cooperation**

**Chapter Five**
**Reducing Tension and Establishing Peace on the Korean**
**Peninsula**


-----

Improving Force Structure

##### Chapter OneChapter One

### Improving Force Structure

###### A. Changes in Battlefield Environment

Pioneering developments in science and technology have shifted the focus of
traditional warfare from territorial conquests and mass destruction to a new
mode of warfare that aims to achieve information paralyses and center of
gravity strikes.
The recent war in Iraq is a perfect example that demonstrated the aspects of
future warfare by expanding the 3-dimensinal battlefield covering ground, sea
and air to a 5-dimensional battlefield including cyberspace and space. It also
transformed the manpoweroriented force structure to an
information intensive force
structure. A firm understanding of
the battlefield, intelligence sharing
and improved precision strikes
along with knowledge and
information, became the elements
that constitute the core military
strength. 3-Dimensional Integrated Battlefield
The War in Iraq, which clearly is

3-Dimensional Integrated Battlefield

a fundamental departure from the warfare of the Industrial Age, has exhibited
the complex aspects of future warfare that involve information and networkcentric warfare as well as long-range precision engagement. It proved that the
ability to conduct information and scientific war is the decisive factor in
military victory.


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

The US-UK Coalition Forces took the initiative in the War in Iraq with highly
sophisticated precision weapons, operating on the advanced C4I control
system. Precision strikes by aircraft and missiles neutralized the Iraqi
command and control systems. Armor-protected mechanized units were
employed to provide mobility for the ground operations. The Coalition Forces
suffered 650 casualties in the war. On the other hand, the Iraqi forces suffered
6,500 casualties with 7,300 prisoners of war and the disintegration of the rest
of its forces.
To cope with these changes in warfare and to prepare for the threats of today
and non-specific threats of tomorrow, ROK MND is pursuing improvements

in force structure to secure self-defense capabilities.


###### B. Military Structure Improvement

Dramatic advancements in weapons systems resulted in the overlapping of
the traditional battlefields of land, sea and air, with the boundaries between
services slowly disappearing. For this reason, victory in today's war is
heavily dependent on the level of cooperation and effective communication
between the different military services. And balanced developments among
the three services are being pursued to optimize the effects of integrated force
structure.
Efforts are also being made to restructure the military by simplifying the

multi-level chain of command to guarantee prompt response against any
local aggression and disputes. Furthermore, the force structure of the past 50
years with its heavy emphasis on quantitative traditional military strength is
expected to undergo a major transformation into high-tech intensive,
qualitative force structure by linking information and scientific technology.


-----

Improving Force Structure

###### C. Pursuit of Force Improvements

Under the premises of preparing for the threats of today and non-specific
threats of tomorrow, the objective of force improvements is to promptly secure
a self-defense capability that can respond to changes in security environment.
Accordingly, the first priority is to fully acquire the ability to counter existing
threats from North Korea. At the same time, the ability to counter non-specific
threats of the future will be developed while the basis of R&D and defense
industry will be strengthened.
In order to fully acquire the ability to counter existing threats from North
Korea, the ROK Armed Forces will overcome the quantitative advantage of
North Korea's military strength through acquisition of and qualitative
improvement in forces concerning surveillance, intelligence and precisionstrike weapons. In particular, the ability to counter asymmetric forces such as
WMD will be enhanced. In addition, to prepare for non-specific threats of the
future, “a minimum level of sufficient combat defense power”that can deny
enemy acts of aggression will be attained. Furthermore, digitized and
scientific force structure that is adequate to conduct future war will be
developed.
As a measure to solidify the foundation of defense industries and R&D, the
acquisition of various weapons systems from abroad is to be minimized. The
promotion of domestic R&D will receive priority while active efforts will be
made to meet the requirements to facilitate localization of imported parts and
promotion of future export.
On the other hand, efforts will be concentrated on the promotion of the
domestic defense industry, encouraging domestic research for advanced
weapons, and replacing the weapons parts produced from abroad with
domestically produced ones.
The main focus of FIPs of each service is as follows. First, surveillance and
intelligence collection capabilities over the Korean Peninsula theater and the
establishment of real-time automated command and control processing


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

system are crucial in C4I and electronic warfare. To this end, plans are being
made to secure the surveillance satellites, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs),
CPAS, and the tactical C4I system.
Maneuver/Strike forces structure is being improved with more emphasis
placed on quality than on quantity. Also, more emphasis will be given to the
acquisition of MLRS, K1A1 tanks, and K-9 self-propelled artillery to expand
capabilities in offensive mobile warfare and strategic target strikes.
For naval forces, the Korean destroyer (KDX-II), 7000-ton class destroyer
(KDX-III), LPX and 214-class submarines will be obtained to protect the
SLOCs and to expand its maritime control
capability.
Regarding the air and air-defense forces,
the decision to acquire F-15K fighter has
been made to maintain air superiority within
the air defense area and to secure the pinpoint strike capability of strategic targets as
well as long-range early warning systems
and strategic surveillance capabilities. In
addition, the attainment of the Airborne
Warning and Control system (AWACS) and
short-range air defense guided missiles will
also be pursued.


Korean Destroyer (KDX-II)


K1A1 Tanks


Next Generation Fighter (F-15K)


-----

Pursuing Defense Digitization

##### Chapter TChapter Twowo

### Pursuing Defense Digitization

###### A. Changes in Defense Digitization Environment

Due to the rapid developments in information and computer technology, the
paradigm of civilization is changing from industrial to information, and
firepower and maneuver-oriented modern warfare is changing into
information and knowledge-based warfare. As a result, the traditional
battlefields of land, sea, and air are expanding into space and cyberspace,
creating a demand for a network integrated information system.
As a core policy measure, the military is currently pursuing e-Defense
Vision 2015 to achieve the objectives of advanced defense digitization.

###### B. Pursuit of Defense Digitization and Its Goals

The objective of defense digitization is to establish the “National Defense
Integrated Information System”that will help achieve the vision of becoming
“Information/Knowledge Focused Elite Digitized Military.”Under the
objective-oriented policy, a gradual and systematic digitization process is
carried out. To achieve standardization and interoperability, user-oriented
digitization system is economically and efficiently being constructed by
utilizing national resources and receiving cooperation from industrial,
academic and research institutes.
The first stage of laying the information communication foundation system
is to build a national defense integrated information system by 2005. The
national defense integrated information system encompasses battlefield


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

**[Figure 4-1] Diagram of National Defense Integrated Information System**

**Information/Knowledge Based Elite Digital Military**

**National Defense Integrated Information System**

Battlefield Resource
Management **Interoperability** Management
Information Information

Information Communication Foundation System
(Computers, Information Infrastructure, Information Security System)


management information system and resource management information
system, which guarantee interoperability. The first stage of this project is to
build a basis and core information system by 2005. Its second stage is to
integrate all the functional systems to form an integrated information system
and then upgrade the systems on a gradual basis until they reach the level of
an advanced information system.

###### C. Building Integrated Defense Digitization System

1. Battlefield Management Information System

To visualize battlefields and enable prompt command decisions, the
integrated C4I system will build and operate the military information system,
operation planning and execution system and tactical resource distribution
system based on the CPAS. Furthermore, it will construct an intelligent
Information Integration System that enables command and control via a single
terminal both during peacetime and wartime by mutually interlocking the


-----

Pursuing Defense Digitization

national warfare management system, CFC C4I system and tactical C4I system
of each military service.
The ground-combat tactical C4I system aims to establish the combat
execution system by automating the combat execution procedure of tactical
units of the corps or subordinate level, which will detect, decide and strike
prior to the enemy. The system will be completed by 2006.
The naval tactical C4I system, based on the Korean Naval Tactical Data
System (KNTDS) and CPAS of the Naval Operations Command, plans to
integrate every battlefield function in order to circulate and share prompt and
accurate information needed for naval operations at the operations command
level and to maximize the cooperative engagement capability including
striking means.
The air-combat tactical C4I system will integrate the military information
system, which currently provides target, electromagnetic and atmospheric
information with the Master Control and Reporting Center (MCRC)-based
operation information management system into the Air Force Operations
Command-based operation information management system.

2. Resource Management Information System

Currently, the budget management system has been completed and is in full
operation in the budget drafting and management fields. The fields of the
budget investment and national defense financial information system will be
completed by 2003 and 2004 respectively. As of 2002, the medical management
system is currently operational in five hospitals including the Armed Forces
Capital Hospital. Four additional hospitals will be incorporated into this
system by 2003 and it will be expanded to a total of 16 hospitals in the long
term.
The ammunition and materiel information system is currently being
operated, and the international freight operation system will be developed by
2003. In addition, the equipment maintenance information system and
transportation information system will be developed by 2007. By procuring all


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

the commodities through the electronic commerce system and by
standardizing all facility operations of military service, the real-time
automation processes are currently in operation beginning with the year of
2003.
In relation to the fields of data distribution, the National Defense Office
Automation System will be changed to a web-based environment, completing
the conversion of the whole of the military into a single system. This change is
expected to provide a foundation for electronic administration and the sharing
of information and knowledge.

3. Information Communication System

The information network will have greater processing capabilities and will
be built extensively in connection with the national ultra-speed information
network for a better broadband multimedia information distribution. The
introduction of the Next Generation Network (NGN) concept will upgrade
strategic and tactical networks, and the computer system will be intelligent,
mobile and multi-functional. Computer facilities, which are currently scattered
over individual echelons, will be integrated into the Consolidated Intelligence
Management Office for national defense.
The information protection system safeguards the national defense
information infrastructure from a cyber attack. To prepare for future
information warfare, civil, government and military branches are maintaining
a cooperative system to improve related policies and system. Furthermore, a
multi-level information protection system, which is organically interlinked
with a variety of systems, will be constructed removing vulnerabilities
beforehand that may be exposed to various invasions. The development of
national defense cryptograph equipment will be continually enhanced.

4. Digitization Environment

The mid- and long-term development of national defense digitization will


-----

Pursuing Defense Digitization

reinforce visions, goals, and strategies of national defense which were
influenced by changes in information technology and the national defense
environment. In building the national defense integrated information system,
we will not only secure and standardize the common operating environment
but also promote mutual integration with the automated information system.

###### D. Building Support System for Battle Focused Training

In the field of education and training, a remote education system, which

continually integrates and supports school education, unit training and

education training support, will be developed by applying cutting-edge

information technology, thereby overcoming the limits imposed by space and

time. By 2010, this kind of system will be reflected in the curriculum of current

military training school by stages.

In the field of military library digitization, the library management and

operation system will be standardized and computerized; a database will be

constructed to share all of the information and library collections possessed by

each individual institute.

The army's project of digitized training field at the battalion-level will help

troops accumulate warfare experience in accordance with future battlefield

environments, and the project will be developed into the Korea Combat

Training Center (KCTC) by 2004. At the KCTC, new tactics and war technique

will be developed and verified. The troops will also be able to experience

combat training in an integrated cyber war-game multiplex.

The modeling & simulation system aims at developing a war-game model

on a functional and objective basis and this will be gradually integrated into a

Korean war-game model. To ensure real-time operational simulation and

decision-making support that can provide operation execution capabilities,


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

the modeling & simulation system will ultimately be developed as a dispersed

form of a war game system.

###### E. Strengthening Digitization Education of Service Members

Digitization education of service
members, which contributes to the
policy of national digitization education,
is focused on keeping up with the
knowledge-based information society.
Therefore, by improving the Internet
environment and continually securing
personal computers at a company level,
the project of digitization education will
provide an opportunity for cyber
education and language training of
military personnel. Digitization Education of Service Members


Digitization Education of Service Members


-----

Advancing the ROK-US Alliance

##### Chapter ThreeChapter Three

### Advancing the ROK-US Alliance

This year marks the 50[th] anniversary of the official inauguration of the ROKUS alliance. As the cornerstone of our nation's security, the ROK-US alliance
has contributed not only to the peace and stability of the Korean Peninsula for
the last 50 years but also to ROK's political development and economic
prosperity.
There have been numerous changes in the national security environment
pertaining to the ROK-US alliance including the US-led reconfiguration of the
international order following the fall of the Soviet Union and the subsequent
end of the Cold War, while in terms of national power, the ROK has joined the
ranks of advanced nations. Within the framework of such a changing security
environment, the ROK-US alliance now faces the challenges to change and
develop with an eye toward the future. The Participatory Government is thus
making diverse efforts to advance the ROK-US alliance to a more
comprehensive and dynamic partnership for the 21[st] century.

###### A. Developments in the Roles and Characteristics of ROK- US Alliance

The conventional definition of national security has been to ensure the
survival and independence of a nation against external military threats.
However, as we enter the new era of information and globalization, some
sources of threats, such as terrorism and drugs, are becoming increasingly
more non-military and transnational in nature, and the paradigm of national
security is changing into a more comprehensive concept that includes
economy, technology, and environment.


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

Taking these changes into
consideration, the Participatory
Government, through the
ROK-US Summit meeting of
May 15, 2003, agreed to further
develop the ROK-US alliance
into a more comprehensive and
dynamic one from what was
essentially a military alliance to
deter the North. Furthermore, ROK-US Defense Ministers' Talks
through the talks between the

ROK-US Defense Ministers' Talks

two Defense Ministers held on June 27, 2003, it was agreed that the ROK
Armed Forces expand its role in defending the Korean Peninsula, and that the
ROK-US alliance develop in such a way that will continue to contribute to
regional stability.
As a result, the ROK-US alliance will transform into a more productive
alliance that enables both countries to preserve and advance the universal
values of humanity. The ROK, with its enhanced role accompanying its
international status, will strengthen its position as one of the core nations
contributing to peace and prosperity not only on the Korean Peninsula but
also in the surrounding region.

###### B. Progressive Adjustment of USFK Base Structure

During the past half century, the ROK has experienced exponential growth,
and, as a result of rapid urbanization and expansion, USFK bases and facilities
dispersed throughout the nation have increased the number of civil petitions,
resulting in negative effects on the ROK-US alliance. In order to process these
civil petitions, and at the same time design a more efficient plan to utilize land
resources while strengthening combat readiness and the efficiency of base


-----

Advancing the ROK-US Alliance

management, a plan to integrate USFK base structure into select key areas is
currently under way.
The Yongsan garrison, which has been the source of inconvenience to people
due to its location at the heart of Seoul, is scheduled for relocation in the near
future, paving the way for a more balanced urban development, and the
relocation of USFK bases located north of the Han River is to be carried out in
two phases.
The first phase is to consolidate USFK bases north of the Han River into
either Camp Casey of the Dongducheon area or Camp Red Cloud of the
Uijeongbu area. The second phase is to ultimately integrate these bases into
key areas south of the Han River. These adjustments of the USFK base
structure will take into account the political, economic, and security situations
of the Korean Peninsula and Northeast Asia. As a result of these adjustments,
the ROK and the US will be able to share such common interests in addressing
civil petitions and improving combat readiness posture, thereby solidifying
the alliance between the two countries.

###### C. ROK-US Combined Forces Modernization

The information age, which was brought forth by the digital and network
revolutions, is fundamentally altering the paradigm of warfare.
New types of warfare completely unknown during the Industrial Age, such
as information, network, and long-range precision strike warfare, are being
introduced, as was demonstrated in the Gulf War (1991), and wars in Kosovo
(1999), Afghanistan (2001), and Iraq (2003). The ROK and the US are working
together to modernize their combined military capabilities in line with these
new concepts in warfare.
USFK has decided to invest $11 billion over the next 4 years to gradually
modernize and reinforce its forces, enhancing intelligence collection
capabilities, increasing stockpiling of precision munitions, stationing and


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

rotating its rapid deployment brigade (the Stryker Unit) in order to improve
its counterstrike capabilities and procure additional pre-deployed stockpiles
for the purpose of strengthening the ROK's defense posture.

The ROK Armed Forces,

in accordance with its

force improvement plan,

will reinforce its own self
defense capabilities by

enhancing the core areas

of strength, such as

and deterrence capabilities

The Second Joint Consultation Meeting on the Future of the
ROK-US Alliance Policy Initiative

against North Korea, that

have been, up to now, dependent on the US. In tandem with these efforts, the

ROK Armed Forces will also gradually assume some of the military missions

that were performed by USFK, consequently expanding the ROK military's

role in defending the peninsula. These efforts will help to enhance the

competency of the ROK-US alliance and fortify the security of the Korean

Peninsula.

In the past, the domestic affairs of the US or changes in the international

security environment resulted in one-sided policy decisions, which in turn

caused the ROK-US alliance to undergo certain fluctuations. However, both

countries agree that the alliance between the two sides should be coordinated

in accordance with the common interests achieved through close cooperation.

Thus, the ROK and the US are currently undertaking the “Future ROK-US

Alliance Policy Initiative”to provide a blueprint for the future of the ROK-US

alliance.

Based on the outcomes of the past 50 years, the ROK-US alliance will

continue to develop into a mutually beneficial relationship that hinges on

respect and trust of one another through close assistance and cooperation,


-----

Advancing the ROK-US Alliance

while at the same time, maintaining a firm and stable combined defense

posture.


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

##### Chapter FourChapter Four

### Promoting Foreign Military Exchanges and Cooperation

###### A. Military Diplomacy with Neighboring Countries

The goal of the ROK's military diplomacy is to deter war on the Korean
Peninsula and to contribute to regional peace and stability and more broadly
to world peace by building mutual trust among friendly nations. To
accomplish this goal, the ROK government will strengthen the traditionally
friendly and cooperative ROK-US alliance. Another focus is on the
development of balanced military relations and multilateral military
cooperation with neighboring countries. Through these efforts, the ROK
government hopes to realize “Peaceful and Prosperous Era in Northeast Asia”
and “Establishment of a Peace Regime on the Korean Peninsula.”
In particular, military diplomacy with neighboring countries plays a central
role in the ROK government's foreign policy because geo-politically the
Korean Peninsula is an area of political and military interest where
competition and cooperation of the world military powers cross over.
Moreover, the Cold War order still remains on the Korean Peninsula with the
military standoff between the two Koreas.
Therefore, based on the foreign policy of the government, we are trying to
gain the understanding and support from neighboring countries to resolve
pending security issues, such as a peaceful resolution of the North Korean
nuclear issue. Military trust and enhanced relations between neighboring
countries are also being pursued through diverse military exchanges and
cooperation. Furthermore, ways to contribute to the regional peace are also


-----

Promoting Foreign Military
Exchanges and Cooperation

being sought.

1. Military Exchanges and Cooperation with Japan

Military exchanges and cooperation with Japan are based on the “New
Partnership for the 21[st] Century”between Korea and Japan and are being
developed into a future-oriented partnership. The ROK and Japan have
gradually expanded and developed military exchanges and relations since the
establishment of the ROK military attaché's office in Japan in 1966 and the
Japanese military attaché's office in Korea the following year. These exchanges
were mainly personnel-based. Since 1994, however, the scope of exchanges has
expanded and diversified through visits of high-ranking officials, such as the
annual Defense Ministers' Talks and a variety of regular working level
meetings.
The “Joint Declaration of New Korea-Japan Partnership for the 21[st] Century”
was agreed on October 3, 1998 in Tokyo, providing an opportunity for both
countries to strengthen bilateral cooperation and exchanges in many areas.
Following this, meetings such as the 1999 ROK JCS-Japanese Joint Staff
Council staff talks and the ROK Navy-Japanese Maritime Self-Defense Forces
talks were held for the first time, diversifying military communication
channels. Moreover, a joint search-and-rescue exercise was conducted in 2000
for purely peaceful purposes, and the ROK Navy marching band participated
in the Japanese Self Defense Forces Marching Festival.
In 2001, however, the disagreement on the contents in Japanese history
textbooks modified and put on hold military relations. In April 2002, the
Japanese Defense Minister visited Korea to participate in the Defense
Ministers' talks, and the two Ministers agreed that “we must learn from
history and step forward together into the future in harmony,”and
reconfirmed that military exchanges must be accompanied by mutual trust
and the support of both Korean and Japanese citizens, based on the correct
understanding of the two nations' past history.
The successful 2002 Korea-Japan World Cup and PKO cooperation in East


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

Timor have made a great contribution not only to both countries but also to
regional stability as well. During the Defense Ministers' talks on March 29,
2003, the two ministers agreed to strengthen the ROK-US-Japan security
relations to peacefully resolve the North Korean nuclear issue. The visits of
high-ranking officials and exhibition soccer match between cadets are
expected to raise the relationship to another level.
Future military exchanges and cooperation with Japan will become more
diversified based on the idea of the joint declaration of “New Partnership of
the 21st Century.”It will greatly contribute not only to building military
confidence and promoting friendship but also to establishing peace and
stability on the Korean Peninsula and in Northeast Asia as well.

2. Military Exchanges and Cooperation with China

There has been significant
progress in economic, social, and
cultural relations between the ROK
and China since normalization of
relations in August 2002. In
November of 2002, presidential
talks were held and both sides
agreed to form the “ROK-China
Cooperative Partnership for the

Minister Zhu Rongji's visit to

China's Deputy Chief of Staff visiting the ROK Defense
Minister

Korea, the two countries agreed to
develop their relationship to the one of “Full-Fledged Cooperation,”including
politics and military, laying down a framework for an epochal development of
ROK-China relationship in all areas.
Based on the extensive progress in ROK-China relations, military relations
between the two countries have progressed gradually after the establishment
of a ROK military attaché's office in 1993 and a Chinese military attaché's


-----

Promoting Foreign Military
Exchanges and Cooperation

office in 1994. Since then, the exchanges of military athletic groups, the ROKChina defense forum, and military education have been active. In particular,
since the ROK-China Defense Ministers' talks in 1999, these talks have become
an annual event. Through these events, including official visits at the level of
Chief of Staff, the scope of military exchanges is gradually expanding.
Recently, more substantial exchanges and cooperation have been made. In
2001, for instance, a cruiser fleet from the ROK Naval Academy visited
Shanghai for the first time. In 2002, ROK aircraft visited China, and in the
same year, Chinese naval vessels visited Korea for the first time. In 2003, more
diverse military exchanges and cooperation are expected to take place. Korea
expects a visit from China's Deputy Chief of Staff, and the ROK Chairman of
JCS is also planning to visit China. A Chinese transport aircraft is expected to
land on Korean soil in 2003.
With President Roh Moo-Hyun's visit to China on July 2003, ROK-China
relations have been raised to the new level of a “Full-Fledged Cooperative
Partner Relationship”and will focus on solidifying military confidence
between the two countries while contributing to establishing peace in
Northeast Asia as well as on the Korean Peninsula.

3. Military Exchanges and Cooperation with Russia

After the diplomatic normalization in 1990 and the establishment of military
attaché's offices of both countries in 1991, exchanges between high-ranking
officials have resulted in various measures for building military confidence.
The military relations between the two countries have made a noticeable
development during the short period of time.
The first ROK-Russia Defense Ministers' Talks in 1994 produced an
“Agreement on the Prevention of Incidents at Seas Beyond Territorial Waters”
between the two countries. The ROK-Russia Joint Defense Policy Consultative
Meeting was held in 1997, and since its first meeting in 2000, the Defense
Industry and Logistics Cooperation meetings have been held annually. In
2002, the “Agreement on Prevention of Dangerous Military Activities”was


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

concluded. Through these events
the two countries are strengthening
the foundation for building military
confidence.
On April 10, 2003, the ROK-Russia
Defense Ministers' talks were held
in Seoul. During the talks, both
sides agreed to diversify their
military exchanges and cooperation,
and Russia gave support for a
peaceful resolution of the North
Korean nuclear issue and the ROK's
“Policy of Peace and Prosperity.” and Russia


Signing of MOU on Military Exchange between ROK
and Russia


|[Table 4-1] Milita|ary Exchanges with Neighb|boring Countries|(  ) : year of initiation|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Classification|Japan|China|Russia||
|Defense Ministers' Talks|Annual event since 1994 *March 29, 2003, Seoul|Exchange visits since 1999 *January 20, 2001, Seoul|Exchange visits since 1994 *April 10, 2003, Seoul||
|Working Level Meetings|Defense Policy Working Level Meeting(1994) National Security Policy Consultative Meeting (1998, Foreign Policy + National Defense Policy) ROK JCS-Japan Joint Staff Council Meeting (1999) Air Defense Working Level Meeting (1991)|Defense Policy Consultative Meeting (1995) Foreign Policy, Defense Meetings (2002)|Defense Policy Working Level Meeting (1997) Defense Industry and Logistics Cooperation Committee (2000) Prevention of Dangerous Military Activities Committee (1995)||
|Exchanges of Ships|Visit to Japan (1994) Visit to Korea (1996)|Visit to China (2001) Visit to Korea (2003)|Visit to Russia (1994) Visit to Korea (1993)||
|Exchanges of Transport Aircraft|Visit to Japan (2000) Visit to Korea (2002)|Visit to China (2002) Visit to Korea (2003)|Visit to Russia (planned in 2004)||
|Other Important Exchanges|Joint Sea Operations (2000) Participation in Japanese Self- Defense Forces Marching Festival (2000)|Exchanges of military athletic groups (1992)|Conclusion of the Agreement on the Prevention of Dangerous Military Activities (2002)||


-----

Promoting Foreign Military
Exchanges and Cooperation

More diverse exchanges and cooperation have been planned in 2003, such as
visits of high-ranking military officers and military exercises.

In the future, the ROK-Russia relationship will continuously develop into a

“Constructive Partnership.”Based on personnel exchanges and systematic

efforts towards building military confidence, this relationship will contribute

to peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula and in Northeast Asia.

###### B. Participation in International Peace-Keeping Operations

1. Outline of Peace-Keeping Operations (PKO)

With the end of the Cold War, the probability of a large-scale war has greatly

diminished. In the meantime, regional disputes, fought over race, borders, and

resources are increasing. Under such circumstances, roles of Peace-Keeping

Operations (PKO) led by the UN have been extended as sentinels of world

peace and order. The PKOs led by the UN are carried out with the approval of

the UN Security Council, and with an agreement between involved parties in

the conflict in most situations. The operational units are composed of military,

civilian, police, election observers, UN and international organizations,

various NGOs, etc.

Peace-Keeping Forces (PKF) that are dispatched at the unit level exercise

authority granted by the UN to perform peacekeeping activities such as

maintaining public order and conducting civil operations. Military

Observation Groups (MOG), who are dispatched in a private capacity and are

unarmed, monitor violations of ceasefire agreements and perform such duties

as patrol, investigation and arbitration. In principle, the UN finances the

expenses of UN-led PKOs. For operations led by regional organizations, the

troop dispatching countries pay for most of the expenses.


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

As of May 2003, approximately 37,000 military and civilian police personnel
from 89 countries are serving in 14 regions including East Timor, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Cyprus.

2. Participation Status of ROK Armed Forces in PKO

In 1993, a ROK engineer battalion was dispatched to Somalia (UNOSOM-II).
Since then, 5,000 Korean peacekeepers have been dispatched to seven different
regions including East Timor, Angola, and Western Sahara, in accordance with
the international effort to maintain peace throughout the world. In October
1999, ROK PKO faced a new phase both in terms of quantity and quality, by
dispatching an infantry unit comprised of mainly Special Warfare Forces to
East Timor. ROK's active participation in PKOs is partly an act of reciprocating
the military support that the UN and the international community provided
the ROK during the Korean War.
In addition, it has contributed to improving reputation of the ROK in the
international society. As of May 2003, the ROK MND has sent a total of 295
Korean soldiers to 5 regions of conflict, which puts the Korean army in 30th
place in terms of size of troops participating in PKOs. Currently, ROK soldiers
are faithfully carrying out their responsibilities as sentinels of peace.

**[Table 4-2] PKO Participation Status of the ROK**

|Region|Type|Dispatch Period|Size of Troops|Rotation Term|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Western Sahara|Medical support unit|September 1994~|20|6 months|
|Georgia|Military Observers|October 1994~|7|1 year|
|India, Pakistan|Military Observers|November 1994~|9|1 year|
|East Timor|Infantry battalion|October 1994~|250|6 months|
||Headquarter staffs|January 2000~|8|1 year|
|Cyprus|Commander in Chief|January 2002~|1|1 year|



※ Numbers as of May 2003. Refer to appendices for older data.


-----

Promoting Foreign Military
Exchanges and Cooperation

a. Participation in East Timor PKO
In October 1999, the ROK government formed the 420-member strong
“Evergreen Unit”which consisted of the main contingent force of 201 infantry
personnel and support personnel in transportation, supplies, communications,
and medical support. The first Evergreen Unit began its operations on October
22, 1999 in Los Palos, East Timor. Since then, the Evergreen Unit was the first
unit among participating multinational forces to have its status changed to the
UN PKF on February 1, 2000. Currently, the 8th dispatch unit is carrying out
various missions after being relocated from Los Palos to the Oecussi region on
January 13, 2002.



**[Figure 4-2] Organization of the Evergreen Unit** (as of May 30, 2003)

**Evergreen**
**Unit**

HQ Unit Support Unit Area Unit

HQ S2/S3 S4 HQ 8 teams

SPLY/
HQ ENG. PLT SIGNAL MAINT MEDICS
TRANS PLT

※ The number of persons in the Evergreen Unit : 250 ( 3 liaison officers included )


The Oecussi region, which is currently under the Area of Responsibility
(AOR) of the Evergreen Unit, is an isolated territory in East Timor which is
actually located within West Timor. It has a population of approximately
47,000. The Evergreen Unit has perfectly conducted its duties including
borderline control, maintenance of public order, provision of military support
to civil operations, and protection of vital facilities in the Oecussi region.


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

The unit transferred the borderline control mission to the East Timor
government in April 2003. The unit has also actively engaged in humanitarian
relief activities, such as provision of medical treatment to local residents,
prevention of infectious diseases, transportation of relief goods, as well as
execution of restoration operations. A civil operation named the “Blue Angel”
program that consisted of provision of medical care, movie-showing, haircut
service, and repair of farming equipment, is particularly notable. This
operation, which has been conducted twice a week, has contributed to the
strengthening of relations between the unit and the natives by providing much
needed services to improve their quality of life. Moreover, the operation has
helped the locals find renewed hope and will to revitalize their region.
The Evergreen Unit is now
referred to as “ Malraimutin,”
meaning the best of the multinational forces by the locals for its
devotion and sincere effort to
accomplish its mission. The UN
has also praised it as the most
exemplary unit among the
countries participating in the PKO


Humanitarian Aid Activities By the Evergreen Unit



-  **The Achievements of the ROK Armed Forces in East Timor PKO**

First, the dispatch of the ROK troops made the ROK an active contributor in maintaining peace in the

Asia-Pacific region. This was a significant progress because the ROK was, in the past, only a

passive receiver of the UN's help in defending its freedom and democracy.

Second, this was the ROK's first dispatch of an infantry unit in PKO. It had broadened the ROK's scope

of participation in Peace-Keeping activities. Previously, only medical and engineer units were

dispatched considering of the security situation of the ROK.

Third, with its prompt dispatch and successful completion of the mission, the unit has greatly

contributed to the maintenance of peace and stability in East Timor, building a good image of

the ROK as a peace-loving nation.


-----

Promoting Foreign Military
Exchanges and Cooperation

As East Timor regained its stability after winning their independence in May
2002, the UN has gradually reduced the size of PKF in East Timor. The
Evergreen Unit is expected to completely withdraw in October 2003.

b. Activities of Korean Medical Units in Western Sahara
The Korean medical unit, currently
participating in the UN Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO),
started its mission in September 1994, when
the very first dispatch contingent unit was
sent from the ROK. As of May 2003, 20
Koreans are carrying out their duties at the
8th dispatch contingent unit. The Korean
medical unit is the only organized unit
among participating units and is performing
the following duties: provision of basic Activities of Korean Medical Units in
medical support to MINURSO personnel;
transfer of severely injured or sick patients

Activities of Korean Medical Units in
Western Sahara

to larger hospitals; 24-hour standby for emergency patient treatment;
prevention of infectious disease of the MINURSO Headquarters; and
inspection of both water and food hygiene. The teams have contributed to
building a great reputation for the ROK by providing top quality medical care
to over 45,000 UN personnel in the past 9 years.

c. Military Observer Activities
The ROK Armed Forces has been dispatching military observers since 1994.
Currently, nine field officers are working as a member of the UN Military
Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) and seven are
participating in the UN Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). The
dispatched officers are serving under the control of the local command and
have been faithfully performing tasks including monitoring of ceasefire
violation, patrolling, investigation, reporting, and arbitration.


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

d. Participation as Commander in Chief of UN PKF in Cyprus
The ROK's successful accomplishment in PKO is well acknowledged, and
the ROK military was requested to recommend a ROK general to be appointed
as the PKF commander in the Republic of Cyprus by the UN Secretariat in
October 2001. The government recommended General Hwang Jin Ha and in
due course he became the first ROK military officer to be appointed as a
commander in chief of the UN Peace-Keeping Forces in January 2002. He has
been providing support to the Special Representative of the Secretary General
in regards to military and security issues. He is currently responsible for
prevention of military conflicts and maintenance of peace in Cyprus.

4. Policy Agenda for Peace Keeping Operations

a. Participation in the UN PKO Stand-by Arrangement System
The UN PKO stand-by arrangement system requires participating nations to
designate a set of units and troops for UN PKO participation and maintain
readiness posture for their dispatch. The agreement also requires the nations
to provide the UN with the dispatching units within an agreed time period.
The ROK notified the UN of its desire to participate in the system by setting
approximately 800 troops aside for PKO dispatch in March 1995. Yet the
ROK's participation still remains in the class 3-level, the lowest level according
to the UN's PKO classification system. Recently, the UN has notified its
member states that it added a new “Rapid Deployment Level (RDL)”in
addition to the current system and requested their cooperation. RDL stipulates
that a nation should have the ability to dispatch 5,000 troops within 30 days
and 10,000 troops within 90 days for PKO operations. The ROK MND has well
recognized that acquiring RDL-status is vital in securing opportunities for the
future PKOs. Hence, the MND plans to collaborate with the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Trade to acquire RDL status. The MND has been actively
preparing to meet the “Rapid Deployment Level”by pre-designating suitable
units and developing adequate education and training system for the UN PKO


-----

Promoting Foreign Military
Exchanges and Cooperation

stand-by arrangement system.

b. Legislation of Overseas Troop Dispatch Laws
As mentioned above, the ROK Military has made significant achievements
in PKO, yet its participation was severely limited due to lack of laws that
would support PKO operations. Thus, each case of dispatch had required the
approval of the National Assembly, which occasionally made the dispatch
impossible due to prolonged delays as well as lack of legal ground to
guarantee legal status of service members.
In order to resolve these problems, the MND, along with the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Trade, is working on specific procedures and regulations
for overseas dispatch of troops as well as related legislation to clarify legal
grounds to guarantee the legal status of the dispatched personnel.

c. Development of the PKO Education System
The MND designated the National Defense University as the institution
exclusively in charge of educating officers chosen to serve as military
observers and staff, and established a PKO department in the school. Also, the
institution was designated as the exclusive institution responsible for
providing unit-level PKO education to special warfare training units.
However, the organization of the PKO department is so weak that it does
not have adequate resources for neither systemic research nor appropriate
education and training.
Taking such limitations into consideration, the MND decided to establish an
“International Peace Supporting Center”in the National Defense University to
function as a specialized educational institution to train personnel fit for PKO
activities. It is also expected to serve as a research center of PKO. The MND
has a plan to expand its function as a special PKO educational institution not
only for the military personnel but also for police, civilian, and foreign army
personnel who will take part in PKO activities.


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

###### C. International Arms Control and Multilateral Security Cooperation Activities

1. International Arms Control Activities

Currently, the international community is operating various international
arms control treaties and organizations in an effort to strengthen the control of
strategic materials and the reduction and nonproliferation of WMDs, that
threaten world peace and stability. Also, the international community has been
actively pursuing multilateral dialogues on arms reduction by utilizing key
international organizations such as the UN, Conference on Disarmament, and
the IAEA.
Recognizing that the effort in arms control and nonproliferation will greatly
contribute to world peace and stability, the ROK government has also joined
and actively participated in international arms control arrangements. By
faithfully fulfilling the required duties as a concerned party to these
international regimes, the ROK has strived to enhance its national interest as
well as to uplift its international status and credibility.
The ROK government is involved in many international efforts to prevent
the proliferation of nuclear weapons through participation in the NPT, the
NSG, and the Zangger Committee, and is exerting diverse efforts to resolve
the North Korean nuclear issue in a peaceful way. In addition, in order to
bring the CTBT into force as early as possible, the ROK is applying multidimensional diplomatic efforts so that the signatories (44 states that possess
nuclear reactors including the 5 nuclear states) including North Korea who are
obliged to ratify the treaty, sign the CTBT in an expedite manner. Furthermore,
North Korea's missile production and deployment, which severely threatens
the ROK's security, is being deterred through the ROK-US combined defense
posture, and the ROK government is cooperating with the international
community to fundamentally resolve the missile issue by inducing North
Korea to give up the production and export of missiles and join the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR).


-----

Promoting Foreign Military
Exchanges and Cooperation

Currently, the ROK government, in accordance with the international trend
towards the reduction and abandonment of chemical and biological weapons,
is participating in various international organization activities related to
inspection and verification of chemical and biological weapons by the UN,
OPCW and BWC. However, considering that North Korea is not a member
state of the CWC, the ROK government has proposed a resolution that calls
for immediate accession to CWC by all non-member states, titled
“Recommendation on Ensuring the Universality of the Convention,”to be
adopted by the OPCW Executive Council. Through this resolution, an
international consensus for inducing North Korea to abandon its chemical
weapons will be achieved. Furthermore, the ROK government is making every
effort to enhance the level of professionalism of the ROK Armed Forces by
actively dispatching personnel to international organizations related to issues
of bio-chemical weapons such as OPCW and the UN, as well as to facilitate the
internationalization of the ROK Armed Forces.
Meanwhile, after signing the Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons (CCW) in May 2001, which prohibits the inhumane use of land
mines, the ROK government has solidified its image as a nation that is
continuously concerned about inhumane use of land mines. In particular,
with the concern that landmines, the major purpose of which is to protect
key facilities in the rear area, could inflict harm on the civilian population,
the MND commenced full-scale mine clearing operations in the rear area in
1996. Accordingly, mines in 7 bases located in or near urban areas out of 39
rear area bases have been completely cleared as of 2002. As a part of the
plan to clear the entire rear area of minefields by 2006, 11 additional bases
will be cleared of mines this year. Also, in order to join in the international
community's pursuit to achieve peace for mankind, the MND will actively
participate in supporting the UN mine removal trust fund and
humanitarian mine clearing activities.


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

2. Participation in Regional Multilateral Security Cooperation
Dialogue

Since 1990, the ROK government has been actively participating in regional

multilateral security cooperation talks in an effort to increase mutual

understanding of nations in Asia, and to build confidence and establish

cooperative systems in order to aggressively deal with potential threats that

may arise from the changing international and regional security environments.

In particular, the Participatory Government, which was inaugurated in

February 2003, adopted a concept of “cooperative security”along with

alliance policy as its key security concepts in order to deter war, reduce

tension, promote peaceful coexistence, and create an environment for peaceful

reunification on the Korean Peninsula. It is also as well as making efforts to

establish a multilateral security cooperation dialogue that involves ROK,

North Korea, US, Japan, China, and Russia for comprehensive consultation on

issues regarding the security in Northeast Asia.

Currently, the ASEAN Regional Security Forum (ARF) is a primary inter
government level multilateral security cooperation dialogue body within the

Asia Pacific region. From the perspective of regional security, ARF has recently

been involved in a process to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue and after

the Intersession Meeting for Confidence Building Measures held in Wellington,

New Zealand in November 2002, ARF has demonstrated its deep concern over

North Korea's nuclear weapons program and has made concerted efforts to

work through the situation in a peaceful manner urging North Korea's prompt

return to NPT and its resumption of cooperation with the IAEA.

By actively participating in regional multilateral security cooperation dialogues,

the ROK government continues to make all necessary efforts to address various

threats to security, including the peaceful resolution of the Korean Peninsula

problem, with other regional states, while actively supporting activities of non
governmental regional multilateral security cooperation dialogue, thus making

an effort to converge policy initiatives proposed by civilian experts.


-----

Promoting Foreign Military
Exchanges and Cooperation

###### D. War against Terror and the Dispatch of ROK Armed Forces

1. Introduction

Since the end of the Cold War in the late 20[th] century, terrorism has been
perceived as the greatest threat to the international community and has
emerged as an urgent issue that needs to be jointly addressed by the
international community. The terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center
buildings on September 11, 2001, which terrorized the US, has clearly exposed
the new forms of threat of the 21[st] century and has triggered the ongoing war
against terror.
After first attacking Afghanistan, a direct state-sponsor of the 9·11 terrorist
incident, the US, as an extension of its War on Terror, planned and executed a
war against Iraq on March 20, 2003, to eliminate weapons of mass destruction
and terrorist threats.
It is true that the international community holds a different perspective on
the two wars led by the US. The War in Afghanistan, named “Operation
Enduring Freedom,”which aimed to punish Bin Laden and the Al-Qaeda
network that are responsible for the 9·11 terrorist attacks, was carried out
under the full support of the international community. However, a fierce
debate on the war against Iraq erupted for the reason of lack of justification,
whose side effects continue to this day.
The ROK has joined the US-led international coalition against terrorism to
contribute to world peace and security and to further strengthen the ROK-US
alliance. With the approval of the National Assembly, a total of 1,178 military
personnel has been dispatched and they are making every effort to
successfully complete their objectives.

2. The War in Afghanistan and Dispatch of ROK Armed Forces

The War in Afghanistan, triggered by the 9·11 terrorist attacks, began with


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

US air-raids on October 7, 2001 under the name “Operation Enduring

Freedom.”The operation had four phases. The objective of the first phase

(September 2001~October 2001) was to set conditions with focus on military

cooperation and troop deployment. The second phase (October 8,

2001~December 2001) was the initial combat phase that put emphasis on air

operations and special forces operations. The third phase (December 8,

2001~present), which constitutes the decisive operation, has put a practical

end to combat. The fourth phase of stabilization concerns supporting the

interim Afghanistan government (established in July, 2002) focusing on the

mopping up of remnant Al Qaeda forces and the capture of Bin Laden. Both

the third and fourth phases of the war are in progress simultaneously, and the

transition to the fourth phase is expected to be completed in the near future.
The stabilization operation is expected to last for a prolonged period of time.
The US plans to organize provincial reconstruction teams and put them in
charge of civil operations in the eight regional administration districts
delineated by the US. The US has already begun civil operations in three of the
eight districts.
Sporadic small-scale terrorist attacks are still taking place in Afghanistan.
However, the country is in relatively stable condition and thus, there is no
serious threat to the safety of dispatched ROK forces in the area. The
dispatched ROK forces consist of a medical support unit and both air and
maritime transport support units. They were dispatched immediately after the
ROK government issued the statement of assistance on September 24, 2001,
and the National Assembly gave its consent. An additional construction
engineer corps was dispatched to the area in February 2002 upon the request
by the US.
The first ROK medical support unit consisting of 100 soldiers and officers
was sent to Kyrgyzstan on February 27, 2002. The unit has provided medical
services to the soldiers of the coalition forces as well as to the local population.
The second dispatched unit laid the groundwork for subsequent dispatch to
Afghanistan. Finally, the third unit was dispatched to the largest US military


-----

Promoting Foreign Military
Exchanges and Cooperation

base located in CJTF-180, 40km north of Kabul, Afghanistan. The third
dispatch was made in February 2003 and some of the troops are working in
Manas.
So far, the ROK units have been successfully carrying out their missions by
providing medical services to approximately 60,000 allied troops and citizens
of Afghanistan. In addition, it has been raising ROK status as well as
promoting inter-state relations by providing services such as Tae-kwon-do
lessons and granting scholarships to Kyrgyzstan college students who are
majoring in the Korean language.
The first ROK Navy transport support unit consisted of one landing ship
tank (LST) and 171 crew members. It was the first unit to be sent to the war. It
has been carrying out missions within the AOR of US PACOM using the
Singapore port as its base port since it left Korea on December 18, 2001. The
sixth dispatch unit, which consists of 163 sailors, is currently operating the
ship. So far, it has transported 5,000 tons of US miltary supplies in 16 missions
and has given assistance to special operations.
The Air Force transport support unit, which consists of 76 crew members,
began carrying out their duties on December 28, 2001, using Kimhae Airbase
as its main base. It has functioned as a regular conveyance line that connects
Gimhae, Singapore and Diego Garcia. Its main mission has been
transportation of troops and supplies within the AOR of US PACOM. The
sixth dispatch unit, which consists of 78 crew members, is currently on duty.
So far, the aircrew has successfully completed 62 missions that involved
transport of 250 tons of supplies and 577 troops.

A construction engineer support unit of 150 troops was organized according

to a request from the US army and was sent to the US base in Bagram,

Afghanistan with the third medical support unit on February 27, 2003. Its

main mission has been construction work within the base. It plans to provide

assistance to Afghanistan civilians as soon as the necessary work is completed

on the base.


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

3. The War in Iraq and Dispatch of ROK Armed Forces

a. Operation Iraqi Freedom
Upon completion of the War in Afghanistan, the US singled out Iraq as a
producer of WMDs and a state-sponsor of terrorism. On March 20, 2003, the
US-UK Coalition Forces initiated the air-raid of Iraq titled “Operation Iraqi
Freedom (OIF).”OIF was divided into 4 phases. During the first “set
condition”phase, inducement of division within Iraq, gradual attrition, and
pre-deployment of military forces were executed. In the second “initial
combat”phase, focus was on the elimination of Saddam Hussein and
neutralization of the Iraqi command and control system. In the third “decisive
operation”phase, executed between March 20 and April 15, 2003, major
battles of the war were concluded with the deployment of main forces that
conducted a simultaneous multi-dimensional battle, that led to the capture of
Baghdad and Tikrit. With President Bush's declaration of the end to major
combat operations on May 1, 2003, the 43 day-long War in Iraq was concluded
with the US and the coalition forces being victorious. Currently, it has entered
the fourth “stabilization”phase, with force relocation, reconstruction, and
support of the interim government in progress.

b. Underlying Rationales for ROK Armed Forces Dispatch
The US asked for support in the form of possible participation of the ROK in
the war through humanitarian support, post-war reconstruction and combat
support operation in November 2002 and March 2003. The ROK government
has carefully assessed the request and prepared for possible outbreak of war
accordingly. When the war broke out on March 20, 2003, President Roh made a
public address to the people of Korea during which he presented the official
government position that, “in light of current international events, the nonproliferation of WMD, and the importance of ROK-US alliance, it is in our
national interest to support US efforts.” The President, after convening the
National Security Council and cabinet meetings, decided the dispatch of the


-----

Promoting Foreign Military
Exchanges and Cooperation

construction engineer and medical support units.
There was much internal conflict that led up to the approval by the National
Assembly to dispatch troops on March 21. Globally, the weak justification for
war and little regard of the due process of law spurred criticism and anti-war
public opinion in the international community. Domestically, public opinion
against the dispatch of troops grew at many levels including the civic groups.
A special session of the National Assembly to approve the troop dispatch was
held, but the plenary session of the Assembly had to be postponed twice due
to rising public opinion and demonstrations against dispatching troops. A
special meeting that required mandatory participation of all members of the
National Assembly had to be held for the first time in Korean legislative
history. The meeting lasted for two full days.
While the ROK Armed Forces prepared for the quick dispatch of its troops
with government approval, it also made a great effort to convince political
parties and the governmental branches involved of the necessity to dispatch
troops. The MND also made efforts to build a public consensus in favor of
troop dispatch through the press and defense publications. After government
efforts to galvanize public support, such as the President’s public address on
the subject as well as televised debates, the National Assembly finally
approved the dispatch on April 2, and the troop dispatch to support the war in
Iraq was put on track.
Following are the rationale for the dispatch, despite wide-spread opposition
from both domestic and international communities. The first rationale was
strengthening the alliance between the US and the ROK. The two nations have
maintained a strong alliance over the past half-century. The US, which
committed more than 140,000 lives in defending the ROK during the Korean
War, is an ally forged in blood and has continued to support the defense of the
ROK by having stationed 37,000 troops in Korea. Bound by a special bilateral
alliance, Korea is living up to the spirit of the alliance to assist the US, a
partner in the defense of ROK, when they are in need of help. A strengthened
alliance between the two nations is especially important because coordination
with the US is vital to the peaceful resolution of the North Korean nuclear


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

issue. It is in this context that the dispatch of troops to the war in Iraq will be
an opportunity to respond to the US as an ally and further strengthen the
ROK-US alliance.
The second rationale for dispatch is to contribute to the establishment of
world peace and security as a responsible member of the international
community, and thereby promote the nation’s status and peaceful image.
There has been much criticism regarding the US government's justification for
the War in Iraq, that Iraq has been the active supporter of the terrorism and
that it poses a serious threat to world peace. Despite such sentiment, the ROK
government decided to support the US based on the belief that the war could
contribute to world peace and stability. After the war ended, much evidence
has been found that supports the ROK government's position. In particular,
the activities by our dispatched support units in reconstruction and
humanitarian efforts clearly demonstrate that our troop dispatch is living up
to its initial goals.
Third, economic factors including energy resource security and participation
in post-war reconstruction were considered. The fact that Korea is 97%
dependent on energy resources from foreign sources and 77% of these are
imported from the Middle East was a major factor in the final decision.
Another consideration was that the dispatch would improve the country's
chances of participation in a great number of large-scale reconstruction
projects and various other projects after the war.
Other rationales for troop dispatch include gaining combat experience,
strengthening combined operations capability through joint operations with
foreign armed forces, and expanding military diplomatic ties with allied and
concerned nations.

c. ROK Armed Forces Dispatch and Future Prospects
The dispatch of ROK Armed Forces was made after careful preparation. All
units were dispatched only after a comprehensive three-week training course.
First, three staff members were sent to Kuwait on April 7 for cooperation
purposes. Twenty additional members were sent to Kuwait on April 17 for a


-----

Promoting Foreign Military
Exchanges and Cooperation

detailed assessment of the
operation environment and duties.
They also laid the groundwork for
cooperation with involved
countries.
While there was a problem
regarding establishment of a SOFA
for entry into Kuwait, the dispatch
was made on time with full support
from Kuwait and the US. The first

Departure of Suh-Hee Unit for Iraq

echelon was sent on April 30. The
unit, which consisted of 236 construction engineers and 90 medical staff, went
through RSO, an adjustment-training program, under the supervision of US
forces in Kuwait. They were then assigned to the Nasiriya area. On May 14,
the second echelon of 329 construction engineers was deployed, which
marked the successful completion of the ROK Armed Forces dispatch.
Since April, the medical support unit has been providing medical services
twice a week in different areas of Iraq. So far, it has provided medical services
to an average of 130 people per day. The July 11 completion of a hospital
building has enabled the unit to provide services to a much greater number of
people.
The construction engineer unit
has been actively involved in
repair of aged infrastructures in
Nasiriya which lay in ruins after
years of war and prolonged
economic stagnation. Hospitals,
public waterworks, sewage
pipelines and schools have been
the top priority of their operation.

Provision of medical service to Iraqi civilians

justification of dispatch and troop


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

safety issues, the dispatched units have been receiving favorable comments
from the local citizens. They also have been contributing greatly to building
favorable national image of the ROK and improving military diplomatic ties
with various nations.
The likelihood of war being led by a single nation or a regional body, such as
in the case of “Operation Enduring Freedom”and “Operation Iraqi Freedom,”
is expected to rise. Unlike the UN led military operations like PKO, the
participating nations must cover their own expenses, which will create more
difficulty in the decision making process.
Therefore, it is vital to modify regulations and military systems to more
efficiently manage dispatch units, and consolidate as well as strengthen the
organization to carry out these tasks. The MND recognizes the importance of
overseas dispatch operations and has allocated resources for necessary
research.


-----

Establishing Peace on the Korean
Peninsula

##### Chapter FiveChapter Five

### Reducing Tension and Establishing Peace on the Korean Peninsula

###### A. Efforts to Build Military Confidence between the Two Koreas

Establishment of a peace regime on the Korean Peninsula can be defined as
the transition from the state of armistice to the state of peace, the former of
which has characterized the order on the Korean Peninsula for the past 50
years, and development of institutions in the areas of security, inter-Korean
relations as well as foreign relations to guarantee the latter. Therefore, the
Participatory Government believes that the establishment of a peace regime
will make it possible for both Koreas to prosper together and furthermore lay
the foundation to become “the economic hub of Northeast Asia.”
By pursuing the “Policy of Peace and Prosperity,”the ROK government will
establish a sound peace regime in order to eliminate the security threat and the
possibility of war on the Korean Peninsula. To achieve this, the ROK
government plans to support those actions necessary to build confidence
between two Koreas on military issues, since this is one of the most important
and essential tasks to realistically establish peace on the Korean Peninsula.
However, North Korea is strictly adhering to its position that discussions on
building military confidence between the two Koreas are meaningless until
the Armistice Agreement is replaced with a peace treaty, arguing that military
issues on the Korean Peninsula are issues between North Korea and the US to
which ROK is not a concerned party. Moreover, the North has stated that
confidence between the two Koreas can be acquired naturally with arms
reduction. However, the attitude of the North towards exchanges and


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability


cooperation in the civil sector has
changed as it recognizes possible
“practical gains”that can be acquired
through dialogue and collaboration. As
a result, the North has stopped
avoiding opportunities for dialogue
and has lessened setting extensive
preconditions for talks.
Despite their change of attitude
toward economic and other areas of
collaboration, North Korea continues to
maintain their negative attitude toward
military issues. The ROK Armed Forces

Roadbed construction work to reconnect

will take this change of attitude into the Gyeongui (Seoul-Sinuiju) inter- Korean

railways and roads

account and take gradual steps toward
building military confidence with
North Korea based on our solid war deterrence capacity in accordance with
the ROK government's “Policy of Peace and Prosperity.”
The aim of the first phase is creating a favorable environment to pursue
confidence building between the two Koreas. This phase involves the
implementation of military tension reducing measures such as the cessation of
slandering, reprobation, and hostile activities. Also in this phase, the ROK
military will continue to provide military assurance for various inter-Korean
exchanges and cooperation projects such as Gyeongui (Seoul-Sinuiju) and
Donghae inter-Korean railways and roads reconnection project, Mt.
Geumgang tourism and construction of the Gaeseong Industrial Complex.
Through these efforts, the ROK Armed Forces will focus on utilizing these
initiatives as a means to build military confidence.
Phase two aims to establish an institutional mechanism for military
confidence building through the regularization of inter-Korean military talks.
In this phase, ROK will strengthen its crisis prevention measures in order to
avert military conflicts such as the Yeonpyeong Sea Battle in 1999 and the West


-----

Establishing Peace on the Korean
Peninsula

Sea skirmish in 2002. Other initiatives in this phase include the establishment
and operation of a hotline between the two militaries, activation of the interKorean Joint Military Committee, and increased exchanges and contacts
between military personnel.
In consideration of the progress made in inter-Korean relations, the third
phase is aimed to pursue control over military operation and mutual
verification. Verification measures for implementation of agreement will be
established through operational arms control such as notification and control
of large-scale military exercises and unit activities as well as formation and
operation of a South-North joint inspection and verification mechanism.
Establishing military confidence building mechanism as described above
will enhance the military transparency of the two sides and the possibility of
predicting the other side's military activities. This will allow the transition to
the arms control phase to take place at an early stage and will militarily
guarantee the government's efforts to successfully establish a structure of
reduced tension and peace on the Korean Peninsula.

###### B. Efforts to Peacefully Resolve the North Korean Nuclear Issue

The North Korean nuclear issue became a tension-laden issue once North
Korea admitted the existence of a highly enriched uranium (HEU) program
during the visit by James Kelly, Assistant Secretary of the US State
Department.
The Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization (KEDO) ceased its
supply of heavy oil to North Korea on November 14, 2002, judging that the
existence of a HEU program is a clear violation of the Agreed Framework (AF)
of 1994. Since then, North Korea has responded with actions that have
increased the tension on the Korean Peninsula. Those actions include
terminating the freeze on its nuclear program, removing the seals on the spent
fuel rods, deporting IAEA inspectors, announcing its withdrawal from the


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability

NPT, and reactivating its 5 MWe nuclear reactors.
The IAEA board of directors held a special meeting on February 12, 2002, to
discuss this matter further and requested a resolution from the UN Security
Council (UNSC). UNSC held its first meeting regarding this matter on April 9,
2003. However, UNSC did not make any official statement, deciding not to
provoke North Korea. Meanwhile, China actively tried to mediate the
situation by hosting a trilateral meeting between US, China, and North Korea
in Beijing on April 23. However, with the announcement by North Korea that
it already started reprocessing the spent fuel rods and that it currently
possesses nuclear weapons, the meeting ended a day earlier than planned
without making progress.
The NPT evaluation meeting preparation committee produced a factual
summary of this issue on May 9, 2003, requesting that North Korea scrap its
nuclear weapons program and take safety measures recommended by the
NPT. It also recommended a multilateral approach to resolve the issue. In
addition, the committee reported and criticized the status of North Korea's
concentrated uranium and plutonium production plan, a violation of NPT's
safety requirements, at the G8 meeting in Evian, France between June 1 and 3.
The committee pointed out that North Korea had failed to take appropriate
action as a responsible nation and made a co-statement urging North Korea to
visibly, verifiably and irreversibly dismantle any nuclear weapons programs.
At the ARF held in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, on June 18, all participants with
the exception of North Korea expressed the shared opinion that it is vital to
resolve the North Korean nuclear program for the safety of the region. Also,
the participating nations urged North Korea to observe the state of a nuclearfree Korean Peninsula and demanded that North Korea return to the NPT.
If North Korea possesses nuclear weapons, not only will it be a detrimental
threat to peace on the Korean Peninsula, but will also destabilize the regional
military balance by inducing a nuclear arms race in Northeast Asia. Therefore,
it is the firm position of the ROK government that North Korea must not
possess nuclear weapons under any circumstances, and governments of the
US, Japan, China and Russia share the same position. Also, with the ample


-----

Establishing Peace on the Korean
Peninsula

agreement in the international community regarding the intolerability of a
nuclear North Korea, the peaceful resolution of the North Korean nuclear
issue seems quite possible.
The ROK government believes that close information sharing and policy
coordination between the ROK and the US are essential in resolving the North
Korean nuclear issue, and is making efforts to cooperate throughout the entire
process of setting goals and strategy. By agreeing on basic principles to resolve
the North Korean nuclear issue during the ROK-US summit meeting held on
May 15, the two nations made important progress in acquiring the foundation
for substantial policy coordination and flexibility in their North Korean policies.
Through all possible channels, the ROK government is urging North Korea
that the pursuit of nuclear weapons development will not be beneficial and
that the ROK and the international community will render full support if and
when North Korea becomes a responsible member of the international
community. In other words, the ROK government is urging North Korea to
choose between the nuclear program and economic development. Also, the
ROK government sees that it is important at this stage to maintain the
momentum of dialogue, and is making an effort to prevent any additional
tension from heightening in the course of its talks with North Korea.
The ROK Armed Forces is making utmost use of its military diplomatic
channels at its disposal, such as mutual visits by high-ranking officials,
working level defense policy meetings, and security policy consultations, to
support such efforts being made by the government towards peaceful
resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue, while strengthening combined
surveillance posture on North Korean nuclear facilities and activities and
maintaining a firm ROK-US combined deterrence capability.

###### C. Military Support for Inter-Korean Exchanges and Cooperation

Inter-Korean exchanges and cooperation projects have played an important


-----

Building a Future Oriented
Defense Capability


role in gradually removing the age-old distrust and barriers to economic
activities between the two Koreas.
As an extension of the progress in the government's policy toward North
Korea, the Participatory Government's “Policy of Peace and Prosperity”
provides a new vision towards Korea's peaceful reunification and
development as the economic hub of Northeast Asia. Therefore, further
expansion and promotion of inter-Korean exchanges and cooperation projects
are one of its most important strategies. In other words, the government is
seeking to recover the sense of unity among all Koreans through establishing
the foundation for economic community by further expanding inter-Korean
economic cooperation projects, and actively pursuing exchanges and
cooperation in social and cultural fields.
In support of such policy, the ROK Armed Forces is actively searching for
areas in which it can render support in the course of inter-Korean exchanges
and cooperation projects, at the same time making various efforts to turn
contacts and talks that take place into military confidence building and
tension reduction measures.
The reconstruction project of the Gyeongui (Seoul-Sinuiju) and the Donghae
inter-Korean railways and roads not only has symbolic nationalistic value, but
it is also a first step in constructing physical infrastructure to pursue further
inter-Korean exchanges and
cooperation. In order to support
this project more efficiently, the
ROK Armed Forces has established
a special committee at the Army
and MND as well as a separate
unit in charge of construction.
Also, a direct military telephone
link has been established between
the construction situation offices of
both sides to be used as a channel Reconnection of Gyeongui (Seoul-Sinuiju) Inter-

Korean Railroad

to prevent accidental clashes


-----

Establishing Peace on the Korean
Peninsula

through frequent consultations on various issues as the need arises.
The ROK Armed Forces' involvement in the reconstruction project of the
Gyeongui (Seoul-Sinuiju) and the Donghae inter-Korean railways and roads
includes clearance of minefields and roadbed work in the area north of the
civilian control line including the demilitarized zone (DMZ). The ROK Armed
Forces began its work on the Gyeongui (Seoul-Sinuiju) railways and roads on
September 18, 2000 and the Donghae inter-Korean railways and roads on
September 18, 2002. The two Koreas agreed to complete the two projects
before the end of 2003 and both projects are well under progress as planned.
Meanwhile, the two Koreas held the official ceremony to celebrate
reconnection of the railroad at the DMZ on June 14 of this year. In addition to
the construction work, the ROK Armed Forces is also taking various measures
to strengthen the defense around the construction area, including maintaining
close contact with the UNC to maintain appropriate status according to the
Armistice Agreement.
In addition, regarding the Mt. Geumgang Tourism projects via cruise line
that began in November 1998, and via road that began in February 2003, the
ROK Armed Forces is making the utmost efforts to guarantee the safety of
tourists while maintaining a firm readiness posture for rescue operations in
the case of accidents.
The ROK Armed Forces will continue to provide all necessary military
services for various exchanges and cooperation projects, including the
Gaesung Industrial Complex project and the Imjin River flood prevention
project. It will also make efforts to study possible areas of defense weaknesses
during the course of inter-Korean exchanges and cooperation projects beforehand so as to maintain a seamless defense readiness posture.


-----

#### Part Five

## Continuous Reform of the Defense System

**Chapter One**
**Reforming Personnel Management**

**Chapter Two**
**Restructuring Defense Organization**

**Chapter Three**
**Improving Military Service and Reserve Forces System**

**Chapter Four**
**Reforming Military Judicial System**

**Chapter Five**
**Enhancing the Efficiency of Defense Build-up**


-----

Reforming Personnel Management

##### Chapter OneChapter One

### Reforming Personnel Management

###### A. Management of Elite Defense Manpower

Rapid changes in the security situation on the Korean Peninsula and its
surrounding area, new developments in science technology and high-tech
weapons systems, and the new era of information and technology have called
for defense manpower with more capabilities and various specialties. In order
to achieve this objective of training and managing elite defense manpower, a
more efficient manpower management system, which fosters military
specialists and expands the role of female service members, is being
developed.
First, the manpower management system will be improved to form a
pyramid-shaped structure to make it more efficient and so that it guarantees
stronger combat power.
To carry out this plan, balance
between services, ranks, and
branches will be sustained,
while the service period for each
rank will be adjusted reasonably
to fit the new system. The
retirement program will also be
adjusted so that promotions to
higher ranks are possible in a
reasonable period of time. By First female officers on battleship duty
applying these measures,

First female officers on battleship duty

manpower management will become more stable and systematic.


-----

Continuous Reform of the
Defense System

As a means of strengthening military competitiveness necessary to adapt to
changes in the defense environment, it can be predicted that the demand for
elite military specialists will increase in the future. In order to foster elite
specialists needed for the future battlefield environment, scientific research
regarding the appropriate number of military personnel necessary in each
field will be carried out. Based on the results of such research, ways to utilize
and recruit civilian specialists will be prepared along with a new individual
evaluation system for these specialists. Recruitment, education and
assignment of these specialists will be coordinated under a unified
management system.
The role of women in Korean society has expanded greatly through the
years and the Participatory Government is carrying out various policies aimed
at expanding the role of women to a greater degree. To actively answer such
policies, the military has opened its doors to elite females who choose to serve
in the military. The rate of female officers in the military is set to reach 5% in
2020. In the past, female service members were mainly assigned to the nurse
corps or the administrative branch. However, the new policies will seek to
assign women to all branches, especially to positions where they will be able
to fully demonstrate their capabilities. These new policies will encourage
highly qualified women to join the military and they will play an important
role in achieving the objective of “Advanced, Self-Reliant Defense.”Utilization
of female service members will be evaluated annually. Based on the results of
these evaluations, management plans for female military service member will
be improved to fit the changing environment.

###### B. Fair Personnel Management

MND is working to improve the current personnel management system so
that promotions, assignments, education and other personnel affairs are
handled in a more fair and transparent manner. This will enhance the spirit of
harmony and unity in the military community.


-----

Reforming Personnel Management

First, a fair rule of competition with regard to promotions, assignments and
education will be set. This rule will maintain the present balance between
commissioning groups. Policies regarding promotions and vacant positions
will be decided prior to the actual evaluation for promotions and they will
also be publicly announced to make the process more transparent. Upon
making decisions regarding assignments and education, personnel
management committees in each unit will be asked to take a more active role.
This will also make the evaluation procedure more fair and transparent so that
the right person is placed at the right position.
To make this possible, “Personnel Management Committee Regulations”
was enacted as an MND decree on May 23, 2003. As a result, all matters
concerning promotions and vacancies as well as other personnel management
policies will be made based on this order. To achieve fair and transparent
personnel management, all units will utilize review committees to decide on
matters of promotions, assignments and education.
After hearing opinions from all services and holding a MND Personnel
Management Committee meeting, MND prepared the “MND Guideline on
Personnel Management”regarding promotions and assignments and declared
it as an order on April 12, 2003. All services will develop and apply a detailed
plan that caters to each of the service's needs.
Starting from this year, the Army will no longer allocate vacant positions
according to commissioning groups when deciding who will be promoted
from the rank of captain to major. Instead, candidates will be evaluated based
on their capabilities, specialties, and future potentials. Through tough and
open competition, the most capable candidates will be promoted. The ROK
Army is planning to introduce this open competition system to other rank
promotions as well.
Until now, the commissioned year or the graduate class of officers was a key
element in deciding who would be promoted. This had caused systematic
problems - capable and outstanding officers could not be promoted if they
were juniors. However, from now on, those who have been promoted to a
certain rank in the same year with their seniors will be given an equal chance


-----

Continuous Reform of the
Defense System

to be promoted to the next higher rank along with his/her seniors who were
promoted in the same year. When this year-based promotion system is
applied, capable officers will be guaranteed early promotion.
Furthermore, research on introducing open and multi-dimensional
evaluation, which takes into consideration the special characteristics of the
military, is currently underway. Each service will do more research on the
applicable rank, time and method so that it does not interfere with its own
system. When complete, each service will gradually apply this new method
starting 2003.
Additionally, a service evaluation program will be newly introduced to
motivate those who have missed opportunities, for timely promotion. Those
who record high scores in the evaluation will be given the chance for honorary
promotions or promotions for a certain period of time. They will also be the
first to be considered for job opportunities, and incentives for honorary
discharges will also be provided to them. On the other hand, those who are
insincere or have caused trouble during their service will be discharged at an
early stage hold them responsible for their negligence.
To ensure improvements in the personnel management system to nurture
military talent and a fair and transparent promotion or assignment decision
process, the ROK Armed Forces will strictly rule out all favors based on
personal background and pursue continuous personnel reforms so as to foster
harmony and unity in the military community.


-----

Restructuring Defense
Organization

##### Chapter TChapter Twowo

### Restructuring Defense Organization

###### A. Background and Implications

The present defense organization relies on temporary or unofficial bodies for
carrying out government projects, large-scale defense weapons system
acquisition and for dealing with pending and urgent problems in the military.
Since the JCS is the key actor in war planning and execution, it is
strengthening its abilities to play an independent role necessary to adapt to
future security situation changes. Therefore, various measures with the
objective of actively coping with future changes in defense environment and
of building a defense organization more adequate for fostering a high-tech
military emphasizing science and technology are underway as means of
restructuring the defense organization. Operation reforms will make the
organization more efficient and consequently help save money and human
resources. The money saved will be accrued for future military funding needs.

###### B. Directions of Organizational Restructuring

To ensure the development of future-oriented defense policy and to
strengthen policy execution capabilities, the organization of MND
headquarters will be restructured. First, its policy-making and planning
functions will be adjusted and reinforced. Excessively large organizations will
be reduced to an appropriate and manageable size to make the operations
system more efficient. PPBEES (Planning, Programming, Budgeting,
Execution, Evaluation System) will also be reorganized so that the


-----

Continuous Reform of the
Defense System

organization can execute policies more efficiently. The hierarchy of general
public servants will be improved to form a pyramid-shape with more focus on
professional skills. Under this improved hierarchy, public servants will be
given greater opportunity for promotion.
The JCS will eliminate any non-essential, high-level positions and fairly
balance assignments among services. In order to prepare for future changes in
the ROK-US combined command system, functions of each office will be
reconsidered and their risk management capabilities will be strengthened.
Accordingly, an independent war operations system will be established with
the JCS playing the central role.
Additionally, the headquarters of each service will readjust the functions of
special offices and remove unnecessary small-sized divisions to build a
digitized military that will adapt to future changes in defense environment in
the era of information and technology. Organization dealing with digitization
and force improvement will be integrated and at the same time personnel,
logistics and mobilization functions will be readjusted in order to establish a
more efficient support system.
Integrating and rearranging offices with similar or redundant functions will
trim down the overall defense organization. The restructuring of unofficial
bodies and temporary organizations including various committees and project
teams will activate the utilization of the Task Force (TF). Unnecessary offices
will be closed, but offices necessary and essential for operations will be made
official.


-----

Improving Military Service and
Reserve Forces System

##### Chapter ThreeChapter Three

### Improving Military Service and Reserve Forces System

###### A. Reduction of Military Service Period

The obligatory military service period will be reduced by 2 months in order
to lighten the burden of military service and to enhance equity in military

|[Table 5-1] Reduced|Service Period According to Enlistment Dates|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Enrolled Date|Reduced Service Period||||
||Army/Marines|Navy|Air Force||
|Apr. 2001|||1 week||
|May 2001|||||
|Jun. 2001||1 week|||
|Jul. 2001|||||
|Aug. 2001|1 week||||
|Sep. 2001|||2 weeks||
|Oct. 2001||2 weeks|||
|Nov. 2001|2 weeks||||
|Dec. 2001|||||
|Jan. 2002|||||
|Feb.~May 2002|3 weeks||||
|Jun.~Sep. 2002|1 month||||
|Oct. 2002~Jan. 2003|1 month & 1 week||||
|Feb.~May 2003|1 month & 2 weeks||||
|Jun.~Aug. 2003|1 month & 3 weeks||||
|Sep. 2003~|Less than 2 months||||
|Oct. 2003~|2 months||||


-----

Continuous Reform of the
Defense System

obligations.
Due to the declining birth rate in the 1980s, there will be a shortage of
military service members starting from 2005. To solve this problem, the
number of alternative service members will be reduced or eliminated
(approximately 66,000 alternative service members at present) and reservists
will be called upon for active duty to fill up the shortage.
Such improvements will help resolve much of the disputes regarding the
fairness of obligatory military service. NCOs will be assigned to positions that
require specialized skills (i.e. maintenance and repair) and be assigned as
squad leaders to prevent any loss of combat power. The reduction of service
period will first be applied to enlisted soldiers who joined the military in
August 2001 (to be discharged in October 2003) and their service period will
be one week shorter. The reduced period will gradually increase, and for those
who joined the military in October 2003 the service period will be shortened
by 2 months.

###### B. Improvement of Military Manpower Administration

1. Recruit-friendly Military Manpower Administration

a. Choosing Enlistment Dates and Training Units
In the past, recruits have not been satisfied with the military manpower
administration mainly because they could not make their own choices
concerning military service obligations. However, recruits can now choose
when to join the military and the unit in which they are to be trained. It is
hoped that a mood for voluntary fulfillment of military service will be created.
In the future, the number of vacant positions from which recruits can choose
from will be enlarged and the recruit system improved to a “Train Ticket
Reservation”system which, within acceptable boundaries, takes into
consideration the aptitude of recruits.


-----

Improving Military Service and
Reserve Forces System

**[Table 5-2] Number of Recruits Choosing Enlistment Dates**

|Year Classification|2001|2002|2003|
|---|---|---|---|
|Total Recruits|225,500|218,300|182,800|
|Recruits who enlisted on a self-chosen date|30,500 (13.5%)|49,200 (22.5%)|60,000 (32.8%)|



b. Joint Enlistment / Service Program for Army Soldiers
In 2003, ROK Army introduced the joint enlistment/service program, a
program that allows recruits to enlist and serve in the military with a friend or
a colleague. Approximately 20,000 army recruits will be given the chance to
participate in this program in 2003. Those participating in this program will be
assigned to nearby barracks after boot camp and will serve together until they
are discharged.
This program was introduced to
relieve the recruits' uneasiness
about having to serve in an
unfamiliar environment alone as
well as to ease concerns of their
family members. By helping
recruits adapt to the environment
more quickly and preventing any
possible accidents, this program

hopes to strengthen combat Joint enlistment/service program
power. On the first day of appli
Joint enlistment/service program

cation, more recruits applied than expected and many other recruits are also
showing interest in this program. The overall effectiveness of this program
will be studied and ways to improve and expand this program will be
developed.

c. Utilizing Skills of Service Members
In order to encourage enlisted service members to utilize their skills and


-----

Continuous Reform of the
Defense System

specialties and give them a chance to develop their skills, recruitment of
specialists will be expanded. Recruitment procedure of these specialists
including application submission and selection process will be computerized
and be disclosed to the public via Internet for their convenience. Such efforts
will improve the overall recruitment systems, making it more recruit-friendly.

2. Enhancing Public Confidence Through Fair and Transparent
Administration

a. Disclosure of Government Officials' Personal Military Service
Information

In order to prevent illegal exemptions from military service by way of
abusing official positions and to make the military manpower administration
more transparent, “Government Officials' Personal Military Information
Disclosure System”was prepared. According to this system, high-ranking
public officials, Grade I or higher, in 5,997 positions are obliged to disclose
their personal military service information. “Act on the Reporting and
Disclosure of Personal Military Service Information of Government Officials
and Others”is being revised to expand its scope of application to around
26,000 officials (Grade IV or higher).
b. Special Management of Public Figure Recruits



**[Table 5-3] Disclosure of Personal Military Service Information**


|[Table 5-3] Disclosur|re of Personal Military Se|ervice Information|(as of June 30, 2003)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Classification|Total|Person in Question|Descendants|
|Number of People|25,379|12,133|13,246|


To overcome the lack of public confidence in the military manpower
administration and to emphasize the moral duty that everyone is obliged to
fulfill his military service, people with high income, entertainers and athletes
will be supervised in a special manner.
Management of these public figure recruits under public concern will start


-----

Improving Military Service and
Reserve Forces System

from the day of their enlistment physical examination to the day of discharge.
Relevant regulations regarding service and emigration will strictly be applied
to ensure public confidence on the fairness of the military manpower
administration and such measures will hopefully contribute to establishing a
social mood for voluntary fulfillment of military service.

###### C. Improvement of Reserve Forces System

Currently, the reserve forces which constitute an indispensable part of
national security and whose role will expand in the future come under the
command of MND headquarters of each service and accepting units, and
serve in this status until 8 years after discharge.
MND will improve the current reserve forces training system to build
stronger reserve forces and to provide more convenience to those who
participate in the training. The following table shows the improvements that
will be made starting from 2004.

**[Table 5-4] Improvements in the Reserve Forces Training**

|Classification|Present|Improvements|Remarks|
|---|---|---|---|
|Training for 1st Year Reserves|Call-up Check (4 hours)|Mobilization Training|Unit-maintained Training Guaranteed|
|Expansion of Exemptions|1 year (8th year)|2 years (7th and 8th year)|Annual Emergency Call-up Inspection of 7th & 8th year Reserves|
|Mobilization Training|3 nights, 4 days|2 nights, 3 days||
|SSangyong Training|3 nights, 4 days||Participants will be exempted from 5th year homeland defense training (8 hours)|



Until recently, those who did not participate in mobilization training could
commute to local units for reserve forces training instead. However, from
2003, to enhance the quality of training, they are required to participate in


-----

Continuous Reform of the
Defense System

mobilization training at a later time. Currently, call-ups are notified in person
or by mail, but in the future it will also be done via the Internet. Reserves will
also be able to choose training dates using the Internet.
The quality of lunch meals during reserve forces training was improved
(price of a meal: 2,000 won → 2,500 won). Such efforts to improve reserve
forces training environment will continue.
Various efforts to foster and support reserve forces are being carried out so
that reserve forces may perform their best combat power during operations.
For injuries or death during reserve duties or training, improved
compensation and medical care programs have been prepared. Starting from
2003, those injured will be compensated 70% (instead of 60%) of the average
income of urban and rural households during the period of hospitalization.
Hospitalization in civilian hospitals may also be extended with the approval
of unit commander to a maximum of 3 days.
At present, reserve forces lack sufficient equipments and resources necessary
to execute homeland defense strategies. Mid-term and long-term plans to
replace old equipments with new ones will be established, and resources for
homeland defense will be reinforced to strengthen the combat power of
reserve forces.


-----

Reforming the Military Judicial
System

##### Chapter FourChapter Four

### Reforming Military Judicial System

###### A. Background and Progress

The enactment of the National Defense Law in 1946 whose origin lies in the

translation of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) of the US, marked

the beginning of Korean military judicial system. The Court Martial Act and

the Military Court Act followed and various amendments were made to adapt

to changing situations. Although the military judicial system has developed

through the years, changes in defense environment calls for further judicial

reform.

With the inauguration of the Participatory Government, an overall reform of

the military judicial system is being prepared to meet the expectations of the

people. The original objective of the military judicial system, “maintenance of

military order and discipline and realization of judicial justice,”will be

upheld, but more focus will be given toward guaranteeing the rights of service

members.

To achieve this goal, “System Improvement Task Force”was established on

January 25, 2002 under the auspices of the Defense Research Committee to

promote independence and fairness of trials, to protect the rights of service

members, and to maximize the utilization of the JAG Corps. Heeding various

opinions from a diverse number of sources (i.e. scholars, NGOs), MND is

pursuing systemic reforms that will satisfy the public at large. The successful

reform of the military judicial system is expected to guarantee the rights of

commanders as well as the rights of service members.


-----

Continuous Reform of the
Defense System

###### B. Key Contents of the Reform

1. Circuit Pool of Military Judges at MND Independent from the
Chain of Command

Under the current military judge system, judge advocates with the rank of
captain or major under the command of service headquarters are appointed as
military judges and one military judge is assigned to each corps. The military
judges assigned to nearby corps form a pool of judges and this pool of judges
takes responsibility for division trials and Corps General Court Martial.
The current military judge system has been criticized for the following
reasons. First, the commanders can interfere with the trial, which in turn
severely harms the independent nature of trials. Second, the military judges
have little or no experience regarding court martial. Finally, the overall system
is criticized for inefficiency because there are too many military judges
compared to the number of actual cases.
Taking these criticisms into consideration, a consolidated “Circuit Pool of
Military Judges (CPMJ)”was established at MND so as to separate military
judges from the chain of command as well as military prosecutors of the unit
in which the trial takes place. CPMJ takes charge of trial cases at the General
Court Martial. In doing so, the country is divided into 5 regions. Officers with
more experience and with the rank of lieutenant colonel or colonel, are
assigned as military judges. To guarantee independence of court martial, the
performances of military judges are reviewed by other military judges.

2. Restriction of Commander's Confirmation Rights and
Noninterference of Trials

One of the characteristics of the military judicial system is that commanders
can take part in the trial procedure. This is to give commanders the authority
that comes with this responsibility. However, this important and necessary


-----

Reforming the Military Judicial
System

element of court martial has been criticized as the main cause of distrust in the
military judicial system. Therefore, in order to eliminate any conflicts rising
from legal commutation by commanders and to enhance credibility of court
marital, the commander with jurisdictions will be required to clearly state the
reason for commutation and commanders or any third parties will be
prohibited from interference or influence.

3. Support for Expanding the Trial Defense Counsel

To enhance the rights of service members and to eliminate any violation of
rights during the investigation process, trial defense counsel will assist the
defendant from the beginning of the investigation process. To this end, the
number of trial defense counsels will be dramatically increased.

4. Improving Detention Procedures and Facilities

In order to minimize the violation of soldiers' rights caused by detention,
which has “the effect of physical confinement,”the current detention program
will be reviewed and fundamental improvements will be made. Judge
advocates will screen the detention process and convicts with less than 6month sentence will not be put in detention facilities. The overall environment
of detention facilities will be improved as well.

5. Improvements in Recruitment and Personnel Management of
Judge Advocates

In order to enhance efficiency in operating the JAG Corps and to enhance
professionalism in legal affairs, recruitment of long-term officers who have
passed the Korea Bar Exam will be carried out. Until recently, military
prosecutors and judges rotated among the assigned positions. But from now
on, they will be assigned according to their specialties and the principle of
check and balance will apply between each group. As a way of recruiting
highly qualified judge advocates, increase in pay for long-term officers and
other welfare and benefit enhancements are being considered.


-----

Continuous Reform of the
Defense System

##### Chapter FiveChapter Five

### Enhancing the Efficiency of Defense Build-up

###### A. Direction of Defense Acquisition and Development

As weapons systems become more complex and sophisticated, acquisition
costs have increased rapidly along with R&D costs for important technologies.
Therefore, R&D and acquisition projects should be pursued not only in an
economical and efficient manner but also with transparency guaranteed and
national consensus formed.
To achieve self-reliant defense, development and manufacturing of weapons
systems should be localized, however costly and time consuming it may be.



**[Figure 5-1] Overview of the Defense Acquisition and Development System**

Objective “Realization of Self-Reliant Defense”

Strengthening R&D, Pursuing Efficient and

Key Points Defense Industry Economic Acquisition &

Development Projects Development Projects

Open Decision Making System

Changes in Increase of Rise in costs for Increase in
Acquisition non-specific developing core acquisition
Environment threats technologies costs


-----

Enhancing the Efficiency of
Defense Build-up

From the national defense strategy standpoint, all resources must be
concentrated on the R&D of those fields where accumulation of technology is
necessary in the long run and where securing independent technology
capabilities is essential.
To respond to the changes in the acquisition environment of the 21[st] century
and to achieve our defense policy objectives, the reorganization of acquisition
and development objectives is underway as seen in figure 5-1.
Three main policy directions for defense acquisition and development are as
follows.

**[Figure 5-2] Three Main Policy Directions for Defense Acquisition and Development**

ㅇ Applying “Open Decision Making System”in Force Improvent Programs (FIPs)

ㅇ Developing R&D and Defense Industry Policy

ㅇ Carrying Out Efficient and Economical Acquisition and Development Projects


First, “open decision-making system”will be applied to Force Improvent
Programs (FIP). Decision at all stages regarding acquisition and development
projects will be made openly so that the projects can be carried out fairly and
transparently.
Second, a future-oriented R&D and defense industry policy will be
developed after clearly reviewing the current status of R&D fields and the
defense industry, which still remain underdeveloped.
Third, acquisition and development projects will be carried out in an
efficient and economical manner. By doing so, weapons and equipments that
meet the requirements of the armed forces will be put into place in an
economical and prompt manner.

###### B. Applying “Open Decision Making System”to Force Improvement Program

In the past, the decision-making procedure regarding force improvements


-----

Continuous Reform of the
Defense System

was focused on who was to be responsible for the decision made. Therefore,
most of the decisions were made through the decision-making channel. Such
method had its advantages; it was clear who was in charge and the decision
was made in a short period of time. However, too much responsibility and
authority was centered on the project unit. Sometimes the unit in charge of the
projects did not possess the expertise to fully carry out the project, which
resulted in decision-making delays and unsatisfactory outcomes. In order to
improve and supplement such a process, the Participatory Government has
changed the decision-making system of FIPs to an “open”one.
In the “Open Decision-Making System,”“Acquisition and Development
Council”and “Expanded Acquisition and Development Council”take charge
of all decision-making regarding project management such as the introduction
of key FIPs, selection of models, contractors, etc. The “Expanded Council for
FIPs”decides on whether to approve the execution of the budget. This allows

**[Table 5-5] Improvements in the Decision-Making System**

|Classification|Present System|Improved System|
|---|---|---|
|Decision-making Process|Decision by Approval|Decision by Committee|
|Project Management Stages|○ Acquisition Meeting ○ Expanded Acquisition Meeting ○ Line of command for each project * Decisions made through the line of command|○Acquisition and Development Council ○Expanded Acquisition and Development Council ○Line of command for each project * Most decisions made after review by Council|
|Project (Budget) Execution|○ Committee for Defense Investment Projects * Insufficient activities by the committee and insufficient participation by related government agencies|○Expanded Council for FIPs * Increased activities by the Council, substantial participation by related government agencies|
|Characteristics|○ Responsibility and speed guaranteed during decision-making|○Expert analysis guaranteed during decision-making ○Fairness and transparency during projects guaranteed and expanded * Promotion of“ People's Right to Know”|


-----

Enhancing the Efficiency of
Defense Build-up

for the gathering of various opinions from members of the council, that will
enhance and help build consensus among other relevant divisions and
government agencies regarding the appropriateness of the project.
To make FIP more transparent, review sessions will be frequently held,
especially before the making decisions on projects that are related to national
industry or are closely related to large- scale, government projects. In these
review sessions, other government agencies such as the Ministry of Finance
and Economy, Ministry of Planning and Budget, Ministry of Commerce,
Industry and Energy, Ministry of Science and Technology, and Ministry of
Information and Communication will be urged to participate. This will
enhance industrial competitiveness and security capabilities by linking
military projects to national industry development.

###### C. Policy Improvement of R&D and Defense Industry

1. Improvements in R&D policy and research environment

MND is trying to improve the R&D policy and research environment of the
military so as to acquire the necessary R&D capabilities regarding high-tech
weapons systems, and to develop core technologies necessary for future
warfare in the 21[st] century. To achieve this purpose, a low-cost, high-efficiency
R&D operations system will be established that follows the directions of
national science and technology policies. Taking into consideration the
compatibility of civil and military technologies, large-scale projects will be
executed as government projects.
National science and technology resources will be utilized for defense R&D,
and the area of research for the Agency for Defense Development will
gradually center around the development of core technologies. Efforts to
improve research environment will be made. Through these measures, the
Agency for Defense Development will be nurtured and developed as a firstclass research institute that pioneers cutting edge defense technology, and the


-----

Continuous Reform of the
Defense System

ratio of R&D investment in the budget will be raised to that of other institutes
in developed countries.

2. Improvements in Defense Industry Policy

MND is revamping the defense industry policy to enhance competitiveness
of defense industry and to expand exports by fostering a defense industry that
focuses on accumulation of technology. MND will encourage defense
manufacturers to increase investment on R&D so that they can domestically
develop technologies as well as raise their technology level. MND is planning
to subsidize the development costs of domestically developed projects.
The current specialized affiliate system will be transformed so that
specialized enterprises are maintained only for those fields that require largescale investments. In other fields, competition among manufacturers will be
gradually promoted. Compensation for localizing technologies will also be
legalized. For expanding exports, fields with export potential will be selected
and given strategic assistance. MND and Korea Defense Industry Association
will organize task forces for export support and utilize defense attaches to
promote defense export.

###### D. Efficient and Economical Pursuit of Defense Acquisition and Development Programs

To achieve self-reliant defense, a stable distribution of adequate national
defense budget is essential. However, with the sustained decrease in the
allocation of the national defense budget, the budget for FIP has also shown a
decrease since 1997, although it slightly rose in 2002. FIP budget is directly
related to building military power that allow the realization of self-reliant
defense. Therefore, FIP should be given priority. The aggregate amount of the
national defense budget in 2003 increased by 6.5%, reaching 17,426.4 billion
won, and the amount of FIP budget increased by 4.7% reaching 5,732.8 billion
won (32.9% of total national defense budget).


-----

Enhancing the Efficiency of
Defense Build-up

**[Table 5-6] FIP Budget Allocation in 2003**

|Classifica- tion|Total|C41 & Information|Maneuver, Strike|Maritime, Landing|Aerial Air Defense|Support|R&D|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Budget (billion won)|5,732.8|326.1|610.0|923.6|1,259.7|2,032.1|581.3|
|Ratio (%)|100|6|11|16|22|35|10|



In 2003, the following projects are being carried out. See [Table 5-7]

**[Table 5-7] Major FIPs in 2003**

|Classification|On-going Projects|Newly-launched projects|
|---|---|---|
|C4I & Information|•Lattice Structure Tactical Communications System (SPIDER) •Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV)|•Electronic Warfare System for Naval Vessels •Tactical Vehicles for Communication Relay|
|Maneuver, Strike|•Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS) •K9 Self-propelled Artillery, K1A1 Tank|•Reorganization of Mechanized Infantry Division •Infrared Imaging System for Helicopters|
|Maritime, Landing|•KDX-II/III •214-class Submarines (KSS-II), Landing Platform Experimental (LPX)|•PKX|
|Air, Air Defense|•Additional manufacturing of F-15K and KF-16 fighters •Very Short-range Air-defense (VSHORAD)|•Mass production of T-50s •KP-SAM|
|Support|•Service support such as WRSA, equipment reinforcement, repair and maintenance •Burden-sharing, 2nd Bulgom Project, etc.||
|R&D|•Support for next-generation high-tech weapons system suited for Korea •Next-generation tanks, Satellite Communication System for military||
||||


-----

Continuous Reform of the
Defense System

When importing foreign weapons systems, the “rule of competition”will be
fully applied. Diversification of weapons acquisition will be maintained, and
import of weapons will be carried out in line with offset deals and defense
industry exports. This will directly and indirectly contribute to breathing
energy into the domestic defense industry. Before accepting sales offers from
foreign manufacturers, evaluation standards and methods will be clearly set to
ensure fairness in the acquisition process. All manufacturers who meet these
standards will be given an equal chance to bid and the final model will be
determined by competitive bidding.
Additionally, the use of commercial items will be expanded so that war
supplies, especially non-weapons systems, are provided in an economical and
efficient manner. To this end, investment efficiency will be enhanced through
the alleviation and removal of defense article standards and progressive
phase-by-phase upgrade plan in place of turn-key acquisition of weapons
systems. The concept of pre-planned capability improvement will be applied
in R&D to extend the life span of equipment where possible.
FIPs need to be managed professionally for them to be efficient. Specialists
who are capable of executing these projects need to be fostered as well. To
enhance the professional capabilities of these specialists in charge of projects,
ways to recruit and manage these specialists will be developed. Those
working in the field of force improvement should possess a highly skilled
policy mind, an understanding of high technology, and the ability to manage
projects.
In order for the specialists to possess relative competitiveness, they must be
carefully recruited, be given appropriate long-term assignments and be
educated periodically in their field. The ties between personnel management
and education should be clarified and strengthened. Specialists will also be
given continuous opportunities to enhance knowledge in their respective
fields through further education both in domestic and foreign institutes.


-----

#### Part Six

## Improving Service Members' Welfare and Barrack Environment

**Chapter One**
**Improving Service Members' Welfare**

**Chapter Two**
**Fostering a Desirable Military Culture**

**Chapter Three**
**Promotion of Welfare for Veterans**


-----

Improving Service Members
Welfare

##### Chapter OneChapter One

### Improving Service Members' Welfare

With the aim of enhancing welfare and uplifting the morale of service
members, innovative plans are under way to improve barrack facilities and
living quarters for officers and NCOs; to improve treatment for professional
soldiers; to realistically adjust wages for soldiers; to make health insurance
applicable for soldiers on leave, on the basis of “plans for development in
military welfare.”
First, barrack facilities and quarters for officers and NCOs that are old and
small will be modernized by stages in order to keep abreast of social
development.
In 2000, the military executed a 3-year plan to improve military quarters and
solve housing problems for professional soldiers, investing 877.7 billion won:
12,323 official residences that were 25 years
or more and 15 pyung or smaller in size
were renovated. Yet 38% of all official
residences are still in poor condition. Thus,
it is expected that old and small residences
of 25 years or more and 15 pyung or under

(26,954 residences) are to be refurbished by
investing national budget intensively over
the next 5 years (2004~2008), matching the
national housing standard of 24 to 32
pyung. In anticipation of any changes in
security circumstances, the minimization Bunk bed-type
of housing construction and a gradual
increase in support for purchasing and


Single bed-type

Bunk bed-type

Squad-scaled quarters equipped with beds


-----

Improving Service Members
Welfare and Barrack Environment

leasing residences are expected in the long run.
Old quarters of 25 years or more and insufficient quarters take up 32 percent
of all quarters for non-married officers. 2 to 3 officers live in a single room,
which raises privacy questions and hinders sufficient rest and relaxation and
in turn hampers regular service duty. Therefore, plans are being made to
improve old quarters of 25 years or more and provide sufficient housing as
soon as possible by investing national budget intensively over the next 5 years
(2004~2008).
Old-fashioned and consolidated barrack facilities built in the 1960s and
1970s, which are out-dated and confined, take up 41% of the whole. Platoonsized quarters make conditions for private life insufficient and lack of
individual living space deprive many of normal sleep during summertime. In
the future, the living conditions of the new generation will be taken into
consideration: in order to improve the barracks life and conditions,
consolidated non-bed quarters will be substituted with squad-scaled quarters
equipped with beds.
For the purpose of improving treatment for professional soldiers, salaries
will be increased to the level of standard private enterprises by the year 2004
in accordance with the government's 5-year plan to realistically moderate
wages for public servants.
Basic salary will be increased along with various kinds of bonuses included.
Tuition subsidies and separate allowances will be provided for special needs.
Special service expenses for staff officers of lieutenant colonel or major will be
gradually augmented.
In addition, the acquisition of excellent manpower and stimulation of
morale amongst professional soldiers are planned through uniquely
organizing the compensation system for service members, which reflects
special aspects of military service.
Salaries for enlisted men who are on active duty are to be increased, taking
into consideration the actual amount needed for expenses. In the past,
treatment for the enlisted mainly consisted of meals, clothing and facilities
within the limits of the national defense budget. As a result, an enlisted


-----

Improving Service Members
Welfare

soldier's average monthly salary is 24,800 won in 2003, which is insufficient
compared to the actual amount of their expenditure. Consequently, most
enlisted men depend on remittance from their homes, which might arouse a
sense of discomfort due to the disparity in wealth. Therefore, the military is
planning to raise enlisted men's monthly salary to 80,000 won a month from
the year 2004 to 2006 reflecting the results of surveys on soldiers' living
expenses. The aim is to encourage savings and root out family financial
support.
Active soldiers may visit military hospitals while on leave but most of them
resort to private clinics due to poor traffic conditions. This causes families to
take on the entire burden of payment, and thus becomes the target of constant
appeals.
The reason why active soldiers are not eligible for medical insurance is
because of the “national health insurance law,”which stipulates that service
members on active service are classified as “non-applicable.”Accordingly, the
military is making efforts to modify the law by discussing this matter with
relevant institutions to let service members receive medical insurance support
in case of sudden illness or injuries while on leave.
Furthermore, plans are being made to effectively manage the maintenance
system welfare facilities of all forces as well as to reasonably distribute the
same welfare benefit evenly to every part of the military. In addition, the
military is planning to integrate the management of welfare facilities, revise
laws and regulations pertaining to this matter in order to enhance efficiency
and transparency.


-----

Improving Service Members
Welfare and Barrack Environment

##### Chapter TChapter Twowo

### Fostering a Desirable Military Culture

###### A. Background

Since the founding of the ROK armed forces, the culture of the military,
which emphasizes that “the duty of all soldiers is to serve one's country
through self-sacrifice,”has been the basis of an elite force and the strength to
overcome national crises.
Korean military culture is based on traditional ideas of Confucianism,
Japanese authoritarianism and American pragmatism and this is why it lacks
its own identity. Furthermore, the rapid changes in society are prompting
diverse values and practices to flow into the military without due screening
and this causes chaos in traditional military values. Even some aspects of
military culture that should be protected and passed on are fading away.
Therefore, the military, in terms of reform, is prepared to “settle a desirable
military culture”by inheriting and nurturing positive factors while resolutely
doing away with negative factors. Fixing misguided military culture and
creating sound spirits of duties and reestablishing officer's ethics about their
profession and their value of being a service member will settle advanced
military culture.

###### B. Prospective Directions

A professional soldier who accepts changes in social environment correctly
and fulfills basic duties and roles with all his heart will be fostered for
building desirable military culture. In other words, values of dedication to the


-----

Fostering a Desirable Military
Culture

nation and the people without a moment's hesitation in any circumstance,
values of sacrificing themselves as professional soldiers, values of having
pride and doing worthwhile duties will be fostered.
Furthermore, current military custom need to be revised within the
perspective of present values in order to create its own colors of military
culture and to root out corruption and irrationality and so, sound military
culture can be fostered and realized by deciding “things to do”and “things
not to do”anew.
In other words, the following cultures will be realized: an open culture of
policymaking through good understanding of each other, a culture of
leadership fostering subordinates into leaders, a culture of a society of
information and knowledge that extends information exchanges between the
private sector and the government and provides a chance to develop personal
skills, a culture of collaboration of armed forces through recurring education
and activation of mutual exchange, and a culture of leisure for improving
quality of life.
Service members will be allowed to have animated lives by providing
advanced conditions and revising methods for their military life. The
following plans will be implemented for their benefit: barrack facilities will be
renovated to accommodate squad-scale bedrooms, daily schedule will be
revised to allow service members their active mode of living by self-control,
good atmosphere for service members' leisure, and a chance for selfdevelopment will be provided.


-----

Improving Service Members
Welfare and Barrack Environment

##### Chapter ThreeChapter Three

### Promotion of Welfare for Veterans

Courses of policy support to the veterans are based on solutions for financial
problems, health care, and efficient leisure time spending. The following plans
have been implemented to improve their welfare: a guarantee of veterans' new
job, an extension for job position, a revision of pension system, an extension of
using forces' welfare facilities, provision of same welfare privileges as service
members, and a change of recognition from the nation and the society.
Inaccurate amount of pension among the service members in different ranks
were deposited, and this problem was often mentioned since the revision of
the law in 2000. But this problem was completely solved through the revision
in military pension law, implemented at the end of year 2002. It brought a
dramatic increase in pension and helped solve financial problems.
Only 27.3% of the service members who were discharged after long years of
service during the last 5 years were able to get a new job due to the special
aspects of their service in isolated places for a long period of time. A bureau in
the MND was organized to take full responsibility of job guiding and
counseling. The following plans were implemented in various ways to
increase their employment rate allowing them a stable life after discharge:
policy development for employment, putting more effort for extending and
seeking positions and jobs in either in forces or in society, and developing
career guidance training for their stable settling in society.
The Ministry of Patriots and Veterans Affairs is planning to implement
supportive systems like health care, education and employment based on the
law of “support for the veterans”for the improvement of welfare and, to allow
the veterans to use military fitness center, hospital and other military welfare
facilities by extending the scope of welfare support and increasing the number


-----

Promotion of Welfare for Veterans

of members.
Moreover, it is planning to use military fitness center for the same price as
service members on active duty with same standing. Extending the extent of a
free diagnosis in military hospital for the veterans with at least 10 years of
service is planned when the capacity and revenue is available. This service is
currently available only to veterans who have served at least 20 years.
Funerals for veterans are planned by establishing funeral ceremony halls in
the Armed Forces Capital Hospital. Burial support in the National Cemetery
for the veterans is planned to continue in the current manner. In the long run,
construction of multiple silver town that has a hospital, basic facilities for
living and leisure is planned to provide veterans with a stable and comfortable
life.


-----

#### Part Seven
## Defense Budget

**Chapter One**
**FY 2003 Defense Budget**

**Chapter Two**
**Defense Budget Allocation Trend and Status of Defense**
**Management**

**Chapter Three**
**Need for Appropriate Defense Budget**

**Chapter Four**
**Requirement for Advanced Self-Reliant Defense**


-----

FY 2003 Defense Budget

##### Chapter OneChapter One

### FY 2003 Defense Budget

The defense budget for the fiscal year 2003 is 17,426.4 billion won, an
increase of 6.5% compared to the previous year. This makes up 15.6% of
government budget and 2.7% of GDP.



**[Table 7-1] Defense Budget in FY 2003 in comparison to FY 2002**

|Classification|Col2|Year 2002 %|Year 2003 %|Changes %|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||%|
|Total Defense Outlays||16,364.0 100|17,426.4 100|1,062.4|6.5|
|Force Investment||5,475.6 33.5|5,732.8 32.9|257.2|4.7|
|Operation and Maintenance Personnel expenses Working expenses||10,888.4 66.5|11,693.6 67.1|805.2|7.4|
||Personnel expenses|7,010.4 42.8|7,578.7 43.5|568.3|8.1|
||Working expenses|3,878.0 23.7|4,114.9 23.6|236.9|6.1|



**[Figure 7-1] Allocation of FY 2003 Defense Budget by Function**


(unit : billion won)단축기간

%

6.5

4.7

7.4

8.1

6.1


(unit : billion won)

Unit Activities[1)]

Meals/Uniform

1,123.1 (6.4%)

1,270.5 (7.3%)

Equipment Operations
470.3 (2.7%)

Facility Construction

Personnel 440.5 (2.5%)
Expenses
Defense
7,578.7 (43.5%) Others [2)]

Outlays

810.5 (4.7%)

17,426.4 (100%)

Force Investment
5,732.8 (32.9%)

1) Unit activities: facility operation, material acquisition, computerization/information, USFK support, etc.
2) Others: training, reserve force capability, R & D support, etc.


-----

Defense Budget

From the FY 2003 Budget, force investment cost was organized to obtain key
defense capabilities, and to increase investment in research and development
of high-tech weapons systems as a means to prepare for non-security threats
of the future. The operation and maintenance portion of the budget was
organized with an emphasis on such fields as better treatment for the service
members, renovation in basic facilities, securing ammunition for training
purposes, environment preservation and public relations matters.


-----

Defense Budget Allocation Trend
and Status of Defense Management

##### Chapter TChapter Twowo

### Defense Budget Allocation Trend and Status of Defense Management

###### A. Defense Budget Allocation Trend

Until the 1960s, our defense budget had been organized based on the
management cost of manpower. Cost for reinforcing military strength and
maintenance of equipment relied on US military aid. The Forces
Modernization Plan (the Yulgok Project) for self-reliant defense had been
pursued since the early 1970s due to the reduction in USFK (1971) in
accordance with the Nixon Doctrine of the late 1960s. A special purpose tax



**[Figure 7-2] Proportion of Defense Outlays to GDP and Government Outlays**

Proportion of defense
outlays to GDP and
government outlays

Proportion of defense
outlays to GDP

Year ’80 ’85 ’90 ’95 ’98 ’99 ’00 ’01 ’02 ’03


-----

Defense Budget

called the “Defense Tax”was introduced in 1975 to meet the necessary
expenses. The 6% proportion rate of defense outlay to GDP was set in 1979 as
agreed items between the ROK and the US. This 6% level had been maintained
until the early 1980s. Since the mid 1980s, to secure funds for economic
development, the method of determining a defense budget that is fixed at a
certain rate to GDP was abolished. Instead, the defense budget was allocated
on the grounds of government's fiscal capability and, as a result, the budget
was lowered to the 4% level of GDP.
The advances in democratization and the implementation of local autonomy
in the 1990s led to the rise in the demand for social welfare expenditure.
Consequently, the defense budget was determined on the basis of the budget's
rate of increase from the previous year. The allocation rate for the defense
budget dropped to the 3% level of GDP. The trend of tight fiscal management
still continues since the financial crisis of 1997, which led to a reduction in
defense budget allocation to the 2% level of GDP in this decade, causing
serious problems in defense management.

###### B. Status of Defense Management

The sustained decrease in the allocation rate of the national defense budget,
coupled with inflation and cost-raising factors involving high technology
weaponry, has worsened the current situation of defense management. If this
trend continues, the building of a forward-oriented military, let alone
maintaining existing defense capabilities, is expected to face a deadlock.

1. Morale and Welfare of Service Members

Although the ROK is on the eve of becoming an advanced country with a
per capita income level of $10,000, the continued deficient management in the
defense sector, as explored in previous chapters, has caused the level of morale
and welfare of service members to deteriorate to the levels reminiscent of the


-----

Defense Budget Allocation Trend
and Status of Defense Management

1960s and 1970s. As a result, there is a decline in pride and attraction in being
a military officer. Also, the situation makes it harder for the newer generation
service members to adapt to military life.

2. Combat Readiness Posture

The continued shortage in national defense resources also had a serious
impact on the maintenance of the combat readiness posture. Possessing a
number of worn-out equipment that have exceeded their lifespan, the military
is having difficulties in securing spare parts and conducting maintenance and
repair. As a result, unexpected breakdowns and accidents have been a source
for concern. For example, the “Nike”guided missile, which was introduced to
ROK as part of US military aid, is no longer in service in any other country in
the world except ROK. This aged weaponry caused several accidents during
the military exercises of 1998 and 1999. Maintenance work on the equipment
necessary for battle is being delayed due to the decrease in the maintenance
budget, which could harm combat readiness posture. Of all the types of
ammunition needed to sustain combat, only 60% satisfy the sufficient level of
ammunition stockpiles and the amount of provision of ammunition for
training purposes remains at 86%. Individual and unit combat competence is
expected to decline since target practice with some costly ammunition is nonexistent. In the meantime, the shortage in oil posed limits in mobile exercise.
With training camp shortages, military commanders face many difficulties
during mobile exercises conducted beyond base grounds and also spend a
large amount of time to prevent civilian complaints.

3. Force Investment

The proportion of force investment in the national defense budget is in
continued decline because of a rise in pay that followed the policy of better
treatment to public officials and fiscal austerity on national defense that has
been maintained since the financial crisis in 1997. The ensuing problems


-----

Defense Budget

concerning force investments are as follows.

**[Figure 7-3] Change in Proportion of Force Investment to Defense Budget**

Force Investment
5,230.4 5,343.7 5,214.1 5,475.6 5,732.8
(billion won)


First, while at least 10% of force investment should be allocated to new
investment projects each year, only 6.6% of force improvement outlays went to
new investment projects in 1997 and 3.7% in 2003 due to resource constraints.
The promotion of new projects to reinforce defense capabilities has become
difficult.
Second, investment project of key defense capabilities such as K1A1 tanks,
F-15K fighters, AWACS, 7,000 ton-class destroyers, next generation guided
weapons were delayed or its scale drastically cut. For example, the project for
next generation guided weapons that would replace the Hawk and Nike
missiles, planned for the acquisition of 72 missiles. However, the order volume
reduced to 48 because of lack of funds. Even the date of completion was
delayed from the year 2005 to the year 2010.
Third, following the reduction in the amount of materials for the domestic
defense industry, the rate of operation in the defense industry stands at only
50.3% of 2001 levels. As firms of the domestic defense industry are currently
manufacturing at minimum capacity to maintain its production line, the very
survival of the domestic industry is in question. By delaying the securing of


-----

Defense Budget Allocation Trend
and Status of Defense Management

key technologies for the defense capabilities development in the future and in
localization of main weapons systems, the lack of R&D investment could lead
to a vicious circle of increasing military technology dependency on foreign
countries and a loss in competitiveness in defense exports.



**[Figure 7-4] Reduction and Delay of Key FIPs**

Period / Number of Units

**Original plan** **Adjusted**

K1A1 tanks ’99∼’08 456 ’99∼’08 323

7,000 ton class Destroyers ’99∼’08 3 ’01∼’12 3

F-15K fighters ’99∼’08 120 ’02∼’09 40

Airborne Warning & Control System ’98∼’04 4 ’04∼’10 4

Next generation guided weapons ’99∼’05 72 ’04∼’10 48

In-flight tanker ’00∼’05 5 ’04∼’10 4


-----

Defense Budget

##### Chapter ThreeChapter Three

### Need for Appropriate Defense Budget

The Korean society is divided on the question of increasing the defense
budget. Those who support an increase in defense budget do so for the
following reasons. Despite the efforts for reconciliation and cooperation
between the South and North, North Korea still remains a military threat, as
evidenced in the nuclear crisis, and therefore ROK's defense capability must
be continuously strengthened. Another thread of opinion in support for a rise
in defense expenditure calls for an early realization of self-reliant defense, in
other words lowering ROK's dependency on USFK and establishing a
forward-looking advanced defense system, which is based on quality rather
than quantity as a way of preparing for non-specific threats in the future.
Meanwhile, negative opinions on the increase in defense budget are as
follows. As the recognition of “no war among the same people”has spread to
certain elements of Korean society since the South-North Joint Declaration of
June 15, 2000, some have said that the rise in defense budget undermines
peace and stability on the peninsula, and that because ROK's economic or
military power is far superior to that of North Korea, portions of the defense
budget should be used for economic development and social welfare. Still
another opinion argues that efficient defense management that includes the
reduction of troops can help secure resources for force investment.
With such a diverse array of opinion about the appropriate level of defense
budget, forming a public consensus built upon the basis of in-depth
understanding of the security situation and policy is needed in order to ensure
peace and prosperity on the peninsula.


-----

Need for Appropriate Defense
Budget

###### A. Preparation for Current and Future Non-Specific Threats

Inter-Korean reconciliation and cooperation notwithstanding, North Korea

has not abandoned its strategy to communize the South, and to this end

maintains an overwhelming quantitative superiority in conventional weapons

while also continuously pursuing the development of WMD. More than 70%

of their ground forces are deployed south of the Pyongyang-Wonsan Line,

enabling them to launch a surprise attack. With the mass development and

deployment of long-range artilleries and missiles, they have the capability to

attack the metropolitan area and the entire peninsula.

Northeast Asia is emerging as the region with the world's most fierce arms

race. Japan is exploring extended political and military roles that are

congruent to its economic power. China is pursuing modernization of military

strength under the strategy of “active defense,”whereas Russia is qualitatively

improving its military strength in order to restore its status as a powerful

country. The ROK is facing a security situation that urgently calls for the

establishment of a self-defense capability that can actively respond to North

Korea's military threat as well as non-specific threats in the future.

###### B. Preparation for Progressive Readjustment of ROK-US Alliance

In line with changes in the global security environment and development of
its forces, the US is recently examining the overall restructuring of its armed
forces deployed overseas.

In light of improvement in the capabilities of ROK Armed Forces, role

adjustments are being explored in which the ROK will play the leading role in

ROK's defense while the US play its role at the regional level. During the


-----

Defense Budget

course of this transition, some of USFK's current duties will be handed over to

the ROK. Those forces which the ROK has been reliant on the US, such as

intelligence, surveillance, precision strike and protective forces need to be

secured as soon as possible. While establishing a basis for a self defense

capability, the building of a future-oriented military force, which conforms to

the modernization of the ROK-US Alliance should also be carried in tandem.

###### C. Securing Defense Capability that Corresponds with National Power

Economic and military power are the two measurements that are used to
gauge a country's standing in the world. A strong national defense raises
ROK's status in international society, and plays a key factor in determining
Korea's credibility. Therefore, defense expenditure that corresponds to
national power is important.

When compared to other countries, the defense outlay of ROK is very low.

The defense outlay of other countries decreased briefly after the end of Cold

War, but returned to continued growth in the late 1990s. Especially since the

9·11 terrorist incident, defense outlays have been climbing sharply.

The proportion of ROK's defense outlay to GDP, which stands at 2.7%, is

lower than the world average of 3.5%. This is even less than half the rate of

other countries with imminent security threats, such as Israel and Taiwan,

which averages at approximately 6.3%. Defense budget per person was $252

in 2001, which is only the 30th highest in the world. The economy of ROK,

which is the 13th largest in the world, can fully absorb a defense outlay of

3.5% of GDP.


-----

Need for Appropriate Defense
Budget


|[Table 7-2] Defense|e Outlay o|of other Co|ountries (|(FY 2001)|Col6|Col7|Col8|(Year 2001)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Classification|Israel|US|Singapore|France|Taiwan|Russia|Japan|ROK|
|Defense budget (in million)|10,375|322,365|4,280|32,909|10,432|63,684|39,513|11,920|
|Ratio to GDP (%)|9.5|3.2|5.1|2.6|3.7|4.3|1.0|2.8|
|Per Capita Defense Budget ($)|1,673|1,128|1,044|553|472|440|310|252|
||||||||||


※ Source : The Military Balance 2002-2003 (ROK entries quoted from government data)

###### D. Defense Budget and National Development


Security and economy are two important axes of national administration.
Stable security provides the environment in which economic activities can
flourish and economic growth makes possible the outlay of appropriate level
of defense budget, which in return reinforces national power.
The era of digitization and globalization has created a new market where
information, capital and goods circulate rapidly. When security is threatened
in this kind of market surroundings, it will have a negative effect on the
economy, with an immediate decline in credit rating, depression in investor
confidence, a slump in stocks and a decrease in exports.
The effect of security factors on the economy is formidable, especially in the
case of divided Korea, whose dependence on external trade is high. A rise in
global credit rating agency's interest in security and defense of the ROK can be
understood in this context.
In the early 1980s, ROK recorded an annual growth rate of 15~20% while the
defense outlay ratio remained at 6% of GDP. The induction effect of industrial
production of defense expenditure is higher than the industry average.
Defense-related research and development contribute to development of


-----

Defense Budget

domestic technologies and an increase in export through the civilian transfer
of defense-related technologies and compromised trade in weaponry import.
Defense budget is not simply an exhaustive expenditure, but an expense spent
in many different industrial fields to contribute to productive economic and
social development through many spill-over effects in overall industry fields.
The ROK Armed Forces also contributed to a rise of the country's status by
participating in activities of UN PKO and anti-terrorism. Recent dispatch of
forces to Iraq and Afghanistan played a decisive role of forming a strong bond
between the US and the ROK. The ROK Armed Forces also played key roles
during national disasters and large-scale national events. This contributed
much to ROK's economy in both direct and indirect ways.


-----

Requirement for Advanced
Self-Reliant Defense

##### Chapter FourChapter Four

### Requirement for Advanced Self-Reliant Defense

Establishing the basis for advanced, self-reliant defense during the term of

the Participatory Government requires not only the maintenance of existing

operations and force investment, but also meeting further budget

requirements to solve problems stemming from a long-term deficient

management and to build a self-defense capability.

This requires an additional 12.2 trillion won for the defense resources until

year 2008 including 10.4 trillion won for uplifting service members' morale,

spent for squad-scale quarters furnised with individual beds, improvement in

quarters for officers and NCOs, a rise in enlisted men's salary and

actualization of facility maintenance needs. It also includes 1.8 trillion won,

spent for reinforcement of defense capabilities due to the reduced period of

service and increase of noncommissioned officers. At the same time, 3.4

trillion won is needed for training-purpose ammunition to strengthen combat

readiness posture, fuel for the equipment and securing a training camp. An

additional 0.3 trillion won is needed for environment preservation, and to

protect people's rights and interests. The overall budget requirement for

operation and maintenance between year 2004 and year 2008 is estimated to

be 82 trillion won.

Force Investment Programs to secure self-defense capabilities include

preparing to counter threats from the North beforehand, developing abilities

for non-specific threats in the future and conducting research and

development to acquire key technologies, which will require 55 trillion won.


-----

Defense Budget

The overall defense budget which includes operation and maintenance and

force investment between FY 2004 and FY 2008 is 137 trillion won, which

amounts to 3.2~3.5% of estimated GDP.

Some people claim that defense capabilities investment should be funded by

reducing troop strength and conducting economical application. During the

sustained period of deficient management, the ROK Forces implemented

various reform measures to efficiently operate defense budget, and will strive

to do so in the future. But the price for F-15K fighter is 100 billion won,

equivalent to the yearly budget for 2 divisions, while one Korean destroyer

(KDX-III) is 1,500 billion won, equivalent to the yearly budget for 17 divisions.

Taking these problems into consideration, it is beyond forces' capability to

resolve the shortage of defense capabilities investment which was brought

about by the reduced allocation.

The key to national defense is to prevent war and to protect national benefit

positively by investing defense budget at the right moment and securing

necessary defense capabilities when needed. If establishing national defense

power for the future is delayed, the very survival of the country will hardly be

guaranteed considering rapid changes in the 21 [st] century's security

environment. At a time when establishing and maintaining military strength

has reached its limit due to the long term accumulated shortage of national

defense resources, appropriate level of defense budget needs to be stably

allocated in order to realize advanced self-reliant defense.

In order to support the Policy of Peace and Prosperity with “force”and to

develop into an “advanced, high-morale, elite armed forces”that can respond

to any security threat in a self-reliant and active manner, a national consensus

needs to be forged so that 3.2~3.5% of GDP can be allocated for defense

budget.

Peace does not come only because we want it; it is won when there is the

“will”and “force”to protect it. Substantial investment along with firm

national will toward security is required in order to uphold the national


-----

Requirement for Advanced
Self-Reliant Defense

interest and right to exist, especially when North Korea poses a threat today,

and an uncertain security environment looms in the future.

It is imperative that a national consensus be forged on a stable allocation of

an appropriate level of defense budget so that the current deadlock in defense

management is improved and the basis is established to build a future
oriented military force, which are the precursors in realizing “advanced, self
reliant defense.”


-----

#### Part Eight

## Realizing the National Defense with the People

**Chapter One**
**Public Benefits Enhancement and Protection of Rights**

**Chapter Two**
**Realizing Open Defense Administration**


-----

Public Benefits Enhancement
and Protection of the Rights

##### Chapter OneChapter One

### Public Benefits Enhancement and Protection of Rights

###### A. Enhancing Military's Environment Preservation Activities

1. Laying the Foundation for the Military's Environmental
Management

The underlying principle of the military's environmental policy is
“environment-friendly management.”The military is actively participating in
environment-friendly activities that are aimed at minimizing pollution caused
by military presence and utilization, restoring polluted areas, preserving the
ecosystem of the surrounding environment, and supporting local
environmental cleanup activities.
Environmental management requires the participation and cooperation of all
involved personnel. Especially, the employment of wastewater treatment
facilities and incinerators requires professional manpower. Out of a total of
5,412 basic environmental facilities classified into 6 catergories such as
wastewater treatment facilities, incinerators, the military has secured 3,460
facilities (64%) as of 2002. And, the rest (1,952) are to be in place by 2005.
Moreover, the military is actively engaged in tasks that are aimed to upgrade

**[Table 8-1] Military Owned Basic Environmental Facilities/Plan**

|Classification|Total Demand|'02|'03|'04|'05|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Facilities|5,412|3,460|440|756|756|
|100 million Won|4,919|2,400|498|1,011|1,010|
|||||||


-----

Realizing the National
Defense with the People

old environmental facilities in order to satisfy the current law standards.
Projects for upgrading 115 basic environmental facilities including incineration
facility are planned for 2003.
Furthermore, the military has been securing sufficient numbers of military
occupational specialty (MOS) personnel including environmental specialists
and other relevant agents that effectively operate these facilities. By the end of
2002, 896 environmental MOS personnel were employed and by the end of
2005, the total demand of 1,609 personnel is to be secured in accordance with
the environmental facilities plan.

**[Table 8-2] Military Employed MOS Personnel/Plan**

|Classification|Total Demand|'02|'03|'04|'05|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|No. of MOS Personnel|1,609|896|237|237|239|
|||||||



2. Reducing Noise in Military Airfields/Firing Ranges

The military holds and operates numerous military airfields and firing
ranges and as a result, there has been a rapid increase in complaints over the
high level of noise produced at these places. Therefore, the military has
established a “comprehensive noise reduction policy”and is doing its best to
minimize the inconvenience experienced by the people. Also, in order to
reduce the noise level and minimize public inconvenience, the flight course
and flight altitude at military airfields are being adjusted.
In order to minimize the noise level of maintaining aircraft, seven soundproof flight maintenance facilities have been constructed by the end of 2002
and six more are being planned for completion by the year 2005.
Meanwhile, a special law concerning military-related noise is being
considered in order to develop fundamental countermeasures to noise
produced at military airfields and firing ranges. The current research on the
actual condition of military-related noise is to be completed by the year 2004


-----

Public Benefits Enhancement
and Protection of Rights

and after securing enough financial resources, the special law will be enacted
by the year 2005, and will go into effect in 2006.

###### B. Management of Military Facilities and the Protection of Individual Property Rights

1. Relocation of Military Facilities

A total of 3.64 trillion won was spent on the relocation of 234 units from 1966
to 2002. In 2003, the military plans to relocate 36 units at the cost of 327 billion
won.



**[Table 8-3] Relocation of Military Facilities Unit**

|Classification|Total|Seoul|Busan|Daegu|Daejon|Gyungju|Wonju|Inchon|Others|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total Number of Projects 1966-2002 (in 2002)|234 (7)|55 (1)|43 (0)|20 (0)|20 (0)|19 (1)|23 (0)|10 (0)|44 (5)|



2. Settlement of Private Land Used by the Military


(number of units)


For private land that the military must continue to use, the military either
purchases the land or compensates the owners for it. For those deemed
unnecessary for military use, they are returned to the owner immediately.

**[Table 8-4] Settlement of Private Land Cases**

|Classification|Total Size of Land to be Settled|Cases Settled (1983-2002)|Plans|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||2003|After 2004|
|Size (10 thousand pyung)|4,702|3,681|277|744|
|Required Budget (100 million won)|6,934|4,520|614|1,800|


-----

Realizing the National
Defense with the People

3. Revision and Deregulation of Military Facility (Base) Protection
Areas

To protect major military facility (base) and guarantee smooth military
operations, the military has designated and managed military facility (base)
protection areas that account for approximately 3.24 billion pyung in
accordance with the Military Facility Protection Act, the Naval Base Act, and
the Act on Air Bases for Military Use.
However, the effective usage of the land is still restricted since a large
portion of the national territory is designated as military facility (base)
protection area. Therefore, restrictions related to the military facility (base)
protection areas are being reduced and the boundary of these areas are being
rationally readjusted, not only to ensure operational efficiency of the land, but
to enhance public benefit as well.

a. Improving Legal and Institutional Framework
Since 1970, the laws on military facility (base) protection areas have been
revised many times, and some areas, such as villages within the protected area
north of the civilian control line, areas necessary to carry out unification
polices and national security tourist sites have been adjusted from restricted
reservation zones to limited protection zones.
In the past, new construction or remodeling of all types of buildings was not
permitted in areas around the ammunition storehouse (depots), but now
removal of buildings in these areas is allowed for public projects, e.g., railway
or road construction. Plus, the air base protection zone, which was previously
set at 5 km from the borderline of airfields, has been reduced to 2 km. Also,
the restricted area for helicopter bases has been reduced. Both ease the
restrictions on the lands around airfields.
Since February 1998, permitted range or height of construction inside the
military facility (base) protection areas has been specified and administrative
agencies took charge of consultations in order to simplify the procedures for
obtaining permission from the military. The military also made efforts to


-----

Public Benefits Enhancement
and Protection of Rights

appease residents by furnishing maps of military facility (base) protection
areas in administrative agencies.
In May 2003, the “Military Facility Protection Act”was revised and enacted
as Statute No. 6870. This law not only laid the ground for division and
brigade-level units to establish and run “Military Facility Protection Zone
Committees”for areas under their jurisdiction but also made possible the
processing of petitions concerning consultation commissioning and other
military facility reservation services. It shortened the processing time from six
months to one month. In addition, it enabled the cooperation between local
administrative agencies and responsible units.
Furthermore, in order to cope with various civil appeals and petitions at
National Assembly and to effectively manage military facility protection
zones, the military has established “Military Facility Protection Area
Management Committee”as of January 2003, headed by the Director of
Operations of the JCS. This committee is working to ease regulations, to
review and lift restrictions on protection areas, to reset operational standards,
and also to modify relevant laws and regulations. In March 2003, the Office for
Government Policy Organization placed the “Improvement of Military Facility
Protection Area Management”at the top of its policy agenda.

b. Easing Regulations
In October 1997, the military lifted restrictions on three reservation zones, a
total of 500,000 pyung including ammunition storehouses and villages in
Bangsan town, Yanggu county, Kangwon Province that had no influence on
military operations. The military also altered the status of 12 areas, a total of
4,820,000 pyung, which includes settlements within the civilian restriction line,
national security tourist sites, and air defense bases in rear areas, from
restricted reservation zone to limited reservation zone.
In June 1998, it lifted reservation zones on 10 areas, a total of 3,810,000
pyung including cosmopolitan development areas that had no influence on
military operations. Also, it altered the status of 16 areas, a total of 2,330,000
pyung, which includes villages within civilian restriction lines, from restricted


-----

Realizing the National
Defense with the People

reservation zone to limited reservation zone, so that local residents could
enlarge and remodel buildings. In August 1998, consultation operations
regarding the area of Gyeonggi, Gangwon, Incheon, and Seoul, amounting to
320,000,000 pyung, were consigned to administrative agencies. In November
1999, consultation operations regarding a total of 32 areas, amounting to
15,000,000 pyung, which include Paju Gyeonggi-do, Munsan and Yeoncheon,
were consigned to administrative agencies so that they can approve
construction within a height range of 5.5 meters to 45 meters.
In September 2000, it lifted the restricted reservation zone on three areas,
amounting to 1,060,000 pyung, which had no influence on military operations
due to the formation of city and the redeployment of forces. Also, it altered the
status of Dongpae-ri, Paju city settlement and national security tourist sights
of Pyongwha Dam, amounting to 64,000 pyung, from restricted reservation
zone to limited reservation zone. It is operated flexibly in consideration of
projects and development plans of local governments.
In December 2001, it lifted restricted reservation zone on 36 areas,
amounting to 42,630,000 pyung, which include Gangwha Island, Munsan,
Changwon, and so forth, regarding alterations on operational environments.
Consultation operations regarding a total of 34 areas, amounting to 3,720,000
pyung, which includes Paju, Gosung, Masan, Jinhae, and so forth, were
consigned to administrative agencies so that local residents can build within a
height of 3 meters to 70 meters without consulting with the military. It
contributed to conveniences and benefits and guaranteed property rights of
local residents.
In September 2002, it lifted reservation zone, on 133 areas, amounting to
5,790,000 pyung, nationwide and eased construction height limits. It lifted
reservation zones on 25 areas, amounting to 550,000 pyung, which include
Jongno, Seoul, and it altered the status of 75 areas, amounting to 2,160,000
pyung, which include villages and islands located northwest of civilian
restriction lines, from restricted reservation zones to limited reservation zones,
so that new constructions and repairs could become possible. Also,
consultation operations regarding 33 areas, amounting to 3,080,000 pyung,


-----

Public Benefits Enhancement
and Protection of Rights

including Byeokjaedong in Goyang city, Sinsanli in Paju city, and so forth,
were consigned to administrative agencies which resulted in the omission of
consultation process with the military. It also eased construction height limits
on existing consigned areas.

**[Table 8-5] Cancellation and Deregulation of Military Facility Protection Areas**

(Unit: 10 thousand pyung)

|Year|total|Before '80|'81∼ '85|'86∼ '88|'89∼ '93|'94|'95∼ '98|'99∼ '00|'01∼ '02|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Cancellation|92,776|849|1,104|30,805|1,393|53,770|431|106|4,318|
|Revision|10,005|257|486|2,615|1,419|4,267|715|6|240|
|Consultation Commission|33,632|·|·|·|·|·|32,000|1,500|132|



###### C. Activities of Military Support for the Public 

1. Support for the Public

As “ Armed Forces of the
People,”the military actively
participates in various endeavors
where they are most needed by
making the best use of its
manpower, equipment, and
technology, while not hindering
fulfillment of its basic missions.
Especially, given manpower
shortages and economic difficu- Farmland Support
lties in rural farming areas, the

Farmland Support

military is an enthusiastic volunteer and source of farmland support in such
work as transplanting rice seedlings, harvesting rice, and other needs.


-----

Realizing the National
Defense with the People

Rather than simply providing manpower, the military tries to support the
foundation of farming through the consolidation of farm roads and river
improvement work. Moreover, the military formed farm machine repair
teams and dispatched them to places in lack of farm machine service centers.

**[Table 8-6] Farmland Support in 2002**

|Participants|Equipment|Major Support Achievements|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Farming Support|Farm Machine Repair|Farm Road Repair|Anti- Epidemic Support|Medical Support|
|613,901 persons|9,105 units|28,752 hectares|6,591 units|89 km|1,384 places|24,874 persons|



Meanwhile, the military also provides free medical service and preventive
measures against epidemics for residents in remote areas with insufficient
medical care, legal counseling services to local residents, and conducts sisterrelationships with nearby social welfare facilities or needy neighbors.

2. Support for Public Projects

In an attempt to enhance public welfare and to develop the nation's
industrial infrastructure, the military has taken part in national land
development projects such as road construction and the reorganization of
arable land. From 1990 to 1993, the military supplied manpower and
equipment to help pave the Freedom Expressway. In 1996, the military
completed road renovation projects on both Baengnyeongdo and
Daecheongdo.
Recently from May 1997 to December 1999, the military provided personnel
and construction equipment to renovate a 19 km section of the coastal road on
Ganghwado. As a second stage of such support, starting in June 2000, a 9.5 km
section has been renovated with various construction equipment including
excavators and dump trucks, and completed 4.3km by the end of 2002. So far,


-----

Public Benefits Enhancement
and Protection of Rights

this military support has saved 17.3 billion won, has met the needs of the local
residents, and has enhanced military operational capability.

3. Support Activities for Disasters and Accidents

In the year 2002, there were large scale disasters resulting from unusual
changes in the weather, including heavy snow, drought, red tide, heavy rain
and the typhoon “Rusa.”
The military promptly carries out restoration support activities and employs
available manpower and equipment to the maximum level possible during
disasters or calamities. Eventually, the military will give positive aid to the
nation by mobilizing all available army personnel in an aspect of “the
performance of military's fundamental duties.”Our military will strive to

**[Table 8-7] Support for the Public during the Last 5 Years**

|Classification|Total|'98|'99|'00|'01|'02|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Military Personnel (Persons)|6,670,546|1,875,540|1,446,651|522,309|1,843,986|982,060|
|Equipment(Units)|149,482|35,476|20,452|3,790|66,892|22,872|



**[Table 8-8] Statistics of Support for the Public during the Last 5 Years**

|Classification|Rescued Person (persons)|Arrangement of house (buildings)|Road/ Riverbank Repair (km)|Farmland Repair (10,000 pyung)|Quarantine/ Sterilizat- ion (ha.)|Green House/ Stall Repair (buildings)|Scatter of Yellow Soil (tons)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total|1,674|77,158|9,388|2,117|161,333|36,867|9,305|
|’98|861|6,520|922|42|132,678|||
|’99|578|21,071|1,020|1,429|22,274|||
|’00|-|1,493|66|-|5,927|||
|’01|124|36,252|6,813|62|-|36,867|5,705|
|’02|111|11,822|567|584|454||3,600|
|||||||||


-----

Realizing the National
Defense with the People

enhance its capability to respond to national crises by properly training its
personnel and improving its equipment, all to minimize damage to life and
property of the people.

4. Military Support for Nation's Logistics Crisis
(General Strike of the Korean Cargo Workers Federation)

Since the Korean Cargo Workers Federation went on a strike in May 2003,
productive activities reached a deadlock, while exports and imports were not
completed timely. At the same time, worry about the national credit rating's
downfall soared during the national logistics crisis. Nevertheless, the military
contributed to the normalization of the nationwide transport cargo system, as
well as the operation of Busan port, by supporting with both military
professional personnel and equipment. As a result, the military not only did
its best for the public welfare, but also earned credibility as the nation's
military in times of national emergency.
During the period of general strike by the Cargo Workers Federation, 35
drivers of container trailers, 20 69-ton tractors and 20 container trailers,
together with 40 more drivers (totaling to 230 personnel and 92 vehicles for
transportation) made a
contribution to normalization
of logistics nationwide. In the
mean time, the military
provided a solution to get
through the nation's serious
crisis by rendering its
exclusive pier as a port of
container shipment.
Once more, the military is
cultivating around 10,860

personnel in approximately


Support for the transportation equipment during the
General Strike of Cargo Workers Foundation


-----

Public Benefits Enhancement
and Protection of Rights

12 fields including railroad, electricity, water works, and others to keep up
with the constant support system.


-----

Realizing the National
Defense with the People

##### Chapter TChapter Twowo

### Realizing Open Defense Administration

###### A. Satisfying the People's Right to Know

1. Information Disclosure and Military Related Petitions

Knowing that defense draws its resources from the people and that the
military cannot play its role properly without their support, the military has
been doing its best to satisfy the right of the people to know. In order to
enhance the sense of national security as well as trust toward the military, the
military publicizes its information to the extent that it does not hurt its
essential role. Also, considering increasing needs of the public involving the
military, and the progress of democracy in Korea, the military is endeavoring
to achieve balance.

a. Information Disclosure
The government passed the “Act on Obligatory Disclosure of Information by
Public Agencies,”in which it makes it mandatory for all public agencies to
publicize all the information they deal with. In accordance with the law, the
military has made a list of public files in civil affairs offices and has built a site
called “Service Windows”on the Internet website of the MND, which
provides various files on its policies and statistics.
Publicizing information is needed to encourage the participation of the
people in national affairs and to ensure the credibility and the transparency of
the government. A person can first look at lists of various files provided at the
website (www.mnd.go.kr) or at government offices, and then ask for the


-----

Realizing Open Defense
Administration



**[Figure 8-1] Process of Information Disclosure**

**Process of Information Disclosure**

Center

Civil Petiton

Notification Request for

Offices

of result reviewing

Application Request

Applicant transfer Decision on disclosing

the information by the
deciding department

Internet

Applicant informed of the decision within 15 days

information needed. Once the request is submitted to the agency, the agency is
obliged to notify the requester within 15 days, whether the request is
permitted or not, and once the request is permitted, it must provide the
information within 15 days.
Should an appellant lodge an appeal, the MND and its subordinate
institutes are to respond within seven days in writing. If the appeal is denied
or dismissed, an information notice of the administrative appeal will be
mailed together with the decision. Since January 1, 1998, the MND has been
continually expanding the boundaries of information, and starting from July
2000, it has established an information disclosure system on the internet, so
that anyone can easily ask for publication of information. Through the Internet
service, which provides various statistics, the MND has tried to ensure the
trust of the people in its administration. Beyond this effort, the MND has
eased restrictions on files regarding National Defense Investment projects, set
up procedures for information disclosure and has publicized these efforts
since July 1999.
When information disclosure was first introduced in 1998, it only received


-----

Realizing the National
Defense with the People

five requests. However, this number is increasing as the people's interest
grows.

**[Table 8-9] The Current Status on Information Disclosure**

|Year|1999|2000|2001|2002|2003(May)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Number of cases|34|627|2,204|139|113|



※ The reason for the reduced number of information disclosure in 2002 is because the basic information disclosures
were also counted as general petitions.

b. Military-related Petitions
As the democracy in Korea was being firmly rooted, the people's need for
satisfaction of personal and property rights grew. The MND has been putting
much effort and resources into this effort to satisfy all these needs. In the past,
dealing with civil petitions was slow, perfunctory and inefficient. Its job was
only confined to taking requests and shifting around paperwork around. In
addition, it had been slow to react to the needs.

**[Table 8-10] Civil Petition Information**

|Classification|Contact information|
|---|---|
|MND address|1 Yongsan-dong 3 Ga, Yongsan-gu, Seoul, 140-701|
|Office of Civil Petition|02) 748-6891, 6892, 797-7504, 795-0808|
|FAX|02) 748-6895|
|Web address|www.mnd.go.kr|
|Defense Reporting Center|02) 748-5959, 017-675-5959, 017-674-6880|
|MND phone number|02) 748-1111|



In order to be effective, the MND had to be quick to respond, but due to its
many- leveled structure, valuable time was lost in the process.
First, the MND created the Office of Civil Petitions, which can deal with civil
petitions comprehensively. The procedure related to civil petitions has been


-----

Realizing Open Defense
Administration

somewhat passive and limited to delivering documents, but as the importance
of civil affairs grew, MND created a civil petitions department under the
inspection bureau for more efficient supervision and defense reporting tasks,
so that the people can handle civil petitions themselves. It has also improved
the service by designating specific departments for the civil petitions that had
not been taken care of because of the administrative structure. For repeated
civil petitions, it has provided substantial solutions to satisfy the petitioners.
Also, it has improved the civil affairs system by activating the defense civil
petitions mediation committee.
Second, it has established the Defense Civil Affairs Information System.
Within the MND, its subordinate departments and each service headquarters
started to use the same program to process the civil petitions. This reduced the
process for each petition takes from seven days to real-time. Also it built a
database so that the people can check the progress of their petitions on the
Internet. This change has ensured speed, reliability and efficiency in civil
affairs.
Third, the laws for repeated petitions and unsolved petitions as well as the
laws and regulations for benefits and support for national heroes, military air
base and hometown reserves have been revised and modified to better meet
the public need. If the laws seem irrational or outdated, requests for revising
the laws may be submitted, and in return, the concerned ministries will accept
and address these problems, successfully getting rid of the possible cause of
petitions.
Fourth, for the benefit of the people, automated booths have been installed
in the headquarters of the MND and each service headquarters as well. Also,
to increase the satisfaction of services, periodic audit procedures are
conducted along with annual satisfaction surveys. Friendliness of telephone
counseling in each division and higher level units is also a subject of checks, so
efficiency could be maintained all the time.
Fifth, in order to foster a bright barrack environment by eradicating battery,
abuse and other illegal conduct, MND has activated the National Reporting
Center. Its existence and ways to utilize their services have been publicized on


-----

Realizing the National
Defense with the People

the Korea Defense Daily Newspaper, weekly. All the reports can be received
through the Internet, mail, telephone, or fax 24 hours a day. Important matters
are directly investigated by the MND, but minor matters are investigated by
each service. However, results of all investigations are checked thoroughly by
the MND. All these measures help to prevent accidents involving military
personnel. Through this effort, battery and abuse as well as illegal or
unreasonable conducts have been sharply reduced.



|[Table 8-11] Met|thods of Civil Pet|tition at MND|Col4|Col5|(Unit: cases)|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Year|Total|Paper Petition|Internet Petition|Visiting Petition|Telephone Consultation||
|2000|51,274|3,793|8,834|2,622|36,025||
|2001|55,922|3,234|10,666|1,832|40,190||
|2002|66,763|9,319|13,216|3,028|41,200||


The majority of civil petitions involve issues regarding personal information,
military regulations, verification of Military Merit, property rights, and
accident reports. Requesting a civil petition is now done via the Internet
instead of paper work. The MND is working around the clock to increase the
satisfaction of the people in many ways, but the vast size of MND and its role
of conducting secret missions make it hard to fully satisfy all the needs of the
people. Therefore, to increase the satisfaction of the people, MND will
continuously improve the laws and regulations regarding civil petitions
through various methods including certificates as well as making requested
documents available on-line, increasing the number of the units equipped
with the Internet, and reducing the process stages of civil petitions. In doing
so, the status of the army for the people and of the people will be solidified.

2. Activating Defense Public Relations

The Participatory Government is making constant efforts to open its defense
administration by making defense policies public and gathering public


-----

Realizing Open Defense
Administration


opinion. To meet these goals, the Participatory Government is holding
constant “daily press briefings”while opportunely apprising the general
public of issues of common interest, such as national defense policies and
changes in security circumstances in and around the Korean Peninsula, by
means of military media, e.g., Korea Defense Daily, Defense Media
Broadcasting, Defense News and other media.
As of March 2000, the MND launched its own Internet website, thereby
making interactive communication with the public possible and improving the
convenience of its users. The MND has also opened websites for each of its
branches within its own website and has established a liaison system with all
forces, making the processing of civil appeals swift and more accurate. Various
military data and diverse multimedia data, such as marching songs and
military films, are also available at this website.
Public opinion is collected and reflected in national defense policies through
various sources, such as public polls, open bulletin, and e-mails. In March
2002, a daily newspaper delivery system was introduced to deliver the Korea
Defense Daily, the military's public media, into the hands of its readers on the
publishing date. The military expects to gradually expand the practice of this
system in the near future.
In order to publicize national defense policies and provide answers to the
questions of the families of
service members, the Korea
Defense Daily is being sold in
some of the subway stations in
Seoul as of March 2002, and in
some of the subway stations in
Busan as of October 2002. The
sale of the Korea Defense Daily
is expected to go nationwide
depending on the response of its

The Korea Defense Daily on Newsstands

readers and other conditions


-----

Realizing the National
Defense with the People

|Total|Korea Youth Association|The Scouts Union|The Girl Scouts Union|Young Astronauts Korea|Sea Explorers in Korea|Others|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|101,890|35,570|38,000|5,450|7,000|13,880|1,990|


3. Inspiring Security Consciousness Through Barracks Experience

Each service of the ROK Armed Forces is conducting distinctive barracks
experiences and self-control training activities, which contribute to fostering
teenagers through cultivation of leadership, discipline of mind and body, and
development of their potentials. The total number of participants amounts to
100,000 annually.
The contents of the program are organized as a national education course
including an introductory movie on national defense, basic military training,
nighttime border guard experience, barracks life education, ocean activity,
survival game, and camping. Participating teenagers experience the
challenging and adventurous activities, which helps them understand the
importance of national security and the significance of national defense duty.
Throughout these activities,
teenagers have a chance to
understand social activities and
barracks culture before enlist-
ment. At the same time, the
military creates for its soldiers a
barracks culture environment,
which corresponds to teenagers'
taste in order to boost morale
and to diffuse and activate
sturdy culture. Teenagers' Barracks Experience

**[Table 8-12] Teenager Organizations National Defense Camping Support Result**

(Unit : person)

**Korea** **The Girl** **Young** **Sea**

**The Scouts**

**Total** **Youth** **Scouts** **Astronauts** **Explorers** **Others**

**Union**

**Association** **Union** **Korea** **in Korea**

101,890 35,570 38,000 5,450 7,000 13,880 1,990


-----

Realizing Open Defense
Administration

On the other hand, for adults, this barracks experience heightens confidence
and brings back nostalgia of their past service, and gives them an opportunity
to propagate security awareness. Furthermore, the MND invites professional
photographers as well as major figures from NGOs and the Korea Literature
Association to frontline posts annually in order to give them a better
understanding of national defense and so that they can share their security
consciousness. This is done by providing them an opportunity to gain a first
hand look into the security environment and witness the readiness posture of
the armed forces.

###### B. Participation of Civilian Experts in Development of National Defense Policy

In an era that stresses “National Defense Together with the People,”national
defense policies must be set and enforced with transparency, and this process
should be conveyed to the people. With this in mind, our military, which
values the importance of the people's participation and interest in national
defense policies, is establishing and executing systems that invite civilian
experts of various fields to take part in deciding national defense policies.

1. The Council of Defense Policy

Since 1981, the military has been consulting the “Council of Defense Policy,”
which consists of learned and experienced civilian experts from academic
fields and the press, thereby improving civil-military relations.
The Council of Defense Policy provides consulting based on the expertise
and experience from diverse fields for national defense policy. It commissions
a total of 47 members in 13 branch committees, which includes policy, defenseexpenditure control, T.I.E. & publicity, planning & budget, judicial affairs,
personnel & welfare, mobilization, logistics, procurement, research &
development, facilities, intelligence systems, and JCS.


-----

Realizing the National
Defense with the People

In tandem with the government's policy of motivating women's social
participation, the military has been commissioning female experts since 2001,
and as of the year 2003, 10 female consultants are currently working in
different fields. Taking into consideration the characteristics of branch
committees, it is expected that the commissioning of female consultants will
gradually increase in the future.
The Council of Defense Policy, with the Minister of National Defense as its
chair, comprises a whole conference which is held annually, and branch
conferences are held at least once every period. Should matters of national
defense become an issue, frequent policy consulting is provided through
individual visitations or correspondence.

2. Increasing Participation Opportunities of Civilian Experts

In the past, the participation of civilian experts in defense policy-making
was limited to questionnaires or seminars, but as of 1998, civilian experts are
directly participating in policy-making as members of various councils. In
2003, the “Committee for the Innovation of National Defense”changed its
name to the “Committee for National Defense Research”and is commissioning
civilian experts and reserved specialists as its councils.
Furthermore, in order that civilian scholars may show continuous interests
in national defense affairs, the MND is holding civilian-sector seminars
pertaining to national defense, and is also making significant use of the views
of civilian experts when reviewing and deciding defense policies. Moreover, as
of 1999, the MND is making efforts to raise the quality of defense research by
including civilian research institutions in researching affairs of national
defense as of 1999, which was previously done by the Korea Institute for
Defense Analyses.


-----

Realizing Open Defense
Administration

###### C. The Korean War and the 50[th] Anniversary Commemoration Project

The Korean War, during which North Korea, with the support of Soviet
Union and China, launched an invasion against the South, is one of the
representative wars under the order of the Cold War that preserved
democracy and contained the spread of Communism.
The support of UN Forces at that time included the dispatch of combat units
by the US and 15 other nations; the detachment of medical support units by
India and four other countries; and material provision by more than 20
countries. For the duration of the war, over 4 million were killed, more than 10
million were separated from their families, and damages were estimated at
$23 billion. The war, which left the people of Korea with tremendous scars,
still leaves the North and South divided and in a military standoff.
Therefore, the government has designated the period from June 25, 2000 to
July 27, 2003, which marks the 50[th] anniversary of the war, as the period for the
50 [th] anniversary commemoration project and is carrying out various
undertakings.

1. Remembering the Historical Lessons of the Korean War

The government is making efforts to instill security consciousness by
teaching our children historical lessons and the meaning of the Korean War, so
as not to let another tragic event take place on this land. In April and July
2000, defense conferences and seminars were held, inviting experts from the
US and the world over.
Central and battlefield commemorative events are being held annually, and
16 unestablished military fields in the Korean War, along with 13 non-military
areas, such as political, economic, social, cultural fields will be organized and
published into booklets by 2003.
In addition, to honor the souls of the war heroes who fought to preserve
peace on this land, the Yeongcheon Battle Monument, Pohang Student


-----

Realizing the National
Defense with the People

Voluntary Forces Memorial, and the Geoje POW Camp Park have been
completed in 2002. “The Korean War Sculpture”within the War Memorial is
expected to be completed by July 2003. The Participatory Government is also
continuously striving to remind the people of the historical lessons of the
Korean War by restoring and maintaining 667 battlefield sites nationwide.

2. Events for Remembering Major Battles

Events for remembering major battles of the Korean War are regularly held
to bequeath the historical lesson to the posterity to honor the patriotic martyr
and to solidify mutual friendship with allied forces
Thirty-three events for remembering major battles have been held so far
including “Nakdong River Counterattack,”“Incheon Landing Operation,”
and “Seoul Recovery.”On July 27[th], “The 50[th] Anniversary of the Truce”was
successfully held at Panmunjeom and the War Memorial of Korea, hosted by
the MND and the UN Headquarters in Korea.

3. Honoring Korean War Veterans and the Enlargement of Welfare
Policies

Honoring Korean War veterans and their families is still and ongoing
business of the government. In order to recover the remains of the patriotic
martyr to their families, from April, 2000 to June 2003, 933 bodies and 32,000
relics have been recovered from the 29 major battlefield sites including
Yeongcheon and Jincheon.
Unidentified bodies have been placed in the National Cemetery Charnel
House, and identified bodies have been placed in the National Cemetery. 5
American remains were returned to the USA, 95 North Korean remains and 19
Chinese remains were buried in the North Korean and Chinese Cemetery in
Jeokseongmyeon, Paju city. Also, to help the recovery of the remains in the DMZ
and the North Korean area, a written document was published based upon the
testimony from the veterans, previous residents of the area, and other relevant


-----

Realizing Open Defense
Administration

historical documents. Recovering remains will continue long after 50 [th]

anniversary of Korean War.
Furthermore, “Regulations on Benefits and Support for National Heroes”
was revised, so the veterans aged over 70 would receive a monthly honorary
allowance and medical benefits. The restrictions with regard to the use of the
National Cemetery were lightened so that not only the veterans themselves
but also their spouses could be placed in the National Cemetery.
A newly launched search campaign for the bereaved family is on the move;
it notifies the bereaved families of the information regarding their family
members who died during the Korea War and of benefits they may claim. A
variety of other programs for war veterans are now in the process of
implementation. These programs are: constructing monuments for KIAs in
each country; writing names of the military merit awardees on road signs;
afixing doorplates at war veterans' houses; awarding honorary diplomas for
war veterans; and constructing busts of military merit awardees and war
heroes. In addition, other programs to honor war veterans include visiting
veterans' homes for consolation, inviting veterans to national events, visiting
wounded veterans, searching for war comrades and commemorating the
dedicated war heroes.
In order to raise the spirit of national and international Korean War veterans
and bereaved families, appreciation letters from the President were sent in
June, 2000. Since there was a difficulty finding addresses for American
veterans and bereaved families, MND has been consistently working on
confirming the list through the mass media.

4. Inspiring Homeland Defense Consciousness for Post War
Generations

In an effort to heighten homeland defense consciousness for post war
generations, which constitute more than 70% of the population, the MND has
been developing educational programs and carrying out various national
defense cultural events. From 2000 to 2003, the contents concerning the


-----

Realizing the National
Defense with the People


atrocities of the Korean War and separated families were revised and reflected
in elementary, middle and high school curricula; 450,000 people visited
Korean War photo exhibition and the DMZ special exhibition; the great march
pilgrimage for national defense and barracks experience camping were
executed. Through these various methods, MND has heightened homeland
defense consciousness for post war generations.

5. Strengthening of Ties among Participant Countries of the Korean
War

By expressing appreciation
to allies, veterans, and the
bereaved families of the
Korean War, Korea not only
lifts national credibility, but
also strengthens security ties
with participant countries of
the Korean War.
To strengthen ties, represen-
tatives and veterans from war

Ceremony for Korean War Veterans' Visit to Korea

participant countries are
invited to various Korean War
commemoration events. Also, MND is actively supporting events of war
participant countries and sending representatives of Korean government to
major commemorations, such as memorial ceremonies for those who died in
battle.
Furthermore, the Korean government attended America's memorial
ceremony for soldiers killed in the Korean War and Canada's participation in
the Korean War Memorial Event, which strengthened ties with these countries.
Moreover, the Korean government awarded war medals to foreign soldiers,
including those from US and New Zealand, who were not awarded medals
because of the limitation of their national laws at that time. Nowadays, Korean


-----

Realizing Open Defense
Administration

government has been awarding war medals to veterans and bereaved families.
Especially for those Americans who participated in the Korea War,
appreciation letters from President were sent to express additional gratitude.
Since the inauguration of the Participatory Government, the MND is
continually supporting Korean War related events, such as construction cost
for monuments in participant countries, memorial events in US and other
participant countries, the 50[th] anniversary of the ROK-US Mutual Defense
Treaty, and the visits by 1,430 foreign Korean War veterans from 21 nations
and etc. Moreover, the Korean government is heightening confidence of
Korean War veterans and strengthening ties among participant countries by
inviting foreign Korean War veterans and their families to consolation events,
by supporting memorial events at overseas missions, and by inserting special
news on Korea in major international news arganications.


-----

# Appendices


-----

**Appendix 1**

Status of Global Conflicts in 2002

■ Distribution of Regional Conflicts Stages: Conflicts in Progress 84, Ended Conflicts 17 (As of Nov, 2002)

|Region|Armed Conflicts|Confrontational Conflicts|Potential Conflicts|Subtotal|Ended Conflicts|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|America (9)|Columbia|Mexico Peru|Falkland Islands|4|Guatemala ('97) Nicaragua ('96) Haiti ('94) El Salvador ('97) Peru-Ecuador ('99)|
|Africa (34)|DR Congo Sierra Leone Liberia Rwanda Burundi Somalia Angola Uganda Nigeria Chad Kenya Algeria Sudan|Namibia Nigeria-Cameroon Senegal Ethiopia Ethiopia-Eritrea Djibouti Southern Sahara Egypt Egypt-Sudan|Guinea-Bissau Lesotho Togo R Congo|26|Malawi ('97) Ghana ('96) Gabon ('97) South Africa ('97) Mali ('97) Mozambique ('94) Chad-Libya ('94) Niger ('00)|
|Middle East (13)|US·England-Iraq (Gulf war) Lebanon Turkey-Kurds Palestine Iran Iran-Iraq|Iran-UAE Iran-Afghanistan Iraq Israel-Syria|Iraq-Kuwait Israel-Jordan|12|Yemen ('94)|
|Asia (20)|Sri Lanka Afghanistan US-Afghanistan Kashmir Nepal Myanmar Indonesia Philippines India South-North Korea|Bangladesh Spratly Islands Kurile Islands Paracel Islands Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands China-Taiwan China-India Cambodia Tibet||19|China-Russia ('97)|
|CIS (10)|Russia-Chechnya|Georgia-Iphasia Moldova North Osetia-Ingush Azerbaijan-Armenia Estonia-Russia Uzbekistan Kyrgyzstan Tajikistan||9|The Black Sea ('97)|
|Europe (15)|Macedonia Kosovo Northern Ireland|Greece-Albania Cyprus Albania|Greece-Macedonia Romania Bosnia Voivodina Bulgaria Slovakia Aegean Sea Istria|14|Croatia ('98)|
|Grand Total (101)|(36) →34|(33) →35|15|84||
||Subtotal: 69|||||


-----

Appendix 2

Comparison of South and North Korean Military Capabilities

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|(As of Dec. 31, 2002)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Classification||||South Korea|North Korea|
|Troops||Total||691,000|1,170,000|
|||Army||560,000|1,000,000|
|||Navy||68,0001)|60,000|
|||Air Force||63,000|110,000|
|Principal Force Capabili- ties|Army|Units|Corps|13 2)|19 3)|
||||Divisions|49|69|
||||Brigades|19|67 4)|
|||Equip- ments|Tanks|2,400|3,700|
||||Armored Vehicles|2,400|2,100|
||||Field Artilleries|5,000|10,000|
||||MRLs|200|4,400|
||||SSM|20 (Launcher)|50 (Launcher)|
||Navy|Surface Vessels|Surface combatants|130|430|
||||Landing crafts|10|260|
||||Mine warfare vessels|10|30|
||||Support vessels|20|30|
|||Submarines/Submersibles||10|100|
||Air Force|Fighters||550|830|
|||Special aircrafts||70 5)|30|
|||Support aircrafts||210|520|
||Helicopters|||700 6)|330|
|Reserve Troops||||3,800,0007)|7,480,000 8)|



※ 1) Marine Corps included
2) Special Warfare Command and Air Operation Command included
3) Artillery, Missile, and Light-Infantry included
4) Excluding about 50 Para-Military Training Units
5) Excluding Naval aircraft
6) All Army, Navy, Air Force Helicopters included
7) Police, Technical experts included
8) The Para-Military Training Units, Worker-Peasant Red Guard Units, and Red Youth Guard Units included


-----

Appendix 3

North Korea's Missile Development and Capability

■ Chronology of Missile Development

o '76, Introduction of USSR-made SCUD-B (two missiles) from Egypt, and Commencement of development in support of China's

technology

o '84/ '86, Successful test-firing of SCUD-B/ SCUD-C

o May '93, Successful test-firing of Rodong-1

o Aug. '98 Successful test-firing of Daepodong-1

o Sep. '99, In preparation for the test-firing of Daepodong missile, declaring for postponement of test-firing

-  North Korea's precedents of declaration for Dostponement of missile test-firing

-  Sept. 24, '99, Announcement for postponement of missile test-firing after the Agreement of US-North Korea's high rank talks

-  Oct. 25, '00, Re-declaration for deferment of missile test-firing during the visit of US Secretary Albright (the first comment

about time limit of postponement on test-firing)

-  Sep. 17, '02, A demonstration of “Continuous postponement of missile test-firing after 2003”during the summit talks between

Kim Jong-il and Japanese Prime Minister Koizumi

*Recent instance of North Korea's suspension warning on postponement of missile test-firing

-  Jan. 11, '03, North Korea's prime ambassador in China said, “Because US breached every agreement US and North Korea had

made, North Korea might withdraw from discontinuance of missile firing”

■ Capability and Threat Range of North Korea's Missiles

|Classification|SCUD|Col3|Rodong-1|Daepodong-1|Daepodong-2|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||B|C||||
|Maximum range (km)|300|500|1,300|2,000|6,000 (estimated)|
|Threatened area|Daejeon|South Sea|Okinawa|Japan/Taiwan|Alaska|
|Warhead weight (kg)|1,000|770|700|500~700|650~1,000|
|Hit error (m)|1,000|1,300|5,000|2,500|2,000~5,000 (estimated)|


-----

Appendix 4

Combined / Joint Training and Exercises

1. ROK-US Combined Exercises

|Name|Type|Purpose|Contents|
|---|---|---|---|
|Ulchi-Focus Lense (UFL)|CPX|Exercise Chungmu Plan and OPLAN 5027|• National and ROK-US combined crisis management procedures • Execution of OPLAN 5027 and US-ROK military coordination • Support procedures for US reinforcement forces' deployment • Procedures of military governance and civil operations|
|RSOI|CPX|Master procedures of the US reinforcement plan as well as ROK forces' support, mobilization, logistical supports, role of rear area coordinator|• Movement management of US reinforcements and exercise of the procedures of forces deployment • Wartime host nation support (WHNS) • Protection of airport and port of debarkation and exercise of controlling combined vessels • Exercise of procedures of ROK vessels mobilization • Commencement of collocated operation base (COB)|
|Foal Eagle|FTX|Combined special warfare operations, operational capability in the rear area, and joint operational capability improvement|• Combined air / maritime maneuver exercise • Exercise of counter-maritime special forces operations • Exercise of combined special forces' execution of OPLAN 5027, defense of theater against guided missiles. • Defense of key terrains in the middle and tactical assembly areas • Corps level FTX and brigade level MILES FTX|



2. Joint Exercises and Trainings (ROK Forces)

|Name|Type|Purpose|Contents|
|---|---|---|---|
|Amnokgang Exercise|CPX|Improvement of war planning and operational command capabilities of the ROK JCS|• Mastery of war deterrence, crisis management and war transformation procedures • Establishment/development of situational contingency plan • Decision on reinforcement required for operational control and mastery of command procedures|
|Hokuk Training|FTX|Improvement of the joint operations capabilities and establishment of military readiness|• Improvement of counter infiltration operations capabilities • Development of the joint operations capabilities • Development of counter fire operations capabilities • Development of survivability measures|


-----

3. Major Combined Trainings of Neighboring States

|Name|Year|Participants|Contents|
|---|---|---|---|
|RIMPAC|Even year (May-July)|ROK, US, Japan, Canada, UK, Australia, and Chile|• Offensive/defensive exercises at sea, naval gunfire training • Security of sea lines of communications (SLOCs) • Naval blockade and air attack|
|ROK-JAPAN Search and Rescue Training|Odd year (August- September)|ROK, Japan|• Search and rescue training for stranded vessels|
|Pacific Reach|Even year|ROK, US, Australia, Japan, Singapore|• Submarine evacuation and rescue training in the west Pacific region.|


-----

Appendix 5


Chronology of ROK-US Military Affairs

|Year|Date|Main events|
|---|---|---|
|1945|Sep. 7|ㆍUS puts ROK under military government|
||Nov. 13|ㆍUS establishes the national defense headquarter in the military governmental office.|
|1948|Aug. 15|ㆍROK government established, military government terminated|
||Aug. 24|ㆍA temporary military agreement on the security between ROK-US|
||Sep. 1|ㆍA temporary PMAG in ROK established|
|1949|Mar. 22|ㆍUS NSC announces a total withdrawal of USFK until Jun. 30th, 1949 (US NSC 8/2)|
||Jul. 1|ㆍInauguration of US KMAG|
|1950|Jan. 26|ㆍUS-ROK mutual defense support treaty|
||Jul. 9|ㆍThe 8th US Army headquarters establishes in Dae-gu|
||Jul. 14|ㆍPresident Lee, Seung-man entrusts General MacArthur with an operational control over ROKA|
||Sep. 15|ㆍIncheon landing operations by UN forces|
|1951|May 17|ㆍUS NSC confirms the termination of war with an armistice agreement(NSC 48/5)|
||Aug. 17|ㆍROK office of the military attache in US established|
|1953|Oct. 1|ㆍROK-US Mutual Defense Treaty|
|1954|Aug. 12|ㆍROK-US military conference, agreements on reinforcement of ROKA and replacement of equipment for reserved army|
||Nov. 18|ㆍROK-US joint minute book signed ㆍConsent on continuous operational control over ROKA to UNC Commander|
||Nov. 23|ㆍROK-US military conference, discussing reinforcement of ROKA|
|1955|Jan. 14|ㆍROK-US military conference, consent on tripling ROK navy forces|
||Jan. 28|ㆍROK-US conference on military support|
||Jun. 21|ㆍROK-US conference on military economy (Washington)|
|1956|Dec. 2|ㆍROK-US joint military conference (Tokyo)|
|1957|Mar. 24|· ROK-US military conference (Washington)|
||Jul. 1|ㆍUNC, transferred from Japan to ROK|
||Dec. 29|ㆍFix the number of ROK forces (630,000) according to ROK-US joint minute book.|


-----

|Year|Date|Main events|
|---|---|---|
|1958|Feb. 19|ㆍUS State Department announces no will to withdraw USFK|
|1959|May 5|ㆍROK-US combined landing operations|
|1961|Apr. 18|ㆍROK assumes the control over ROKA training from USFK commander|
||May 26|ㆍJoint announcement by National Reconstruction Supreme Council and UNC on returning operational control over ROK revolutionary army|
||Aug. 19|ㆍROK-US high-level military talks (Jin-hae)|
||Oct. 13|ㆍROK-US combined commander's conference (The 8th US Army headquarters in Seoul)|
|1962|Mar. 17|ㆍROK-US high-level military talks (Washington)|
||Apr. 13|ㆍROK-US high-level military talks (Consent on military aids program)|
||May 1|ㆍROK-US high-level military talks (Consent on additional national defense budget)|
|1964|Dec. 19|ㆍPresident Johnson requests President Park to dispatch ROK forces to Vietnam War|
|1965|Jan. 26|ㆍA bill of dispatching troops to Vietnam passes in the ROK National Assembly|
||Jun. 28|ㆍROK-US high-level military talks on the dispatching troops to Vietnam|
||Sep. 6|ㆍROK-US military working-level agreement in Vietnam|
|1966|Jun. 22|ㆍROK-US defense ministers' talks (Washington); consult on the plan of modernizing ROK forces|
||Jul. 9|ㆍSigned SOFA agreement, abolished Daejon Agreement|
|1967|Sep. 5|ㆍROK-US high-level military talks (Consent on military aids program)|
|1968|May 7|ㆍ1st ROK-US national defense cabinet meeting (Washington)|
||Oct. 13|ㆍ1st Focus Lens Exercise|
||Oct. 15|ㆍROK-US operations planning staff groups’meeting; ROK’s first participation in planning defense operations on the Korean Peninsula|
|1969|Mar. 16|ㆍROK-US combined airlift training in Focus Retina|
||Jul. 22|ㆍROK-US defense ministers' talks on reduction in forces|
|1970|May 26|ㆍROK-US high-level military talks on reducing the number of USFK and modernizing ROKA equipment|
||Oct. 14|ㆍROK-US military conference; mutual discussion on modernization of ROKA equipment and reducing forces|
|1971|Mar. 12|ㆍROKA takes over west front line of US 2nd Division area; guards whole area along the DMZ excluding JSA|


-----

|Year|Date|Main events|
|---|---|---|
|1971|Mar. 27|ㆍWithdrawal of US 7th Division|
||Apr. 1|ㆍUS military advisory group in Korea changes its title to JUSMAG-K|
||Jul. 1|ㆍEstablishment of ROK-US 1st Corps|
||Jul. 13|ㆍROK-US national defense cabinet meeting changes its title to Security Consultative Meeting(SCM), held in Seoul|
|1973|Sep. 13|ㆍ 6th round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul)|
|1974|Sep. 24|ㆍ 7th round of ROK-US SCM (Honolulu)|
||Nov. 22|ㆍ ROK-US summit meeting (US reconfirms security commitment on ROK)|
||Dec. 12|ㆍ UNC announces to transfer its operational control to US JCS|
|1975|May 5|ㆍUlchi exercise (ROK) combines with Focus Lens exercise (US)|
||Aug. 27|ㆍ8th round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul)|
|1976|May 26|ㆍ9th round of ROK-US SCM (Honolulu)|
||Jun. 7|ㆍ1st ROK-US combined military training initiated|
|1977|May 11|ㆍROK-US begin discussing about the reduction of the USFK|
||Jul. 20|ㆍ10th round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul)|
|1978|Jul. 6|ㆍROK -US sign on basic memorandum of understanding (MOU) for Korean model of tank|
||Jul. 27|ㆍ11th round of ROK-US SCM (San Diego)|
||Jul. 28|ㆍ1st round of ROK-US Military Committee (MC)|
||Nov. 7|ㆍEstablishment of ROK-US Combined Forces Command (CFC)|
|1979|Jul. 20|ㆍUS President Carter announces revision of withdrawal of USFK|
||Oct. 19|ㆍ12th round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul)|
|1980|Mar. 14|ㆍROK-US 1st Corps reformed into ROK-US CFA|
|1981|Jan. 3|ㆍROK-US summit meeting (Issuing the joint statement with 14 clauses including the concealment of USFK withdraw)|
||Apr. 30|ㆍ13th round of ROK-US SCM (San Francisco)|
||Jun. 19|ㆍROK-US naval maneuver training (East China Sea)|
|1982|Mar. 31|ㆍ14th round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul)|
|1983|Apr. 15|ㆍ15th round of ROK-US SCM (Washington)|


-----

|Year|Date|Main events|
|---|---|---|
|1983|Dec. 8|ㆍMOU on co-production of 155mm self-propelled artillery between ROK-US|
|1984|May 10|ㆍ16th round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul); ROK-US combined air - land joint training|
||Jul. 25|ㆍMemorandum of agreement(MOA) between ROK-US on selling stockpiles to ROK except for WRSA|
|1985|Feb. 15|ㆍROK government holds ROK-US standing committee on the issue of helicopters' export to North Korea|
||May 8|ㆍ17th round of ROK-US SCM (Washington)|
|1986|Apr. 3|ㆍ18th round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul)|
||Dec. 16|ㆍUS terminates providing FMS to ROK after 1987|
|1987|May 7|ㆍ19th round of ROK-US SCM (Washington)|
|1988|Apr. 29|ㆍUS administration commences demand for burden sharing for the Gulf War to ROK government|
||Jun. 8|ㆍROK-US mutual logistics support treaty; ROK-US MOU on defense technology coordination|
||Jun. 9|ㆍ20th round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul)|
|1989|Jul. 18|ㆍMOU between ROK and US on the use of technology in producing defense materiel within ROK|
||Jul. 19|ㆍ21st round of ROK-US SCM (Washington)|
||Aug. 2|ㆍUS congress adopts the“ Nunn-Warner Amendmen”|
|1990|Feb. 15|ㆍROK-US Defense ministers' talks|
||Jun. 25|ㆍMOA between ROK and US on transferring“ Yong-san garrison”to Osan, Pyung- taek area before 1996|
||Nov. 15|ㆍ22nd round of ROK-US SCM (Washington)|
|1991|Jan. 25|ㆍAgreement on establishing JUSMAG-K|
||Feb. 1|ㆍ1st modification of ROK-US SOFA|
||Mar. 25|ㆍAppointment of ROK general to the chief delegate of the UN side of Military Armistice Commission (MAC)|
||Nov. 21|ㆍ23rd round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul); en bloc agreement on ROK-US wartime support|
|1992|Apr. 24|ㆍAppointment of ROKA officer to the company commander of JSA|
||Jun. 25|ㆍDisorganization of ROK-US field army headquarters|
||Aug. 20|ㆍUS Air force in ROK deploys the first patriot missiles in ROK|


-----

|Year|Date|Main events|
|---|---|---|
|1992|Oct. 8|ㆍ24th round of ROK-US SCM (Washington)|
|1993|Nov. 4|ㆍ25th round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul)|
|1994|Oct. 6|ㆍ26th round of ROK-US SCM(Washington); Agreement on redemption of peacetime operational control to ROK|
|1995|Nov. 3|ㆍ27th round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul)|
|1996|Apr. 16|ㆍ1st ROK-US combined wartime RSOI exercise|
||Nov. 1|ㆍ28th round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul)|
|1997|Dec. 9|ㆍ1st round of plenary session of 4-way talks held, 29th round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul)|
|1998|Jul. 9|ㆍROK-US defense ministers' talks|
|1999|Jan. 15|ㆍ30th round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul); Consent on defense burden sharing for 1999~2001|
||Jan. 17|ㆍ30th round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul)|
||Jul. 29|ㆍROK-US defense ministers' talks|
||Nov. 3|ㆍ31st round of ROK-US SCM (Washington)|
|2000|Mar. 18|ㆍROK- US defense ministers' talks|
||Jun. 13|ㆍPresident Kim, Dae-joong visits Pyongyang; Summit meeting between South and North Korea|
||Aug. 18|ㆍGeneral measure to compensate“ Maehyang-ri”villagers for shooting range events|
||Sep. 21|ㆍ32nd round of ROK-US SCM (Seoul)|
||Sep. 25|ㆍSouth- North Korean defense ministers' talks|
|2001|Jan. 12|ㆍAnnouncement of ROK-US joint statement on the compensation of“ Nogeun-ri”event; construction of memorial tower, scholarship for the bereaved family|
||Jan. 16|ㆍArrangement in ROK-US missile treaty; New Guideline on missiles|
||Jan. 18|ㆍ2nd modification of SOFA (7 fields including criminal jurisdiction, environment, labor, etc. )|
||Nov. 15|ㆍ33rd round of ROK-US SCM (Washington); concluding letter of intent on LPP|
|2002|Mar. 29|ㆍMOA on LPP|
||Apr. 4|ㆍConsent on defense burden sharing for 2002 - 2004|
||Dec. 5|ㆍ34th round of ROK-US SCM (Washington), Consent on the improvement of SOFA procedures|


-----

|Year|Date|Main events|
|---|---|---|
|2003|Apr. 8|ㆍ1st meeting of“ Future of the ROK-US Alliance Policy Initiative”|
||Jun. 4|ㆍ2nd meeting of“ Future of the ROK-US Alliance Policy Initiative”|
||Jun. 27|ㆍROK-US defense ministers' talks (Washington)|


-----

Appendix 6


Chronology of Major Foreign Military Exchange and Cooperation

|Col1|Visits to ROK|Overseas Visits|
|---|---|---|
|Jan. 16-19, 2002|The 4th ROK-France policy working-level talks||
|Jan. 20-27|Military educational representatives of China||
|Jan. 21-25||ROK-Japan navy to navy meeting|
|Jan. 21-26||Air Force chief of staff to China|
|Jan. 28-Feb. 1||Asia-Pacific defense officials forum in Japan|
|Feb. 3-6||ROK-Japan security policy consultation meeting|
|Feb. 5|The 7th ROK-France defense industry and logistics joint committee||
|Feb. 16-19|Vice Defense Minister of Australia||
|Feb. 17-20|Army Chief of Staff, Japan||
|Feb. 28-Mar. 9||Sangmu soccer team to China|
|Mar. 2|The 1st exchange students from Japan National Defense Academy to ROK Air Force Academy||
|Mar. 3-Mar. 7||Logistics representatives to China|
|Mar. 4|The 1st ROK-Holland Defense Industry Committee||
|Mar. 4-7|Western Corps commander of Japan||
|Mar. 10-13|Air Force chief of staff, Japan||
|Mar. 11-15|Group of junior officers, Japan||
|Mar. 18-23|4 anti-terrorism experts of France||
|Mar. 19-22|Commander of Army Force, Thailand||
|Mar. 19-24|Superintendent of National Defense College, China||
|Mar. 24-28|JCS college students of Thailand||
|Mar. 25-29|Air defense working group of Japan||
|Mar. 27|Ambassador of Poland||
|Apr. 1-4|Naval vessels of Ireland||
|Apr. 7-12||Minister of National Defense to Malaysia, Indonesia|
|Apr. 9-20|Military Advanced Research Agents of France||
|Apr. 14-17|Minister of National Defense, Republic of the Philippines||


-----

|Col1|Visits to ROK|Overseas Visits|
|---|---|---|
|Apr. 14-20|Diplomatic Strategy Research Agents of France||
|Apr. 17-26||JCS Chairman to Turkey, France, and Germany|
|Apr. 18-28|Athletic representative group of China||
|Apr. 19-21|Minister of Defense, Japan (4.20 Ministers’Talks)||
|Apr. 21-28||Superintendent of National Defense University to China|
|Apr. 24-May 4||Navy chief of staff to Russia, Germany, and Italy|
|Apr. 27-May 3|National Defense University students of Pakistan||
|Apr. 27-May 7|HALO team of China Air Force||
|Apr. 29-May 2|44 Flying officer candidates of Japan, 2 ocean navigation exercise vessels||
|May 8-11|The 1st visit of naval vessel, China to In-cheon Port||
|May 13-16|The 4th ROK-UK defense working-level meeting||
|May 12-14||ROK-US-Japan security conference in Japan|
|May 14|The 12th ROK-Japan air defense working-level meeting||
|May 15-19|ROK-Russia maritime accident prevention committee||
|May 12-20||Army chief of staff to Italy and Russia|
|May 19-23|Navy chief of staff, Pakistan||
|May 26-Jun. 1|Superintendent of the 2nd Medical College, China||
|Jun. 3-7|France Military Intelligence Agency (DPSD) visits to ROK Defense Security Command||
|Jun. 10-15|The 7th ROK-China Defense Study Convention||
|Jun. 11-15||ROK-Russia defense working-level meeting|
|Jun. 17-21|Commander of Turkey land forces||
|Jun. 17-22||JCS College students to China|
|Jun. 18-23|Naval vessel of Germany||
|Jul. 7-9|Minister of National Defense, UK||
|Jul. 23-28|Politicians of China (Goodwill Emissary)||
|Aug. 26-31||Vice-Minister of National Defense to China|


-----

|Col1|Visits to ROK|Overseas Visits|
|---|---|---|
|Aug. 28-Sep. 3. 2002||ROK-Russia JCS headquarters head-level meeting|
|Aug. 31-Sep. 6|National Defense University students of Bangladesh||
|Sept. 2|Director of National Defense Research Agency to Japan||
|Sept. 2-6|ROK-Australia defense working-level meeting||
|Sept. 9-15|ROK-Japan maritime joint reconnaissance, rescue training||
|Sept. 9-15||The 1st visit of transport aircraft and AWC students from Air Force to China|
|Sept. 9-15||Chairman of Defense Agency for Public Information Service to China|
|Sept. 24-25|ROK-Japan defense policy working-level meeting||
|Sept. 24-28|Commander of Special Warfare Command (SWC), Vietnam||
|Sept. 30-Oct. 4|Chairman of JCS, China||
|Oct. 3-6|Air Force chief of staff, Japan||
|Oct. 8-12|President of Vietnam Defense Science Technology Environment Center||
|Oct. 8-15||Naval chief of staff to Japan|
|Oct. 13-16|Vice-director of Strategy Bureau of National Defense Department, France||
|Oct. 17-19||ROK-China diplomacy-defense officials meeting|
|Nov. 4-6||Chairman of JCS to Japan|
|Nov. 6-12|Naval vessel of France to In-chon Port||
|Nov. 9-13|Commander in chief, PACOM of France||
|Nov. 10-13|Naval chief of staff, Japan||
|Nov. 10-16||Minister of National Defense to Russia|
|Nov. 15-24||Air Force military band to Japan|
|Nov. 17-21|Commander of Training and Doctrine Command, France||
|Nov. 17-21||Commander of Defense Security Command to China|
|Nov. 23-26|The 1st ROK-Spain defense working-level meeting||
|Nov. 24-29|Naval deputy chief of India||


-----

|Col1|Visits to ROK|Overseas Visits|
|---|---|---|
|Nov. 24-Dec. 3, 2002||Commander of SWC to Australia and New Zealand|
|Nov. 26-30|ROK-New Zealand defense working-level meeting||
|Nov. 28|The 4th ROK-Spain defense industry and logistics committee||
|Dec. 4-8|Commander in chief, Far East of Russia||
|Dec. 8-12|Advanced Research Group of China National Defense College||
|Dec. 10-14|Two naval vessels of Russia to Busan Portt||
|Dec. 13-15|Chairman of JCS, Rumania||
|Dec. 14-17|The 4th ROK-Japan JCS-unified forces head-level meeting||
|Jan. 17-20, 2003|Director of intelligence department, China||
|Feb. 12-15|Peace and Security Research Agency of Japan||
|Feb. 13-16|Air Force chief of staff, Japan||
|Feb. 16-21||ROK-Indonesia navy to navy meeting|
|Mar. 1-4|Naval vessels of Spain||
|Mar. 4-7|Vice chief of staff of China||
|Mar. 16-19|Chief of Defense Institute, Japan||
|Mar. 28-30|ROK-Japan defense ministers' Talks (Mar. 29)||
|Apr. 9-11|ROK-Russia defense ministers' Talks (Apr.10)||
|Apr. 13-21||ROK-Russia defense industry and logistics committee|
|Apr. 24-27|Air Force chief of staff, Indonesia||
|May 11-14||Air Force chief staff to Japan and Russia|
|May 18-23|ROK-Russia defense working-level meeting (May 19)||
|Jun. 7-15||ROK-France-Japan defense working-level meeting|


-----

Appendix 7

Status of ROK Armed Forces' Participation in the PKO

■ UN Peace Keeping Operations

|■UN Peace Keeping O|Col2|Operations|Col4|Col5|Col6|(As of June 2003)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Region||Unit(Personnel)|Period|Rotation Period|Total number of Personnel in a year|Approval of the National Assembly|
|Past Parti- cipation|Somalia|Engineer Battalions (252)|Jul. 1993~ Mar. 1994|6 months|504|◯|
|||Headquarters Command (6)|Dec. 1993~ Feb. 1995|6 months|12||
||Angola|Engineer Battalions (198)|Oct. 1995~ Dec. 1996|6 months|594|◯|
|||Headquarters Command staff (6)|Feb. 1996~ Feb. 1997|1 year|6||
|Present Parti- cipation|East Timor|Infantry Battalions (250)|Oct. 1999~|6 months|3,244|◯|
|||Brigade Headquarters (8)|Jan. 2000~|1 year|84||
||India· Pakistan|Military Observers (9)|Nov. 1994~|1 year|75||
||Georgia|Military Observers (7)|Oct. 1994~|1 year|41||
||Western Sahara|Medical Units (20)|Sep. 1994~|6 months|442|◯|
||Cyprus|Officer in Command (1)|Jan. 2002~|1 year|1||



※ Number of participants: Total number of personnel 5,003 / Current number of participants 295


(As of June 2003)


-----

|■Counter -Terrorism War|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|(As of June 2003)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Classification||Current number of personnel|Region|Date of Dispatch|Rotation Period|Total Number of Personnel|Approval of the National Assembly|
|Dong-e Forces (96)|Bagram Headquarters|48|Bagram|Oct. 2002|6 months|288|◯|
||Manas Detachment Party|40|Manas|Feb. 2002|6 months|||
||Kabul Detachment Party|8|Kabul|Aug. 2002|6 months|||
|Construction Engineer Unit||150|Bagram|Feb. 2003|6 months|150|◯|
|Naval Transport Supporting Unit||163|Singapore|Dec. 2001|3 months|986|◯|
|Air Force Transport Supporting Unit||78|Kim Hae|Dec. 2001|3 months|472|◯|
|Coalition Supporting Group (12)|USCENTCOM|5|Florida|Nov. 2001|1 year|11||
||USPACOM|2|Hawaii|Nov. 2001|1 year|6||
||CJTF-180|2|Bagram|Jul. 2002|6 months|4||
||Kuwait|3|Camp Doha|Apr. 2003|6 months|3||
|Staff (4)|USCENTCOM|1|Florida|Nov. 2002|1 year|1||
||CJTF-180|2|Bagram|Jul. 2002|6 months|4||
||CJTF-HOA|1|Djibouti|Feb. 2003|6 months|1||


※ Number of participants: Total number of personnel 2,601 / Current number of participants 1,178

■ Gulf War / War in Iraq (As of May 2003)

-  Gulf War (Jan. 1991 ~ Apr. 1991): 314 personnel (154 personnel of Medical Supporting unit, 160

personnel of Air Force Transport unit)

-  War in Iraq (May 2003 ~): 675 personnel (575 personnel of Construction Engineer supporting units, 100

personnel of Medical supporting unit)


-----

Appendix 8

Status of ROK Armed Forces' Participation in the Iraq War

■ Chronology of Troop Dispatch

|Date|Principal Matters|
|---|---|
|Nov. 20, 2002 Dec. 27|The First request from the US (The US ambassador delivers a Non-Paper to the ROK minister of foreign affairs.) - Humanitarian support and post-war reconstruction support - Transportation, equipment, combat service support elements (engineer unit, medical unit and etc.), mine sweeping unit, etc Present review results to the US (The ministry of foreign affairs delivers a Non-Paper to the Korean embassy in the US) - Support to Iraqi refugees and neighboring countries, post-war reconstruction support possible - Military support: conversion of Afghan war deployment forces, additional support of 1 engineer company possible|
|Mar. 13, 2003 Mar. 20. 11:30 Mar. 20 Mar. 21 Mar. 22 Mar. 28-29 Apr. 2 Apr. 4 Apr. 7 Apr. 17 Apr. 30 May 14|The Second request from the US (The US ambassador delivers a Non-Paper to the minister of foreign affairs.) - Short-term essential items for safety and security in Iraq, right after outbreak of war - Requested Items: ①Military support (infantry, engineer, etc.) ②Experts on WMD, explosive ordnance disposal ③Decontamination after CBR attacks ④Humanitarian & medical support, etc US launches an attack on Iraq (05:30, Mar. 20, local time) NSC Standing Committee held, decided to dispatch construction engineer and medical unit Resolution of cabinet meeting to approve of troop dispatching to Iraq Resolution of Defense Committee, the National Assembly to approve of troop dispatch to Iraq Personnel selection announcement Plenary session of the National Assembly on troop dispatch Resolution of plenary session of the National Assembly to approve the troop dispatch Personnel selection (Competition Rate 2.7 : 1), the roster completed on 11th of April *Construction engineer of 575 men and medical support unit of 100 men Dispatching on-site coordination group of 3 men to Kuwait *1 man to the USARCENT (Apr. 3) Dispatching of the advance element (20 men) Dispatching of the 1st echelon (Medical support and construction engineer unit of about 326 men) Dispatching of the 2nd echelon (Construction engineer unit of 329 men)|


-----

■ Status of Dispatch Forces (as of May 2003)

-  Personnel Conditions

|Total|Construction Engineer supporting unit|Col3|Col4|Col5|Medical supporting unit|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Sub-total|Officer|NCO|Enlisted|Sub-total|Officer|NCO|Enlisted|
|675|575|62|124|389|100|38|26|36|



-  Deployment area

- Deployment location: US military base (Camp Aurther) between Nasiriya and Talil Airport in Iraq

- 320km Southeast of Baghdad, population of 412,000

- Mostly Shia party, main economic source from agriculture

-  Mission

- Construction engineer supporting unit: Carrying out civil engineering and building works for the

reconstruction of infrastructures

- Medical supporting unit: Humanitarian support to the local people and the POWs, medical

treatment to the US and coalition forces

-  Combat service support

- Logistics support from the US 377 theater support headquarters

- Logistics requirements such as security, meal service, water supplies, and military quarters are

provided by the US



-  Budget


(Unit: 100 million won)

|Classification|Total|Allowance|Meal / Clothing|Equipment|Resource acquisition|Unit manage- ment|Transpor- tation|Investment on combat power|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total|377|115|27|6|39|14|47|129|
|Construction Engineer|317|96|23|5|21|12|47|113|
|Medical Supporting|60|19|4|1|18|2|0|16|


-----

Appendix 9


Organization of the ROK Ministry of National Defense and the
Current Number of Military Personnel

(As of May 31, 2003)

Minister

|National Memorial Board|Defense Agency for Public Information Servioes|National Defense Computer Center|Defense Intelligence Agency|National Defense Welfare Support Group|General Court Martial|Prosecutor Office|Korea Arms Verification Agency|Defense Procurement Agency|Yongsan Project Office|Criminal Investigation Department|Scientific Investigation Laboratory|Psychological Operstion Group|National Defense University|Korea Armed Forces Athletic Corps|Defense Security Command|Defense Transportation Command|Chemical Biological Rediological, Defense Command|Defense Communication Command Forces|Armed Forces Medical Command|Armed Forces Seoul Hospital|Kyerongdae Service Support Command|Institute for Military History Compilation|Women’s Forces Development Group|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|(Unit: Person)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Classification|Total|Army|Navy|Air Force|Other|
|Total|758,292|606,818|74,683|69,339|7,452|
|Military personnel Military civilians components Civilian government officials Full-time reservists|691,600 27,559 2,655 36,478|558,993 13,402 - 34,423|67,906 4,722 - 2,055|64,701 4,638 - -|- 4,797 2,655 -|


Executive TI & Publication Joint Chiefs of Staff
Assistant Affairs Office

Central Directorate for
Intelligence

Vice Minister Central Directorate for

Operations
Central Directorate for

Deputy Minister for Strategic Planning
Human Resources Central Directorate for

Personnel/Logistics
ACofS for Command

Inspector Legal Affairs Analysis & Arms Control Information General and Communications
General Office Management Office Evaluation Office Office Planning Office Services ACofS for Civil &

Psychological Warfare

Division

Combat Readiness
Inspection Office

Planning and Acquisition Policy Planning Office of the Secretary
Management Office Office Bureau

Personnel and Public Affairs Office
Welfare Bureau Office of the Judge

Coordination OfficePlanning and Acquisition Office Mobilization Advocate

Bureau

Planning and Logistics
Budget Bureau Management Office Military Installations

Bureau

R&D Office

Army Navy Air Force Military Manpower
Agency


-----

Appendix 10


Force Integration Project of Major Military Equipment in 2003

|Col1|Col2|2003 Force|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Type||Integration Project (number)|Remarks|
|C4I & Intelligence War Capacity|Tactical communication system (SPIDER)|9|Domestic development/production|
||New model of VHF wireless equipment|216|Produced with introduced technology (Licensed production)|
||UAV|4|Domestic development/production (2 UAVs)|
||Long-range radar|2|Foreign purchase|
||Mobile radar|3|Foreign purchase|
|Maneuver & Strike Capacity|A large-caliber Multiple Gun (M/A)|18 / 50|Foreign purchase|
||K-9 Self-propelled artillery|38|Domestic development/ production|
||K1A1 tank|26|Domestic development/ production|
||ROK mine scatterer|10|Domestic development/ production|
|Maritime & Landing Capacity|Destroyer (KDX - II)|1|Domestic construction|
||Mine-sweeper|1|Domestic construction|
||A vessel-to-air guided Missile|54|Foreign purchase|
||Heavy Torpedo|25|Domestic development/ production|
|Aerial & Air Defense Capacity|Fighter (KF-16)|9|Produced with introduced technology (Licensed production)|
||Basic training jet (KT-1)|19|Domestic development/ production|
||Short-range anti-air guided weaponry|12|Domestic development/ production|


-----

Appendix 11

Status of International Defense Industrial Agreements

|Agreements on Cooperation in Defense Industry and Logistics|Agreements on Scientist and Data Exchanges|Agreements on Quality|Agreements on Providing Cost Information|
|---|---|---|---|
|US United Kingdom France Italy Spain Indonesia Israel Thailand Malaysia Philippines Romania Canada Russia Germany New Zealand Netherlands Turkey Venezuela Vietnam Australia|US France Italy United Kingdom Israel|US United Kingdom France Spain Swiss Canada Italy Netherlands Belgium Denmark Australia Philippines Germany Israel Turkey Indonesia New Zealand|US United Kingdom Germany|
|20|5|17|3|



※ Bolded 11 countries are newly joined members of the Agreement since 1999.


-----

Appendix 12

Status of Investment in Defense Research & Development

■ Annual Investment in National Defense R&D

(Unit: 100 million won)

|Year|Defense Budget|FIP 1) Expenditure|R&D Expenditure Budget|Col5|Col6|R&D Expenditure to (%)|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||Force Investment|Operation Expense|Total|Defense Budget|FIP Expenditure|
|1997|137,865|48,836|3,432|1,211|4,643|3.4 (2.5)|9.5 (7.0)|
|1998|138,000|50,902|3,661|1,129|4,790|3.5 (2.7)|9.4 (7.2)|
|1999|137,490|52,304|5,960|1,051|7,011|5.1 (4.3)|13.4 (11.4)|
|2000|144,390|53,437|6,482|967|7,449|5.2 (4.5)|14.0 (12.1)|
|2001|153,884|52,141|5,888|1,027|6,915|4.5 (3.8)|13.2 (11.3)|
|2002|163,578|54,756|6,314|1,369|7,683|4.7 (3.9)|14.0 (11.5)|
|2003|174,264|57,328|6,349|1,511|7,860|4.5 (3.6)|13.7 (11.1)|



※ The numbers shown inside the parentheses are pure R&D expenditures, not including the operation expenses.
※ 1) FIP: Force Improvement Program


■ 2004 - 2008 Mid-Term R&D Budget Program


|■2004 - 2008 Mid-Term R|R&D Budget Pr|rogram|Col4|Col5|(Unit:|100 million won)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Classification|Total|2004|2005|2006|2007|2008|
|R&D Expenditures|76,040|11,255|12,888|14,781|17,188|19,928|
|Possession of Defense Budget (%)|6.3|5.4|5.8|6.1|6.6|7.2|


-----

Appendix 13


Status of Career Guidance Training before Retirement in 2002

|■Overview|Col2|(Unit: person)|
|---|---|---|
|Total|Private Institute|Commencement of an enterprise / Independent enterprise|
|1,834|855|979|


■ Courses of Private Institute


|■Courses o|of Private|Institute|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|(Unit: person)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Classificaton|Total|Colonel|Lieutenant|||Warrant|Command Sergeant|Sergeant|
||||Colonel|Major|Captain|Officer|Major/Master Sergeant|First Class|
|Total|855|15|146|143|232|43|196|80|
|Army|809|14|140|135|225|35|185|75|
|Navy|38|-|4|5|7|7|10|5|
|Air Force|8|1|2|3|-|1|1|-|


■ Commencement of an Enterprise / Independent Enterprise Process

|■Commenc|cement of a|an Enterpri|ise / Indepe|endent Enterp|prise Proces|ss|Col8|(Unit: person)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Classification|Total|Colonel|Lieutenant|||Warrant|Command Sergeant|Sergeant|
||||Colonel|Major|Captain|Officer|Major/Master Sergeant|First Class|
|Total|979|78|56|87|80|185|397|96|
|Army|515|69|30|42|76|26|220|52|
|Navy|225|1|9|28|2|38|114|33|
|Air Force|239|8|17|17|2|121|63|11|


■ Other Entrusted Educational Courses


|■Other Entruste|ed Educational C|Courses|Col4|Col5|(Unit: person)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Field|Company|Warrant|Non-commissioned|
|Classification|Total|grade Officer|grade Officer|Officer|Officer|
|Total|954|350|310|63|231|
|Social Accomo- dation Education|520|209|90|40|181|
|Independent enterprise education|434|141|220|23|50|


-----

Appendix 14

Status of Retirees Re-employment in 2002

|Classi-|Employment rate|Col3|Col4|Col5|Affiliated|Contin-|Reserve troops|Military|Welfare|Col11|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|fication|Rank|Dis- charged|Employed|Rate (%)|organiza- tion|gency planners|comman- ding officer|civilian com- ponent|group service- members|General companies|
|Total|Total|3,090|850|27.5|5|48|122|21|13|641|
||Colonel Lt. Colonel Major Captain WO CSM MS SFC|189 433 652 309 286 628 240 353|49 110 282 169 32 48 41 119|25.9 25.4 43.3 54.7 11.2 7.6 17.1 33.7|2 1 2|22 24 2|96 26|6 3 8 4|2 2 1 7 1|19 80 172 139 31 41 40 119|
|Army|Sub Total|2,200|565|25.7|3|42|121|8|12|379|
||Colonel Lt. Colonel Major Captain WO CSM MS SFC|119 377 494 288 114 459 188 161|25 91 180 155 12 31 26 45|21.0 24.1 36.4 53.8 10.5 6.8 13.8 28.0|1 2|18 22 2|96 25|2 3 3|2 2 1 6 1|6 65 75 127 11 25 25 45|
|Navy|Sub Total|442|138|31.2|1|3|1|4|1|128|
||Captain Commander Lt. Commander Lieutenant WO MCPO SCPO CPO|33 30 41 10 40 100 24 164|14 12 18 9 6 8 7 64|42.4 40.0 43.9 90.0 15.0 8.0 29.2 39.0|1|2 1|1|3 1|1|12 10 15 7 6 7 7 64|
|Air Force|Sub Total|448|147|32.8|1|3||9||134|
||Colonel Lt. Colonel Major Captain WO CMS SMS MS|37 26 117 11 132 69 28 28|10 7 84 5 14 9 8 10|27.0 26.9 71.8 45.5 10.6 13.0 28.6 35.7|1|2 1||6 1 2||1 5 82 5 14 9 8 10|



※WO: Warrant Officer CSM: Command Sergeant Major
MS: Major Sergeant SFC: Sergeant First Class
MCPO: Master Chief Petty Officer SCPO: Senior Chief Petty Officer
CPO: Chief Petty Officer CMS: Chief Master Sergeant
SMS: Senior Master Sergeant MS: Master Sergeant


(Unit: person)


-----

Appendix 15


Composition of MND Budget by FY


|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|(Unit: 100 million won)|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||||||
|Year|MND Budget||Current Operating Expense|||Force Investment|||
||Amount|Increase Rate|Amount|Increase Rate|Composition Rate|Amount|Increase Rate|Composition Rate|
|1982|31,207|15.7|19,392|18.2|62.1|11,815|11.8|37.9|
|1983|32,741|4.9|20,525|5.8|62.7|12,216|3.4|37.3|
|1984|33,061|1.0|20,122|2.0|60.9|12,939|5.9|39.1|
|1985|36,892|11.6|21,845|8.6|59.2|15,047|16.3|40.8|
|1986|41,580|12.7|23,842|9.1|57.3|17,738|17.9|42.7|
|1987|47,454|14.1|26,001|9.1|54.8|21,453|20.9|45.2|
|1988|55,202|16.3|30,550|17.5|55.3|24,652|14.9|44.7|
|1989|60,148|9.0|34,155|11.8|56.8|25,993|5.4|43.2|
|1990|66,378|10.4|38,515|12.8|58.0|27,863|7.2|42.0|
|1991|74,764|12.6|44,988|16.8|60.2|29,776|6.9|39.8|
|1992|84,100|12.5|51,968|15.5|61.8|32,132|7.9|38.2|
|1993|92,154|9.6|57,981|11.6|62.9|34,173|6.4|37.1|
|1994|100,753|9.3|64,637|11.5|64.2|36,116|5.7|35.8|
|1995|110,744|9.9|71,032|9.9|64.1|39,712|10.0|35.9|
|1996|122,434|10.6|79,772|12.3|65.2|42,662|7.4|34.8|
|1997|137,865|12.6|89,032|11.6|64.6|48,833|14.5|35.4|
|1998|138,000|0.1|87,098|2.2|63.1|50,902|4.2|36.9|
|1999|137,490|0.4|85,186|2.2|62.0|52,304|2.8|38.0|
|2000|144,774|5.3|91,337|7.2|63.1|53,437|2.2|36.9|
|2001|153,884|6.3|101,743|11.4|66.1|52,141|2.4|33.9|
|2002|163,640|6.3|108,884|7.0|66.5|54,756|5.0|33.5|
|2003|174,264|6.5|116,936|7.4|67.1|57,328|4.7|32.9|


-----

Appendix 16

Defense Budget of Select Powers

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Country|GDP (US$ 100 million)|Defense Budget (US$100 million)|GDP to Defense Budget(%)|Personnel (thousand persons)|Military Expenditure per Capita (US$)|
|ROK|4,222|119|2.8|690|252|
|US|102,000|3,224|3.2|1,368|1,128|
|Japan|41,000|395|1.0|240|310|
|China|12,000|460|4.0|2,310|36|
|Russia|15,220|637|4.3|977|440|
|Taiwan|2,900|104|3.7|370|472|
|United Kingdom|14,000|347|2.5|211|583|
|France|13,000|329|2.6|274|553|
|Germany|18,000|269|1.5|308|328|
|Israel|1,100|104|9.5|164|1,673|
|Egypt|938|43|4.7|443|62|
|Saudi|1,760|243|14.1|201|1,156|
|Australia|3,580|68|1.9|51|350|
|Turkey|1,480|72|5.0|515|107|
|Malaysia|870|32|3.8|101|144|
|Thailand|1,120|18|1.7|306|29|
|Singapore|850|43|5.1|61|1,044|



※ Source: The Military Balance 2002-2003 (Korean data was based on the Government Statistics)


(Unit: constant in 2001)


-----

-----

