###### MTEF FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13

##### Safeguarding South Africa For A Better Life For All

### Department of Defence
## Strategic
# Plan


-----

-----

###### “Doing things diff erently to achieve more with less”

#### Strategic Plan (MTEF FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13)

###### The DOD Strategic Plan 2010 (MTEF FY 2010/11–FY 2012/13) is available on the website at http://www.mil.za Enquiries about this plan are to be forwarded to Mr M.S. Dlamini Tel No: +27 (12) 355 5663 Fax No: +27(12) 355 6134 Email: hoc@mil.za


-----

-----

###### TABLE OF CONTENTS


###### TOPIC PAGE


List of Tables i

List of Figures ii

Foreword by the Honourable Minister of Defence iii

Introduction by the Accounting Offi cer: Acting Secretary for Defence v

###### CHAPTER 1 – STRATEGIC OVERVIEW 8

Introduction 8

Constitutional and Legislative Mandate of the DOD 9

Defence Core Objectives 10

Structure and Post Establishment of the DOD 10

Vision 11

Mission 11

Mission Success Factors 11

The DOD’s Value System 12

Defence Strategic Approach 13

Defence Strategy 13

Overview of Defence Diplomacy 13

Military Strategy 14

Force Preparation Strategy 16

Force Employment Strategy 16

Force Support Strategies 17

Organisational Performance Management (BSC) 17

###### CHAPTER 2 MEDIUM-TERM STRATEGIC FOCUS 19

Introduction 19

Overview of the DOD Strategic Planning Cycle 19

Government’s Medium Term Strategic Focus 20

DOD’s Medium Term Strategic Focus 21

Defence Alignment with Government Priorities 22

Minister of Defence’s Priorities for FY 2010/11 23

DOD Alignment With MTSF Priorities 25

Legislative Changes Likely to Infl uence Programme Spending Plans over the 29
MTEF Period

Financial Considerations 30

Allocations of the Defence Programmes 30


-----

###### TOPIC PAGE


Expenditure Trends 31

Infrastructure Spending 31

Departmental Receipts 31

Analysis of the 2010/11 Defence Budget Allocation 32

Risk Management 32

###### CHAPTER 3 – OVERVIEW OF THE PROGRAMMES 34

Introduction 34

Outlook of DOD Programmes 34

Defence Outputs 34

Translation of DOD Outputs in Terms of Programmes 35

Linking the Strategic Plan with the Estimate of National Expenditure 35

Detailed Overview of the DOD’s Programmes 37

###### Programme 1: Administration 37

Programme Purpose 37

Objectives and Measures 39

Financial Resources 39

###### Programme 2: Force Employment 39

Programme Purpose 39

Subprogrammes 39

Objectives and Measures 40

Financial Resources 40

###### Programme 3: Landward Defence 41

Programme Purpose 41

Subprogrammes 42

Objectives and Measures 43

Financial Resources 43

###### Programme 4: Air Defence 43

Programme Purpose 43

Subprogrammes 43

Objectives and Measures 44

Financial Resources 44


-----

###### TOPIC PAGE


###### Programme 5: Maritime Defence 45

Programme Purpose 45

Subprogrammes 45

Objectives and Measures 45

Financial Resources 46

###### Programme 6: Military Health Support Programme 46

Programme Purpose 46

Subprogrammes 46

Objectives and Measures 47

Financial Resources 47

###### Programme 7: Defence Intelligence 47

Programme Purpose 47

Subprogrammes 47

Objectives and Measures 48

Financial Resources 48

###### Programme 8: General support 48

Programme Purpose 48

Subprogrammes 48

Objectives and Measures 49

Financial Resources 49


-----

###### TOPIC PAGE


###### APPENDIX A 50 DETAILED PERFORMANCE INFORMATION FOR THE PROGRAMMES: OUTPUTS, PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND TARGETS

Programme 1: Administration 50

Programme 2: Force Employment 66

Programme 3: Landward Defence 69

Programme 4: Air Defence 72

Programme 5: Maritime Defence 75

Programme 6: Military Health Support 78

Programme 7: Defence Intelligence 81

Programme 8: General Support 82

###### APPENDIX B 86 LINKS TO OTHER PLANS

Overview of the DOD Information Strategy 86

Implementation of the DEIS Master Plan 87

Defence Enterprise Information Systems Master Plan 88

Overview of the Human Resources Strategy 89

Overview of the Joint Logistics Strategy 90

Asset Management 92

Strategic Capital Acquisition Strategy 93

Service Delivery Improvement Programme 94

###### APPENDIX C 99

Overview of DOD’s Private Public Partnerships 99

Entities Reporting to the Executive Authority 100

National Defence Force Service Commission 100

ARMSCOR 104

Castle Control Board 104


-----

###### List of Tables


###### TABLE PAGE


1 Details of Government’s Manifesto, Medium Term Strategic Framework and 20
Outcomes

2 DOD Alignment With MTSF Priorities 25

3 Legislation That Could Infl uence Future Spending in FY 2010/11 29

4 Vote 21 : Budget Allocations for the 2010/11 Medium Term Expenditure 30
Framework Period

5 Enterprise Risk and Mitigation Strategy 33

6 Programme Purpose 35

7 Selected Performance and Operations Indicators for FY 2011 to 2012/13 36

8 Administration Programme 37

9 Administration Programme: Allocations for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 39

10 Force Employment Programme: Financial Resources for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 40

11 Landward Defence Programme: Financial Resources for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 43

12 Air Defence Programme: Financial Resources for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 44

13 Maritime Defence Programme: Financial Resources for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 46

14 Military Health Support Programme: Financial Resources for FY 2010/11 to FY 47
2012/13

15 Defence Intelligence Programme: Financial Resources for FY 2010/11 to FY 48
2012/13

16 General Support Programme: Financial Resources for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 49

17 Administration: Output Details for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 50

18 Force Employment: Output Details for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 66

19 Force Employment: Joint, Interdepartmental and Multinational (JIM) Exercises for 67
FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13

20 Landward Defence: Output Details for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 69

21 Landward Defence: Planned Service Unique Exercises for FY 2010/11 to FY 71
2012/13


-----

###### TABLE PAGE

22 Air Defence: Output Details for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 72

23 Air Defence Planned Service Unique Exercises for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 74

24 Air Defence JIM and Multi-National Exercises for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 74

25 Maritime Defence: Output Details for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 75

26 Maritime Defence: Planned Service Unique Exercises for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 77

27 Military Health Support: Output Details for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 78

28 Military Health Support: Planned Service Unique Exercises for FY 2010/11 to FY 80
2012/13

29 Defence Intelligence: Output Details for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 81

30 General Support: Output Details for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 82

31 Defence Enterprise Information System Master Plan 88

32 Capital Assets for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 93

33 Income from Sales of Equipment for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13 93

34 Service Delivery Improvement Programme 94

35 National Defence Force Commission: Strategic Targets 101

###### List of Figures

 FIGURE PAGE


1 The Macro-Structure of the DOD as Approved on 15 August 2008 by the Minister 11
of Defence

2 Military Strategy in Context 14

3 The DOD Balanced Scorecard 18

4 Comparative Budget Allocation Changes Between Financial Years 2009/10 and 32
2010/11 (All Amounts in R’000)


-----

###### Foreword by the Honourable Minister of Defence and MIllitary Veterans, L.N. Sisulu, MP

The mandate of the Department of Defence is to support the developmental state
and ensure that the Defence Force can contribute to the socio-economic needs of
the country. Where possible, assistance is to be given in maintaining infrastructure.

The creation of a new Department of Military Veterans, with its own Accounting
Offi cer will provide the guarantee that the rights, the acknowledgement and the
material provisions accorded to the men and women who fought for freedom in
South Africa, are given. It is not enough to pay lip service to the men and women
who were prepared to sacrifi ce their all. The level of pension payouts, health care
and other social benefi ts will be interrogated, so that realistic provision can be made for this important
sector falling under our Department of Defence.

To be able to carry out these tasks, the DOD will be looking at ways and means of rejuvenating its
landward forces. Since new military equipment was provided for the Air Force and Navy in the fi rst term
of our democratic dispensation in the form of the strategic defence packages, it is now the turn of the
South Africa Army to be provided with the equipment it needs to carry out its many and varied tasks.
Decisions in this regard will be based on a careful examination of what equipment is needed over the
next 30 years, the upgrading of our technical skills base and the relevant resources that will be needed.

The conditions of service of members of the SANDF must be understood within the context of the
level of sacrifi ce and commitment they are expected to make. The Defence Force Service Commission
will ensure that this high level of commitment is recognised by the State as a separate and distinct
dispensation.

The Department of Defence will attend to the infrastructure of the department, with a special attention
to its facilities. Discussions are in process to transfer this area of responsibility from the Department of
Public Works.

Developments in our region and on the world stage have necessitated that the SANDF participate in
borderline control, assisting the police to protect our borders, both, land, sea and air.

The creation of sustainable communities must be supported by accelerating the process of the land
restitution programme.

The upgrading of the MSDS programme must have greater focus on its outcomes.

The Department of Defence will resuscitate the Works Regiment which would facilitate work
opportunities for Military Veterans and at the same time ensuring capacity in the Department of
Defence as soon as the responsibilities of the Department of Public Works are transferred.

The Constitution of South Africa is unequivocal with regard to the role of defence. To this end we are
duty bound to ensure that we provide combat ready forces to deal with any internal or external threat.


-----

Consistent with our holistic vision of defence, and in line with South Africa’s interests, our work must
complement and re-enforce the goals of our foreign policy. To this end, sustaining our peace keeping
eff orts in line with our Government’s priority of stabilising the continent and strengthening our region,
remains one of our priorities. This will include working with other Government Departments on cross
cutting issues of post confl ict resolution and security sector reform. The world has acknowledged our
manifest success in this area of activity and South Africa continues to lead.

(L.N. SISULU)
MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS, MP


-----

###### INTRODUCTION BY THE ACCOUNTING OFFICER: ACTING SECRETARY FOR DEFENCE

It is again my pleasure to present the detail of the Minister’s policy as provided in the
foreword. The medium term focus will concentrate on the realisation of a defence
mandate-driven force design and address rightsizing and rejuvenating human
capital. The long term focus is on attaining the optimal level of competencies,
technology and force structure to defend and protect South Africa and its territorial
integrity.

This Strategic Plan document comprehensively outlines the
mandate of the Department and its obligations towards fulfi lling
its political, administrative, operational and corporate governance duties during the
FY 22010/11 - 2012/2013 cycles. The Plan is informed by the Medium Term Strategic
Framework 2009-2014 of the Government whose central objective is to set the country on a higher and
sustainable growth trajectory by the end of 2014. The decisions and priority guidelines of the January
2010 Cabinet Lekgotla as well as the pronouncements of the President in the June 2009 State of the
Nation Address also form the basis of this Plan.

Achieving more with less is what defi nes the Defence portfolio, as well as its execution of the mandate
that is premised on the protection of territorial integrity in line with the applicable domestic laws and
international laws governing the use of force. From a domestic perspective the Department has actively
contributed to the organic growth of entities within the Defence portfolio. Notably, towards the end of
the 2009 calendar year a new Department that provides for the rekindling of human dignity within the
Military veterans was proclaimed.

The Plan takes into consideration the primary role and mandate of the South African National Defence
Force (SANDF) as encapsulated in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996. Typically,
protection of people and territorial integrity, has, during the previous fi nancial year, seen the Department,
in line with the Cabinet decision, invoking the provisions of Section 18(1) (d) of the Defence Act, 2002
that provides for the SANDF to support the South African Police Service (SAPS) with the role of borderline control.

In line with this provision of the Defence Act, 2002, Cabinet recently determined that the SANDF should
play a supportive role to the SAPS in safeguarding the country’s land, sea and air borderlines.
With regards to internal deployment, the SANDF is prepared to support Government departme
nts in fi ve operations over the MTEF period, in terms of border safeguarding, safety and security, disaster
aid and relief, search and rescue and the 2010 Federation International Football Association (FIFA) World
Cup.

Joint, Interdepartmental and Multinational exercises are critical for force readiness and 24 exercises are
planned to take place over the MTEF period.

In pursuit of Defence Diplomacy as a strategy to rekindle territorial integrity, the Department of
Defence’s role as an honest peace broker has been profi led by its strategic positioning as a secretariat


-----

for the ICTS cluster. In addition to fulfi lling the international obligations arising from several defence cooperation agreements with neighbouring countries, our second decade of democracy will be marked
by South Africa assuming non-permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC).
This demonstration of confi dence and faith in South Africa’s commitment to advancing Africa’s interest
in multilateral institutions certainly obligates the DOD to continue playing a leading and exemplary
role in international peace missions and confl ict resolution. The ongoing debate on the burgeoning
relationship between the African Union Peace and Security Council (PSC) and UNSC on matters relating
to peacekeeping on the continent will require the DOD’s attention and support to South Africa’s
diplomatic activities.

During the fi nancial year, the Department will continue to provide support to United Nations (UN) and
African Union (AU) initiatives aimed at promoting peace, stability and security in Africa. It is in view of
this commitment that the role of the DOD will continue in all security related regional and continental
activities.

Security, peace and stability in the region and the continent are promoted not only through peace
support operations, but also through humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, as well as post confl ict
reconstruction and training. The SANDF prepares capabilities, which include land, air, maritime and
military health support, annually to support UN and AU peace support operations, by ensuring the
deployment and support of an average of 2 102 members per day over the MTEF period. Current
deployments are mainly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sudan. The deployment in
Burundi was terminated on 30 June 2009 with a small contingent remaining to see to the back-loading
of equipment to South Africa.

Defence foresight initiatives will be pursued to realise a Defence Force that is capable of defending
South Africa at any time, by giving eff ect to the one force, core force and growth force concepts with
an appropriate balance between Regulars, Reserves, Public Service Act Personnel (PSAP) and members
from the Military Skills Development System (MSDS). 106 500 Reserve members could be called up over
the MTEF period and through the MSDS, the DOD aims to equip 11 140 young South Africans with basic
military skills per year.

There is a need for the consolidation of our eff orts in utilising the best practises and strategies to strengthen
the Department’s administrative, operational and corporate governance mechanisms, particularly the
Public Finance Management Act (Act No. 1 of 1999) and public service acts and regulations. This focus
will enabled the Department to work towards clearing the remaining qualifi ed audits and ensuring that
no qualifi ed reports are received in the near future.

This edition refl ects yet another innovative attempt to improve the content of the Strategic Plan. This
Strategic Plan has been rearranged to ensure that the legislative requirements are complied with.
The Strategic Plan is packaged into three chapters, with the accompanying appendices that refl ect
performance tables for each of the DOD outputs. Further Appendices are included that provide a link
with other plans, as required by law.

An overview of resource plans that support the DOD’s corporate plan is provided. Detail regarding
public-private partnerships the DOD is involved are elucidated, together with the concomitant fi nancial

1 At the time of writing, the African Union through the medium of the African Group in New York has voted South Africa to
assume the two year non-permanent membership of the Security Council. The vote is expected to be endorsed and accepted
unanimously by the current Security Council in October 2010. Thus SA is to serve in the Security Council in 2011-2012.


-----

obligations. To ensure compliance with section 52 of the PFMA, 1999, an overview of public entities
that report to the Executive Authority is presented. In this regard the Strategic Plan anticipates the
establishment of a permanent autonomous Defence Force Service Commission as a public entity
reporting to the Executive Authority.

The Strategic Plan further anticipates some migration of the HR component that encapsulates the
Military Veterans to the New Department. As such, it is anticipated that a separate detailed Strategic Plan
will be developed to inform the expenditure, migration of assets that will characterise the promulgated
Department.

The Department of Defence will, over the MTEF focus on the stated objectives with the fi rm aim of
renewing its mandate and enhancing its work. This work remains fi rmly rooted in the continued
prioritisation of our domestic agenda, as identifi ed by government’s priority areas. Through the
implementation of the Plan, the Department of Defence will continue with its role and contribution to
peace and security engagements in the region and the African continent.

As outgoing Acting Secretary for Defence, I wish to thank the Minister for the co-operation and the
confi dence she displayed in me during my period as Acting Secretary for Defence.

I further wish to thank colleagues of the Department of Defence that I engaged with in pursuance of
the various portfolios I led, ranging from human resources, policy and planning to defence international
relations, to mention but a few.

I am confi dent that we, together with all the current and intended public entities that service the
defence mandate, will, work together to advance the goals and outcomes of the Defence and Military
Veterans Portfolio.

I humbly present the Strategic Plan that details the interpretation and execution of the Policy that has
been defi ned for Defence to pursue in realising the priorities set for the defence portfolio in giving
substance and embracing the priorities of Government .

Honourable Minister It is my pleasure and privilege to submit to you the Strategic Plan 2010 (MTEF
FY 2010/11 – FY 2012/13) of the Department of Defence in terms of Section 38(n), read together with
Regulation 5 developed in terms of Section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, (Act No 1 of
1999).

(T.E. MOTUMI)
ACTING SECRETARY FOR DEFENCE: DEPUTY DIRECTOR-GENERAL


-----

###### CHAPTER 1 STRATEGIC OVERVIEW


###### INTRODUCTION


This Strategic Plan is developed within a landscape characterised by a sharper focus on monitoring
and evaluation aimed at ensuring that together we achieve more with less. Further, the Strategic Plan
attempts to refl ect on outcomes-based planning, which place the deliverables of defence within the
broad Medium Term Strategic Framework (MTSF) and identifi ed outcome areas.

From a corporate governance perspective, it is worth noting that the development of the Strategic Plan
is informed by primarily, Regulation 5 of the Treasury Regulations developed in terms of section 47 of
the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act 1 of 1999) read together with Part III of the Regulations
developed in terms of the Public Service Act, 1994, as amended. Further, corrective actions emanating
from the various audits have been considered in developing this Strategic Plan.

From a corporate citizenship perspective, the Department has, in the spirit of accelerated service
delivery, deepened partnerships with other organs of State, thus contributing to revenue generation,
whilst sharing the distinctive competencies that the Department possesses. Such interventions typically
refl ect the Department’s sustainability strategy during peacetime, in pursuit of the “support to the
people” objective of Defence.

The role of the Department in international aff airs, including defence diplomacy and security, has
been profi led by the appointment of the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans as head of the
International Co-operation Trade and Security (ICTS) Cluster. This strategic positioning of Defence
within the Government cluster system, as the lead department of the International Co-operation Trade
and Security, places opportunities for Defence to create collective ownership of its priorities.

In addition to fulfi lling the international obligations arising from several defence co-operation
agreements with neighbouring countries, our second decade of democracy will be marked by South
Africa’s return to assuming non-permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC).
This demonstration of confi dence and faith in South Africa’s commitment to advancing Africa’s interest
in multilateral institutions certainly obligates the DOD to continue playing a leading and exemplary
role in international peace missions and confl ict resolution. The ongoing debate on the burgeoning
relationship between the African Union Peace and Security Council (PSC) and UNSC on matters relating
to peacekeeping on the continent will require the DOD’s attention and support to South Africa’s
diplomatic activities.

Whilst the outcomes-based performance model advocates for one department, one outcome area for
streamlining, it is, however, recognised in this Strategic Plan that the Department is and will continue
to contribute to other outcome areas, wherein the defence objectives, and specifi cally the military
objectives, fi nd expression. This is evidenced by the increased participation in the MSDS as well as
borderline control, in response to Cabinet’s decision to redeploy the SANDF. The aforementioned
interventions exist outside the ICTS cluster.

2 At the time of writing, the African Union through the medium of the African Group in New York has voted South Africa to
assume the two year non-permanent membership of the Security Council. The vote is expected to be endorsed and accepted
unanimously by the current Security Council in October 2010. Thus SA is to serve in the Security Council in 2011-2012.


-----

Cabinet has determined that the SANDF should play a supportive role to the SAPS in safeguarding the
country’s land, sea and air borderlines. Section 18(1) (d) of the Defence Act, 2002 provides for the SANDF
to support the SAPS in the role of borderline control, as apposed to border post control which is a multiagency responsibility.

This Strategic Plan is developed against a backdrop of the establishment of the Department of Military
Veterans Aff airs as a separate department by way of Proclamation in the Government Gazette No.
32844. The Strategic Plan anticipates a new department with its own strategic focus and plans to drive
its mandate. However, for these purposes of planning, some elements of the Military Veterans will be
refl ected in the Human Resources Support Services Programme under the Administration Programme

The Strategic Plan is packaged into three chapters, with the accompanying appendices that refl ect
performance tables for each of the DOD outputs. Further Appendices are included that provide a link
with other plans, as required by law.

Chapter 1 provides the constitutional and legislative mandate of the DOD, the translation of the mandate
to defence objectives, the structure that provides for the implementation of the mandate, the defence’s
strategic approach and the approach to systemic performance management.

Chapter 2 provides an overview on the alignment of the DOD with the broad Government goals and
outcomes to accelerate the creation of a better Africa and better world.

Chapter 3 provides the translation of the DOD’s mandate into defence outputs in a logical framework
approach with the accompanying exposition on the fi nancial resources, as well as anticipated public–
private partnerships, per programme. The detailed performance information is provided for in the
tables.

An overview of resource plans that support the DOD’s corporate plan is provided. Detail regarding
public-private partnerships the DOD is involved in are elucidated, together with the concomitant
fi nancial obligations. To align Strategic Planning with reporting requirements, a table providing the
information is provided in the Appendices.

Lastly, in line with the provisions of section 52 of the PFMA read together with TR 29.2.1. and 29.2.2, the
public entities that fall within the defence portfolio have been identifi ed. This is aimed at enhancing
the utilisation of the applicable entities to advance the mandate of defence, through service delivery
agreements that will be monitored.


###### CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGISLATIVE MANDATE OF THE DOD


The DOD derives its mandate primarily from Section 200(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa, 1996 (Act 108 of 1996), as well as Section 227 of the Interim Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa, 1993 (Act 200 of 1993). The mandate is given substance by the Defence Act, 2002 (Act 42 of 2002),
the White Paper on Defence (1996), the Defence Review (1998) and delegated legislation.


-----

###### DEFENCE CORE OBJECTIVES


The mandate for Defence to defend and protect South Africa and to support broader Government
initiatives, translates into the following three Defence Objectives:

- To defend and protect South Africa, its sovereignty, its territorial integrity, its national interests and
its people in accordance with the Constitution and principles of international law regulating the use
of force.

- To contribute to freedom from fear and want, including the promotion of human security, both
nationally and internationally.

- To contribute to a better life for the people of South Africa.

In order to foreground the delivery of the defence mandate the following key tenets provide a basis for
good business practice and governance:

- The execution of defence commitments as ordered and funded by Government.

- The provision of contingency-ready and cost-eff ective defence capabilities as specifi ed by approved
policy.

- Sound management of the Department.

- The administration of the DOD within the prescripts of the law, regulatory framework and Government
policy.

- The assurance of sustainability, continuous improvement of output quality and the reduction of the
cost of DOD processes, as well as the accounting thereof.

- The assurance of the continuous quality improvement of people in the DOD.

- The assurance of quality command and management information in the DOD.

- The assurance of continuous quality improvement of DOD equipment and facilities.


###### STRUCTURE AND POST ESTABLISHMENT OF THE DOD


Given the complex nature of the defence function, the DOD’s force design and force structure are
reviewed on a regular basis in order to ensure that the DOD is able to execute its mandate and that it
is aligned with the Department’s objectives, the budget allocation, ordered commitments and likely
missions.

As indicated in Figure 1 below, the DOD comprises the Defence Secretariat, established in terms of
Section 204 of the Constitution, 1996 (Act 108 of 1996) and the SANDF, established in terms of Section
224(1) of the Interim Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1993 (Act 200 of 1993).

The Secretary for Defence is the Head of the Department, the Accounting Offi cer, the Information Offi cer
and the principal advisor to the Minister of Defence on defence policy matters. The Chief of the SANDF
commands the SANDF under the authority of the President and in accordance with the directions of
the Minister of Defence, pursuant to Section 202(2) of the Constitution. The Chief of the SANDF is the
principal advisor to the Minister of Defence on military policy matters. The Secretary for Defence and
the Chief of the SANDF, operate under the direction of the Ministry of Defence act within their areas of
responsibility to provide strategic direction to the DOD.

Further reorganisation will be pursued in the year ahead by giving substance to the Minister of Defences
pronouncement during the 2009 Budget Vote in such a way that the statutory entities within Defence
are able to execute their mandate eff ectively.


-----

Figure 1: The Macro-Structure of the DOD, as approved on 15 August 2008 by the Minister of Defence


###### VISION


Eff ective defence for a democratic South Africa.


###### MISSION


To provide, manage, prepare and employ defence capabilities commensurate with the needs of South
Africa as regulated by the Constitution, national legislation and Parliamentary and Executive direction.
The above will be provided through the proper management, provision, preparedness and employment
of defence capabilities, which are in line with the domestic and global needs of South Africa.


###### MISSION SUCCESS FACTORS


For the DOD to achieve its mission, it is essential that it is managed strategically. As part of this process,
certain factors that are fundamental to achieving success were identifi ed. The Mission Success Factors
(MSFs) of the DOD are as follows:

- National consensus on defence.

- Excellent strategic direction.

- Excellent resource management.

- Eff ective combat forces and support forces.

3 The structure indicated above is being reviewed in order to align with the defence mandate and the Minister’s intent.


-----

- Professionalism in the conduct of operations.

- Successful implementation of the transformation process.


###### THE DOD’S VALUE SYSTEM


The DOD has committed itself to organisational values that are rooted in individual values, codes of
conduct and unit cohesion.

Individual Values

- Patriotism

- Loyalty

- Human dignity

- Professionalism

- Integrity

- Leadership

- Accountability

###### ORGANISATIONAL VALUES

In delivering the defence mission, the DOD will follow the principles set out below:

- Service Standards
Service standards are based on clear direction and strong leadership. Our priority is, and will always
be, to maximise our defence capability and our contribution to peace and security. We will maintain
high standards of excellence and professionalism in everything we do.

- Excellence
We will build on what we do well and actively foster a climate of success. We will invest in our people
and encourage innovation. We will provide the right incentives and recognise individual and team
contributions.

- Ethics
We will adopt and encourage reasonable working practices. We will not be defl ected by the demands
of vested interests. We will foster fairness and trustworthiness in all that we do. We will not ignore
diffi cult issues.

- Openness and Transparency
We will make clear communication and better understanding our priorities. We will ensure that our
messages are understood. We will listen to clients’ concerns and make sure we understand what they
are saying to us. We aim to create a climate of trust and transparency in our decision-making.

- Consultation Rooted in Eff ective and Effi cient Partnership and Collaboration
We will encourage and improve links with other Government departments and other relevant organs
of state. We will strengthen partnerships with industry, allies and the community at large. We will
promote collaboration within the DOD, harmonise activities and systems and, where sensible, share
knowledge.


-----

- People
We will uphold the values as espoused in the founding principles of the Constitution and further
expressed in the Bill of Rights.

- Teamwork
Within the DOD we are one team and embrace one purpose. We will debate issues fully, whilst rigorously
representing our individual responsibilities. Our overriding aim, however, is to reach conclusions that
are best for defence as a whole, and then to act on them.

- Accountability
We will create a learning organisation in which all employees seek and share knowledge and
information, whilst committing themselves to personal growth. We will set the example and lead
the way. We will lead by example and infl uence others to follow these principles. We will be sensible
regarding the demands we make on people and recognise the unique commitments they make.

- Discipline
We will consistently strive towards upholding a high level of discipline. We will individually and
collectively rebuild the profi le and image of the defence establishment as the best disciplined
profession.


###### DEFENCE STRATEGIC APPROACH


###### DEFENCE STRATEGY

The Defence Strategy provides the strategic direction towards the achievement of the Department’s
core objectives that are aimed at attaining its vision: “To provide eff ective defence for a democratic
South Africa.”

Taking cognisance of the rapidly changing geostrategic and macro-economic environment, that places
limitations on the defence capability to respond appropriately, the Defence Strategy will endeavour to
meet these ever-changing challenges, especially since they have implications for human security. The
strategy acknowledges that many of the human security threats are non-military in nature and, as such,
assume collateral architecture.

The foundation of democratic governance has been characterised by eff orts aimed at pioneering
the institutionalisation of civil-military relations. In the coming period, the Defence Strategy should
strengthen and consolidate the sound basis upon which civil-military relations were founded. Such a
Defence Strategy will underscore the need for the requisite resources to provide for both the core and
secondary permutations of the constitutional mandate, as espoused in Sections 200 and 204 of the
Constitution.

###### OVERVIEW OF DEFENCE DIPLOMACY

Government’s national strategic vision of a “better life for all” and a peaceful and prosperous African
continent continues to enjoin the DOD to constantly carve a meaningful role in global diplomacy. As such,
though diplomacy may be considered the antithesis to a war fi ghting machinery, defence diplomacy
remains the cornerstone of the DOD’s contribution to Government’s foreign policy agenda. Therefore,
Government’s foreign policy posture has seen the DOD signing defence co-operation agreements with
numerous African states, if not all, as a key confi dence and security building measure.


-----

In pursuance of the Strategic Priority 8 of the MTSF, in particular the advancement of the African Agenda,
the DOD, through its Defence International Aff airs Division and Defence Foreign Relations, will strive to
contribute to strengthen regional mechanisms for peace and security in the southern African sub-region
and the continent at large. Defence diplomacy will continue to be pursued in various forms including
active participation in bilateral and multilateral forums aimed at enhancing mutually benefi cial defence
relations in the continent. The strengthening of the institutional capacity of the AU and SADC, through
means such as seconding suitably qualifi ed and experience offi cers to ensure eff ective response to
continental challenges, will also feature prominently in the DOD’s diplomatic initiatives.

Given South Africa’s geostrategic prominence in global aff airs and its concomitant leadership role in
forums, such as the UN and the Non-Aligned Movement among others, the resolution of confl icts through
peaceful negotiations means that the strategic role and participation of Defence as the country’s honesty
peace broker and the largest troop contributor, both domestically, regionally and continentally, will be
further entrenched during this decade, in order to respond to a growing international responsibility as
dictated by the country’s foreign policy on peace keeping.

###### MILITARY STRATEGY

The Defence Strategy directs the Military Strategy of the SANDF. The Military Strategy describes the
three Military Strategic Objectives of defence, as well as ways and means of achieving the objectives.
In essence, the Military Strategy’s purpose is to give substance to section 200(2) of the Constitution,
namely, “To defend and protect the Republic, its territorial integrity and its people, in accordance with
the Constitution and the principles of international law regulating the use of force.” The Military Strategy,
which is depicted in Figure 2, informs the Force Preparation and Force Employment strategies.

Figure 2: Military Strategy in Context


-----

###### MILITARY STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES (ENDS)

Military Strategic Objectives constitute the ends that are to be achieved by the SANDF. These objectives
are directed at the full range of military and other ordered commitments. The following objectives guide
the composition of the Force Design and Force Structure of the SANDF:

- To enhance and maintain comprehensive defence capabilities
To provide self-defence according to international law against any aggression that endangers the
stability of South Africa.

- To promote peace, security and stability in the region and on the Continent
To provide for internal and external force deployments to enhance security in support of decisions by
parliament.

- To support the people of South Africa
Provide support to the people of South Africa through operations other than war, during disaster,
emergency and humanitarian need circumstances where the responsible State departments do not
have adequate capacity to do so.

###### MILITARY STRATEGIC CONCEPTS (WAYS)

Military Strategic Concepts describe the ways to be followed in order to meet the Military Strategic
Objectives. The Military Strategy captures the following strategic concepts through the mission-based
approach:

- Mission-essential Training. The training of personnel in the essential knowledge and skills required to
execute tasks necessary to accomplish prescribed missions.

- Mission-trained Force. A force prepared and supported to execute prescribed missions (within the
parameters of the selective engagement concept).

- Selective Engagement. This concept of selective engagement indicates that the South African National
Defence Force will execute all the prescribed missions, but will be selective in terms of the extent to
which operations and tasks, emanating from these missions, will be executed. This concept implies
that appreciated risks will have to be taken.

- Strategic Positioning. This concept indicates that the South African National Defence Force is willing
to proactively establish a sound security environment, through actions such as infl uencing political
and military foreign relations actions and the pre-placement of appropriate military capabilities.

The SANDF will use the mission-based approach **_(that can also be described as the mandate driven_**
**_approach) to achieve the Military Strategic Objectives of the DOD. This implies that the various missions_**
that the state requires the SANDF to conduct will be used to direct force preparation, training and
exercises.

###### MILITARY STRATEGIC CAPABILITIES (MEANS)

The Strategic Capabilities of the SANDF constitute the means of the Military Strategy. These consist of
the following:

- C4I3RS (command and control, communications, computers, information, intelligence, infrastructure,
reconnaissance and surveillance) capability.

- Balanced conventional war fi ghting capability.

- Light mobile capability.

- Support capability.


-----

###### MISSIONS

Missions are combinations of tasks that should be performed to achieve the Military Strategic Objectives.
The missions determine the capabilities that must be acquired, prepared and supported. As such,
missions guide the allocation of resources.

The types of missions undertaken include conventional, non-conventional, unconventional, health
support, peace support operations, special operations, special force operations, defence diplomacy,
support to other Government departments, presidential tasks, disaster relief and humanitarian
assistance.

###### MILITARY STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION

The contextual environment is characterised by uncertainties and unpredictability. A fl exible approach
to defence planning necessitates a Military Strategy that takes account of strategic uncertainties.
Flexibility is achieved through the utilisation of multi-role preparation, skills-based capability and the
Reserve Force. The Military Strategic Objectives, the Military Strategic Concepts and the Military Strategic
Capabilities are not to be seen as separate parts of the Military Strategy, but as an integrated system.

###### FORCE PREPARATION STRATEGY

The Force Preparation Strategy determines the level of defence and readiness at which to prepare
the SANDF in order to use the defence allocation towards the correct output, and avoid fruitless
expenditure. The Force Preparation Strategy primarily provides for the preparation of Regulars for
deployment on ordered missions, supplemented by Reserves when required. Additional forces will only
be prepared when necessary to deal with ad hoc crises or when a State of National Defence is declared.
The preparation of forces other than that for ordered commitments is divided into the following three
categories:

- Immediate forces for unexpected or sudden crises requiring a quick response.

- Second-line forces for the above, consisting primarily of Reserves, who will also provide most of the
conventional landward capability of the SANDF.

- Heightened force levels required for a war of national survival will be provided by the mobilisation of
general Reserves.

###### FORCE EMPLOYMENT STRATEGY

The Force Employment Strategy primarily directs the conduct of operations by the SANDF in support of
Government policy and its Programme of Action initiatives. The Force Employment Strategy is based on
the following approaches:

- A multinational approach aimed at the establishment, structuring, staffi ng, equipping, operating,
exercising, sustaining and empowering of regional structures to foster security.

- An interdepartmental approach with the focus on improving co-operation.

- A phased approach that endeavours to change the focus over time from “supporting the people” to
promoting peace, security and stability in the region and on the continent”. The aim is to foster a
stable and secure environment in the region.


-----

###### FORCE SUPPORT STRATEGIES

 SUPPORT STRATEGIES

The essence of the support strategy, which directs the provision of support to the DOD in general and
the SANDF in particular, during both peace and confl ict times, is to diff erentiate between unique support
required by operational elements and the common support requirements of all Services and Divisions.
Support is seen as an integrated series of processes that enables the DOD to execute its constitutional
mandate. The uniqueness is a consequence of the unique operational environments and dictates that
specialised support concepts are to be developed, which entails that the “front” of the support system
supports uniqueness, whilst the “rear” utilises a common technology base.

The renewal of the DOD resources, both matériel and human, is detailed in the following Force Support
strategies:

- Human Resource Strategy.

- Joint Logistic Strategy.

- Information Strategy.

- Strategic Capital Acquisition Strategy.

- Service Delivery Improvement Plan


###### ORGANISATIONAL PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT


###### DOD BALANCED SCORECARD 

The defence objectives have been translated into the DOD Balanced Scorecard (BSC) Strategy Map.
Presented below are perspectives as gleaned from the DOD BSC Strategy Map that are the key levers for
measuring the DOD’s internal, external and collective eff ectiveness:

- Output deliverables – Deliver what our stakeholders expect from us.

- Internal – Excel in our internal processes in order to satisfy our stakeholders.

- Resources – Provide and manage our resources in order to support our processes and outputs.

- Building for the future – Learn, grow and innovate in order to achieve long-term goals.

The above perspectives provide the framework for the annual performance agreement of the
Accounting Offi cer and the Chief of the SANDF with the Minister. Hence, when implemented, the BSC
will form the basis of the performance management system at organisational and individual level within
the DOD.

The DOD is currently in the process of implementing the BSC as a performance management framework
to translate strategy into measurable objectives.

The starting point for this process was to develop a strategy map for the Department – a visual map
of the overall strategic outcomes and objectives of the department. The objectives are grouped into
four perspectives (strategic performance focus areas). Each of these contains objectives commensurate
with the focus of the perspective. Performance related cause and eff ect relationships are indicated with
arrows on this map.

This strategy map is included as Figure 3 below. The full BSC consists of the perspectives, objectives,
measures and targets. It consolidates all objectives and measures in the department into one balanced
view of its performance.


-----

The roll-out of the BSC as a performance management tool was advanced during the past year. At the
close of the fi nancial year, the scorecards for the various Services and Divisions had been completed.
These scorecards have played a pivotal role in the strategic planning process. The implementation of the
BSC will bear positive results for the Department in respect of planning and reporting on performance.

Figure 3: The DOD Balanced Scorecard


-----

###### CHAPTER 2 MEDIUM-TERM STRATEGIC FOCUS


###### INTRODUCTION


This chapter provides an overview of the DOD‘s policy and legislative developments that will impact
on the spending patterns, the outputs with accompanying key performance indicators, the budget
allocation and associated corporate risks, as well as the specifi c focus on service delivery improvement.

The DOD’s medium-term strategic focus is shaped by the National Strategic Direction, which consists
of the Regulatory Framework of Government; ‘Towards a 10-Year Review’; Government Scenarios;
the annual State of the Nation Address by the President; the annual Budget Speech; the Government
Makgotla decisions, issued bi-annually in January and July; the Medium-Term Strategic Framework
(MTSF), a mechanism for generating limited, focused, medium-term strategic priorities shared by all
spheres of Government; and the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF), which is directed by the
MTSF, national interests and national values.

This chapter provides an overview of Government’s medium-term strategic focus, the DOD’s medium
term strategic focus and the alignment thereof with Government priorities, the Minister’s priorities, as
well as policy and legislative developments that will impact on the spending patterns.

Further, the budget allocation as gleaned from the Estimate of National Expenditure, tabled by the
Minister of Finance, is presented herein. Expenditure trends and analysis of the budget allocation are
alluded to. Finally, the risk management approach and assessment, as well as the specifi c focus on the
service delivery improvement programme, are provided.


###### OVERVIEW OF THE DOD STRATEGIC PLANNING PROCESS


The process of strategic planning in the DOD is initiated annually with the environmental analysis (EA).
The Planning and Budgeting Seminar then follow up the EA in September. During this Seminar, the
Minister presents the guidelines that inform the strategic planning process for the next fi nancial year.
At the same work session the Accounting Offi cer translates the Minister’s guidelines to Departmental
Guidelines. The Accounting Offi cer presents more detailed guidelines that are informed by the Outcome
Delivery Agreements.

Guidelines are issued that pertain to the programmes as articulated in the ENE as well as the crossfunctional support plans. Services/Divisions during October/November develop their strategic plans
in line with the guidelines issued and these get submitted to the SANDF and the Secretariat in April of
each year. The plans are technically evaluated in May in preparation for the Departmental Programme
and Budget Evaluation Committee (DPBEC) in June, where the individual Services make presentations
and the Accounting Offi cer makes evaluations. These revised plans are submitted in November and
these inform the corporate Strategic Plan, which is developed consultatively and gets approved by the
Secretariat Council (SC), Military Command Council (MCC) and Plenary Defence Staff Council (PDSC).
The approved document is submitted to the Auditor General (AG) and National Treasury (NT) for quality
assurance and inputs regarding compliance with regulatory framework.


-----

The Accounting Offi cer presents the approved document to the Minister. The publication process then
commences to see the document tabled in parliament in March of every year.

The strategic planning process and the implementation thereof is supported by the MCC, SC, Council on
Defence (COD), Plenary Defence Staff Council (PDSC), Defence Planning Board (DPB) and the DPBEC to
ensure alignment with the DOD priorities as well as Government prescripts.

The execution of the DOD Strategic Plan is monitored through Quarterly Reports (fi rst three quarters),
the Annual Report, as well as at DPBEC meetings.

The necessary adjustments to the process will be eff ected to continually align with the emerging
Government strategic planning trajectory.


###### GOVERNMENT’S MEDIUM TERM STRATEGIC FOCUS


The MTSF 2009-2014 builds on successes of the 15 years of democracy. It is a statement of intent in
identifying the developmental challenges facing South Africa and outlines the medium term strategy
for improving in the conditions of life of South Africans, as well as for our enhanced contribution to the
cause of building a better South Africa.

Government adopted the MTSF for the mandate period 2009-2014 where 10 strategic priorities serve
as a basis for determining Government’s implementation plans for the period 2009 to 2014. The table
below places the election mandate, MTSF key strategic objectives and outcomes alongside each other.
The outcomes refl ect the desired impact that Government seeks to achieve.

Table 1: Details of Government’s Electoral Mandate, Medium Term Strategic Framework and Outcomes

|Electoral Mandate|MTSF|Outcomes|
|---|---|---|
|Creation of Decent Work and sustainable livelihoods|Speeding up growth and transforming the economy to create decent work and sustainable livelihoods.|Decent employment through economic growth.|
|Education|Strengthen the skills and human resource base.||
||Quality basic education.||
||||
|Skilled and capable workforce to support an inclusive growth path.|||
|Health|Improve the health prof ile of all South Africans.|A long and healthy life for all South Africans.|
|Rural development, food, security and land reform|Comprehensive rural land development strategy linked to land and agrarian reform and food security.|Vibrant, equitable, sustainable rural communities contributing towards food security for all.|
|The f ight against crime and corruption|Intensify the f gi ht against crime and corruption.|All people in SA are and feel safe.|
||||


-----

|Electoral Mandate|MTSF|Outcomes|
|---|---|---|
||Massive programme to build economic and social infrastructure.|An ef cfiient, competitive and responsive economic infra- structure network.|
||Build cohesive, caring and sustainable communities.|Responsive, accountable, ef efctive and ef ficient local government system|
|||Sustainable human settlements and improved quality of sustainable human settlements and improved quality of household life.|
||Pursuing African advancement and enhanced international co- operation.|Create a better SA, a better Africa and a better world.|
||Sustainable Resources Management and use.|Protect and enhance our environmental assets and natural resources.|
||Building a developmental state, including improvement of Public Service and strengthening democratic institutions.|An ef cfiient, ef efctive and development-oriented Public Ser-vice and an empowered, fair and inclusive citizenship.|


###### DOD’S MEDIUM-TERM STRATEGIC FOCUS


As directed by Government’s imperatives, during the next decade, the DOD will focus on a mandatedriven, force design and structure. The DOD intends undertaking a policy and strategy review that will
inform the force design and structure to

- Meet the ordered commitments stipulated in the Constitution of defending and protecting the RSA
and its people; and

- Support Government’s diplomatic initiatives in the region and on the continent.

These will be met in accordance with the principles of international law, the MTSF and the MTEF of
Government.

Whilst emphasising its Constitutional obligation, the DOD also embraces Government’s initiatives and
priorities to combat poverty and underdevelopment through various socio-economic development
programmes as a necessary condition for lasting peace and stability nationally, sub-regionally and
continentally. Such alignment shall entail that:

- The defence capabilities of the DOD are enhanced and maintained

- Peace, security and confi dence-building in the SADC sub-region and the entire continent are
promoted through constructive dialogue aimed at nurturing sound defence diplomatic relations
and projecting South Africa’s foreign policy principles and objectives;

- The Government’s policy to resolve confl icts peacefully through recognised international
instruments and mechanisms will be supported by deploying the SANDF in international peace
missions; and


-----

- The Government’s diplomatic engagements are supported through participation in multilateral
institutions such as the SADC, AU and UN.


###### DEFENCE ALIGNMENT WITH GOVERNMENT PRIORITIES


The business of defence is aligned with the priorities of Government as determined in the MTSF and the
priorities determined annually in the Cabinet Lekgotla.

In the January 2010 Cabinet Lekgotla, a concept document was approved, entitled “Measurable
Performance and Accountable Delivery” which seeks to “develop the MTSF into outcomes with
measurable outputs and optimal activities”. The outcomes, outputs and measurable activities will focus
the business of Government on those key matters which will “achieve more with less”.

Defence is a member of the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security (JCPS) Cluster and the International
Co-operation, Trade and security (ICTS) Cluster. Defence became the Chair of the ICTS cluster in October
2009. It is within these clusters that Defence contributes to the strategic intent of Government and
ensures that its readiness and resources are aligned with the ordered commitments of Government.

###### JUSTICE, CRIME PREVENTION AND SECURITY (JCPS) CLUSTER

The JCPS cluster will focus on Outcomes 3 entitled “All People in South Africa Are and Feel Safe”. Within
this outcome 3, Defence will focus on the output related to border management.

In November 2009, Cabinet approved the employment of the SANDF for the full spectrum of border
safeguarding services inside South Africa and in international waters. By so doing, Cabinet confi rmed
the long term responsibility for border control residing with the SANDF.

In terms of the Cabinet decision, the DOD supports other State departments in respect of  border
safeguarding. Border safeguarding operations will not be limited to the borderline only, but will include
rear area operations.

Border safeguarding must be viewed and managed as a priority function of the SANDF in relation to its
mandate to protect and defend the Republic, its sovereignty, territorial integrity and national interests
and people, in accordance with the Constitution and the principles of international law regulating the
use of force.

Consequently, the SANDF must structure, budget for and develop capabilities to execute the full
spectrum of border safeguarding. The SANDF military strategy and Force employment planning must
be adjusted to meet this priority.

###### INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION, TRADE AND SECURITY (ICTS) CLUSTER

The ICTS cluster will focus on Outcome 11, “Create a Better South Africa and Contribute to a Safer Africa
and a Better World”. In this Outcome 11, Defence will focus on the outputs related to the Advancement
of Regional and Global Peace, Security and Sustainability.

The measurable activities of this output will relate to both the promotion of regional security and South
African representation in multilateral organisations/peace and security forums.


-----

This will mean that the effi cacy of SANDF forces deployed in peace missions and general military
assistance missions will be measured in terms of having the correct mandate to deploy, are missionready and mission-trained, and are properly supported and protected by the correct legal instruments
and legal framework.

This further means that Defence must take active steps to ensure that regional, continental and
international peace and security structures are capacitated and strengthened by the appropriate
deployments of South Africans into these structures, which may include the SADC Planning Elements,
SADC Standby Force, SADC Peace Mission Training Centre, African Union Peace and Security Structures,
Military Staff Committee and United Nations Department of Peacekeeping.


###### MINISTER OF DEFENCE’S PRIORITIES FOR FY 2010/11


The Minister of Defence has determined that execution of the defence mandate should help realise the
following strategic priorities during FY 2010/11 and beyond. Monitoring of performance against these
identifi ed strategic objectives will be a litmus test of the extent to which the defence function has been
able to do things diff erently and achieve more with less. The Ministerial Priorities for FY 2010/11 are as
follows:

- The establishment of a functional Department of Military Veterans
The Department should be fully resourced to take responsibility for the overall management and
administration of Military Veterans aff airs, including but not limited to, developing policy, legislation,
programmes, benefi ts and services that facilitate the transition from active service to civilian life.

- Rejuvenation and Upgrading of the Landward Programme
This shall be our main focus in the incoming period and additional funds are to be secured. This will
take place sequentially and in phases. The fi rst phase will be characterised by the alignment of the
Army Vision with the DOD’s MTEF priorities.

- Infrastructure
- The DOD will develop a model to manage its own facilities.
- The DOD will compile a master plan to deal with infrastructure. This plan must include priorities,
costs and the development of a phased approach.

- Department of Defence Works Regiment
- The DOD is to create a “works brigade” to ensure an in-house capacity to attend to all its facilities.
- The DOD will utilise professional technical resources within Defence to support infrastructure
development at local Government level.

- Alignment of Defence Secretariat with its Constitutional and Legislative Mandate
A review of the Defence Secretariat to align with the mandate of the defence organisation and support
the requirements for the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans.

- The Establishment of the National Defence Force Service Commission and Supporting Structures
To improve the level of job satisfaction and morale, a permanent National Defence Force
Commission will be established, whose mandate will be to investigate, provide expert advice and
make recommendations regarding remuneration and the conditions of service of members of the
SANDF and, secondly, to make recommendations to the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans on
the establishment of a permanent NDFSC (Military Service Commission).


-----

- Transformation of ARMSCOR
In order to increase the DOD’s contribution to South Africa’s Research and Development Index, it is
imperative that ARMSCOR human capital base be continually reviewed to ensure the emergence of a
rejuvenated, dependable technical human capital base.

- Incremental Refocusing of Denel to Support the Identifi ed Defence Strategic Capabilities
Notwithstanding the economic imperatives that drive Denel’s business strategy, a concerted eff ort
will be made to optimally utilise Denel to provide for the strategic competencies of defence.

- Promote a Culture of Good Governance Prescripts
Realisation of a Qualifi cation–Free Audit: Institutionalisation of prudent internal controls will be
employed to promote evidence-based performance reporting at all levels. A multi-pronged strategy
must be developed and fully implemented that addresses root causes of the Auditor General’s
qualifi cations and will be employed to continually align the DOD with emerging domestic and
international auditing standards.

Information Technology (IT): To improve systemic compatibility and interoperability, the DOD, in
collaboration with the National Treasury, is involved in preparing the rollout of the Integrated Financial
Management System (IFMS). It is expected that the utilisation of IT as a strategic resource will greatly
facilitate administrative processes, as well as improve the level of accountability.

- Defence Strategy that responds to the DOD’s Current and Emerging Needs
A strategy must be developed to provide a cogent argument on the levels of defence capabilities
required to respond to domestic and global trends, including socio-economic and environmental
issues, as well as requirements posed by the foreign and security policy of this Government, to meet
the three strategic defence objectives of defending the Republic, promoting regional and continental
security, and supporting the people and continually improving defence capabilities.

- Revitalisation of the Reserves
The Reserves must be transformed and revitalised so that they can fulfi l their primary role of
providing the majority of the conventional landward capability of the SANDF, whilst at the same time
supplementing the peace support missions conducted by the Regulars. The Reserve Strategy must be
fi nalised and fully implemented.

- Optimal Utilisation the Collateral Value of Defence Capabilities in Responding to the Country’s SocioEconomic Needs
In support of the Government’s drive to achieve more with less, more partnerships will be pursued
within other organs of state to assist in the delivery of justifi able socio- economic needs at municipal
and local levels.

- Provide a lead to the development and implementation of the Community Service Programme (CSP)
In an eff ort to curb migration to urban areas, escalating levels of service delivery protest actions, high
level of unemployment that is prevalent amongst women, youth, military veterans and people in the
rural areas, a community services programme will be initiated that will re-skill the citizens, thus
providing another opportunity for economic participation though maintenance of existing
infrastructure and heritage sites. As such artisan and cultural promotion programmes will be promoted
within the rural training and this will form the core of the National Community Service Concept
that the Defence Force will be infused in all communities that are intricately connected to Defence
institutions.


-----

###### DOD ALIGNMENT TO MTSF PRIORITIES


The table below indicates how the DOD has aligned certain of its activities in accordance with the MTSF
document issued by the Presidency. This is a framework that guides Government’s programme in the
electoral mandate for the period 2009 – 2014.

Table 2: DOD Alignment to MTSF Priorities

|Table 2: DOD Alignment to MTSF Priorities|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Strategic Priority as Ref elcted in the MTSF|Elements of Strategy|DOD Alignment to MTSF Priorities|
||||
|Strategic Priority 1:|||
|Speeding up growth and transforming the economy to create decent work and sustainable livelihoods|Creation of decent employment, economic growth, broad-based industrialisation.|Ensure that procurement processes promote broad-based economic empowerment.|
|||Development of the White Paper on Defence Industry.|
|Strategic Priority 2:|||
|Massive Programme to build economic and social infrastructure|Development of robust, reliable, af ofrdable and secure ICT infrastructure|Promote partnerships with other organs of state at local and municipal level to accelerate the delivery of socioeconomic needs.|
||Establish an integrated management framework that will ensure synchronisation of DOD and DPW strategic objectives of facility infrastructure development and management that is compliant with regulatory requirements and meets strategic and operational requirements of both departments (eg EPWP).|Establishment of DOD Works’ Capability to address DPW capacity challenges and simultaneously empowering youth and underutilised DOD personnel.|
|Strategic Priority 3:|||
|Comprehensive rural land development strategy linked to land and agrarian reform and food security|Aggressive implementation of land reform policies|Finalisation of pending land claims (land restitution).|
||Facilitation of the Draft DPW Disposal Policy into a policy implementation document.|Develop partnership with local Government and broad based community organisation in optimal utilisation of underutilized military land and facilities. Engage relevant departments (NT and DPW) in co-ordinated and focused disposal of excess military land and facilities (Endowment Properties).|


-----

|Strategic Priority as Ref elcted in the MTSF|Elements of Strategy|DOD Alignment to MTSF Priorities|
|---|---|---|
||||
|Strategic Priority 4:|||
|Strengthen the skills and human resource base|Broaden access to post- secondary education and improve higher education,|Access to post-secondary education funding by means of bursaries.|
|||Access to (part and full qualif ication- based) NQF- linked training opportu-nities.|
||In partnership with identif eid academic institutions, deve- lop DOD logistics training institutions into centres of excellence for Supply Chain Management and Life Cycle Management.|Restructuring of DOD logistics training capability to be streamlined towards force preparation objectives and broad-based skills and human resource development.|
||Ensure that training and skills development initiatives respond to the requirements of economy, rural develop-ment and social integration.|Enhanced MSDS system that widens the graduates’ talent and skills base in cultural activities and sport.|
|Strategic Priority 5:|||
|Improve the health prof lie of all South Africans|Increase institutional capa- cities to deliver health-system functions|Hospital revitalisation programme Filling critical posts and improving remuneration of health and medical care personnel.|
||Strengthening treatment of TB.|DOD awareness programmes.|
||Comprehensive plan for HIV/ AIDS|DOD awareness programmes.|
|Strategic Priority 6:|||
|Intensify the f gi ht against crime and corruption|Develop the strategy and Plan to inform DOD’s role in borderline safeguarding|Implementation of the Cabinet decision regarding employment of SANDF for a full spectrum of border safeguarding services inside South Africa and in international waters|
||Combat the scourge of corruption in the public and private sectors by strengthening legal and policy frameworks.|Full implementation of anti- criminality strategy and plan.|


-----

|Strategic Priority as Ref elcted in the MTSF|Elements of Strategy|DOD Alignment to MTSF Priorities|
|---|---|---|
||||
|||Promote f inancial disclosures at all levels.|
|||Strengthen the GRC processes to address the ethical and f di uciary requirements that guide the securing of service providers.|
|||Strengthen the DOD risk management framework.|
|Strategic Priority 7:|||
|Build cohesive, caring and sustainable communities|Implement comprehensive social assistance and social.|Establish a fully functional Department for Military Veterans.|
||Promote shared value system.|Intensify civic education programmes to include all members and employees.|
|Strategic Priority 8:|||
|Pursuing African advance-ment and enhanced international co- operation|Continued prioritisation of African Agenda|Promote nationally identif eid outputs that relate to advancement of regional and global peace, security and sustainability.|
|||Ensure that regional, continental and international peace security structures are capacitated and strengthened by appropriate deployments.|
|||Ensure that adequate legal instruments and frameworks exist to support the requisite deployments in Peace Missions and General Military Assistance Missions.|
||Improving political and economic integration of the SADC|Improve governance within SADC in terms of Defence Specif ic Security Sector Reform programmes.|
||Strengthen South-South Relations|Implementation and monitoring of IBSA Agreements and Action Plans –relevant to the DOD.|


-----

|Strategic Priority as Ref elcted in the MTSF|Elements of Strategy|DOD Alignment to MTSF Priorities|
|---|---|---|
||||
|||Ensure alignment of agreements with NEPAD, revitalise NAASP, as well as support AU and UN ef ofrts to guarantee lasting solutions to conf lict resolution.|
|Strategic Priority 9:|||
|Sustainable resources management and use|Promote a culture of sustainable resource man- agement.|Assist in protecting marine resources in co-operation with the police.|
|||Promote responsible management of land resources through collaborations to promote land use recycling.|
||Contribute to a system for Environmental Impact Man- agement Strategy.|Ensure compliance with National Environmental Management Act (NEMA) and the applicable protocols regarding sustainable resource management.|
||Ef efctively utilise the allocated radio frequency spectrum.|Promote prudent utilisation of defence allocated bandwidth.|
||Implementation of national Framework for Sustainable Development.|Compliance with relevant protocols to ensure sustainable environmental management.|
||Develop a sustainable Supply Chain Management and Life Cycle Management framework that meet Force employment requirements and is compliant to NT resource management guidelines and require-ments.|Ensure that the Logistics Intervention and Restructuring Programme objectives are accomplished and embraced within the DOD at all levels.|


-----

|Strategic Priority as Ref elcted in the MTSF|Elements of Strategy|DOD Alignment to MTSF Priorities|
|---|---|---|
||||
|Strategic Priority 10:|||
|Building a developmental state, including improvement of public service and strengthening of democratic institutions|Improving the capacity and ef ficacy of the State.|The review of the Defence Secretariat to align it with the mandate for defence organisation and support requirements for the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans.|
||Improve the delivery and quality of public services.||
||Entrenching a culture and practice of an ef cfiient, transparent, honest and compassionate Public Service.|Continually project the patriotism and high levels of discipline that characterise the Defence Force.|
|||Deepen the understanding of the code of conduct that is a def ni es the outlook of the members and employees of Defence|


###### LEGISLATIVE CHANGES LIKELY TO INFLUENCE PROGRAMME SPENDING PLANS OVER THE MTEF PERIOD


The following table lists legislation that could infl uence Defence spending for FY 2010/11.

Table 3: Legislation that Could Infl uence Future Spending in FY 2010/11

|Objective|Description|
|---|---|
|Military Discipline Bill|The Constitution enjoins the State to respect the dignity of all persons and some of the of efnces and penalties are not in line with this injunction.|
|Military Veterans Af afirs Bill|To give full ef efct to the expanded mandate of the Ministry of Defence and Military Veterans and to provide for matters incidental thereto.|
|Defence Amendment Bill|To provide obligatory service for the members of the Reserve Force.|
|National Defence Force Service Commission Bill|To establish the National Defence Force Service Commission and provide for matters incidental thereto.|
|Geneva Conventions Bill|To enact the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols into domestic law in terms of section 231 of the Constitution.|


-----

###### FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS ALLOCATIONS OF THE DEFENCE PROGRAMMES


The composition of Defence’s budget per programme as published in the Estimates of National
Expenditure 2010, Vote 21, and tabled in Parliament by the Minister of Finance on 17 February 2010 is
presented in Table 4.

Table 4: Vote 21: Budget Allocations for the 2010/11 MTEF Period

|Budget summary|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|R million|2010/11||||2011/12|2012/13|
||Total to be appropriated|Current payments|Transfers and subsidies|Payments for capital assets|Total|Total|
|MTEF allocation|||||||
|Administration|3 247.1|3 193.9|34.2|19.0|3 617.2|3 991.7|
|Force Employment|1 908.9|1 700.8|145.4|62.7|1 997.1|2 086.3|
|Landward Defence|9 982.9|7 409.3|2 519.2|54.4|10 431.2|11 062.1|
|Air Defence|6 059.1|3 713.8|2 287.7|57.7|7 910.5|8 361.9|
|Maritime Defence|2 179.8|1 706.5|421.2|52.1|2 320.0|2 574.2|
|Military Health Support|2 770.2|2 685.1|35.8|49.3|2 961.3|3 201.3|
|Defence Intelligence|631.1|226.6|401.1|3.4|666.0|698.9|
|General Support|3 936.2|2 462.9|985.8|487.5|4 028.1|4 410.1|
|Total expenditure estimates|30 715.3|23 099.0|6 830.1|786.2|33 931.4|36 386.5|
|Executive authority|Minister of Defence and Military Veterans||||||
|Accounting of cfier|Secretary for Defence and Military Veterans||||||
|Website address|www.dod.mil.za||||||
|The Estimates of National Expenditure booklets for individual votes are available on www.treasury.gov.za. They provide more comprehensive coverage of vote specif ic|||||||
|information, particularly about goods and services, transfers, public entities and lower level institutional information.|||||||


-----

###### EXPENDITURE TRENDS


The detail of Defence expenditure is refl ected in Government’s Estimate of National Expenditure 2010
and is included in the Appropriation Bill 2010 that will be tabled in Parliament on 17 February for
consideration.

Expenditure trends over the MTEF period are impacted on by the cancellation of the strategic airlift
capability, higher than planned for salary adjustments for Government employees and additional
allocations for the South African Defence Force’s new remuneration system, the military skills
development system, landward defence modernisation and the establishment of an offi ce for the
management of military veterans aff airs.

With the cancellation of the A400M aircraft contract Landward Defence becomes the dominant
programme within the Defence vote over the MTEF period, consuming 30.5 per cent of the department’s
total budget. Air Defence takes up 23.7 percent, General Support and Administration take up 12.8 and
10.6 per cent respectively of the total budget. The Administration programme increases with 12.7 per
cent, 11.4 per cent and 10.4 per cent over the medium term due to the inclusion of the defence Offi ce
Accommodation portfolio of R1.8 billion in 2010/11 in this programme. General Support is equally large
due to the facilities maintenance and repair programme, the capital works programme and the upgrade
of the Air Force Base Waterkloof runway being included in this programme. The higher than average
increases in the Landward Defence, Maritime Defence and Military Health Support programmes during
the MTEF period are due to the additional allocations received for landward defence renewal, provision
for the replacement of operational ambulances and initiating programmes to acquire a hydro graphic
vessel and off -shore patrol vessels.

Compensation of employees, amounting to R13.5 billion or 43.8 per cent of the total budget in 2010/11
remains the largest expenditure item in the budget. Goods and services and transfer payments amount
to 31.5 per cent and 22.2 per cent respectively in 2010/11.


###### INFRASTRUCTURE SPENDING


In FY 2008/09 the Department continued to fund 36 capital works building projects. Expenditure was
directed towards upgrading military health facilities, installing fi re detection and protection systems,
improved accessibility to buildings for disabled members, upgrading kitchens, building an urban training
facility and improving security at diff erent buildings. In consultation with the National Department of
Public Works, Defence continues with the repair and maintenance programme at the military hospitals
in Pretoria and Cape Town, the Air Force Base Waterkloof, 4 SA Infantry Battalion and 35 Engineer
Support Regiment. Over the medium term, the programme is extended to eventually include the repair
and maintenance of 33 bases and 52 capital works projects.


###### DEPARTMENTAL RECEIPTS


Departmental receipts are mainly from the sale of redundant or obsolete equipment and defence
matériel, the rental of accommodation to personnel and board and lodging. The unpredictable nature of
reimbursements for peace support operations prevents accurate projections in departmental receipts,
specifi cally fi nancial transactions in assets and liabilities. The compliance regime for the disposal of prime
mission equipment also impacts on the accuracy of revenue projections. Despite the aforementioned,
improvements in revenue management should contribute towards an increase from R676.7 million to
R756.9 million, at an average annual rate of 3.8 per cent between 2009/10 and 2012/13.


-----

###### ANALYSIS OF THE 2010/11 DEFENCE BUDGET ALLOCATION


Figure 4: Comparative Budget Allocation Changes Between Financial Years 2009/10 and 2010/11 (All amounts in R’000)


###### RISK MANAGEMENT


Section 38(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, (Act 1 of 1999), as amended, and section 3.2
of the Treasury Regulations require the DOD to put in place a risk management system. To fulfi l this
requirement, the DOD’s Enterprise-Wide Risk Management (ERM) eff orts for the MTEF period will be
directed towards entrenching the risk management culture by means of the following:

a. Roll-out (communication) of the DOD ERM Framework, Policy and Strategy to DOD personnel and
key stakeholders.

b. Implementing a risk-based approach through the integration of ERM with internal processes such as
strategic planning, internal audit, performance monitoring, control and compliance. This will ensure
that ERM is integrated with all Departmental management processes.

c. Establishing the DOD ERM Committee and relevant risk management support committees in the
respective Services/Divisions.

d. Developing a consolidated DOD Risk Register and annual Risk Assessment Report.

The approach outlined above will contribute towards improving management and other personnel’s
understanding of the context and implications of risks to their day-to day activities.

A generic overview of the enterprise risks that could impact on the achievement of the DOD’s goals is
presented below:


-----

Table 5: Enterprise Risk and Mitigation Strategy

|Enterprise Risk|Mitigation Strategy/Action|
|---|---|
|The continued loss of scarce skills due to the exit of large numbers of highly skilled personnel.|• An Interim Service Commission has been established to consider remuneration and the conditions of service of members of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF), a unique service dispensation for the SANDF outside the ambit of the Public Service.|
||• Implementation of the DOD retention strategy.|
||• Air Force partnering with local aviation industry.|
|Inadequate funding for human resource expenditure could result in a further burden on DOD’s budget vote/allocation.|• Department will engage National Treasury for additional funding.|
|The declining Rand value of the DOD budget could negatively impact on the Department’s operating budget and capital acquisitions budget.|• Department will engage National Treasury for additional funding required to address def ciiencies in the capital acquisition budget.|
|Inadequate facility infrastructure maintenance and renovation capacity resulting in unacceptable facility repair and renovation backlog that detrimentally impacts on force preparation and employment.|• Immediately establish bilateral forum between DPW and DOD leading towards migrating some custodian functions to the DOD, and development of an ef efctive memorandum of understanding.|
||• Finalise the development of the Works Capability to assume some of the migrated functions from DPW to address capacity inadequacies.|
|Incompatible systems could result in inef efctive and inef ficient performance.|• Analysis of all the systems in the Department with the intention of integration.|
||• Approaching National Treasury for permission to procure DOD integrated system.|
|Lack of single logistics management information system due to historic fragmentation of information systems and a perceived National Treasury (NT) moratorium on information system enhancements. This has led to inability to comply with NT asset management requirements including f ni ancial reporting leading to audit qualif ciation.|• Employment of outsourced capabilities to assist in addressing audit qualif ication and asset verif ciation challenges.|
||• Establishment of Integrated Project Team to investigate all available options to develop a single DOD logistics information system.|
|Non-compliance with legislation, e.g. certain aspects of the PFMA.|• Enhance good corporate governance throughout the Department.|
|Inadequate consensus on defence could lead to poor reputation in the public domain|• Enhance the Department’s communication strategy.|


-----

###### CHAPTER 3 OVERVIEW OF THE PROGRAMMES


###### INTRODUCTION


This chapter presents the outputs that defi ne how the Department operationalises its mandate in terms
of Force readiness, Force support and Force Employment. Further the translation of these outputs in
terms of Programmes is presented herein.


###### OUTLOOK OF DOD PROGRAMMES


The DOD spends a great deal of time preparing for various contingencies and also conducts operations
inside and outside the borders of South Africa. The performance of the DOD against plan will be measured
quarterly and annually, using performance indicators developed by the Services and Divisions. The
Inspector-General of the DOD conducts regular audits to verify the results achieved.

The outputs of the DOD, as gleaned from its mandate as well as the translation thereof into the
programmes, are outlined in this chapter. Finally, the chapter provides an overview of each programme,
details of which (in terms of performance information) are provided in the tables in Appendix A. In
this chapter, the DOD presents the programmes as an organising framework and the budget allocation
for capital acquisition, managed through Acquisition Services within the Administration Programme,
notwithstanding the allocation that is refl ected in the various programmes. Each programme, therefore,
is not representative of a Service or Division, but is a comprehensive outlook of what the programme
requires. This is also the case for Property Management, a sub programme of the Administration
Programme, wherein funding resides for projects executed through the General Support Programme.


###### DEFENCE OUTPUTS


The outputs provided by the DOD to Government are the following:

- Defence commitments, which include
- Operations that are ongoing in nature during the year and for which plans and fi nancial provision
can be made in advance;
- Operations that must be executed during the year and, if unforeseeable, for which no provision has
been made; and
- Joint, interdepartmental and multinational exercises required during the year to prepare forces for
operations.

- Landward defence capabilities.

- Air defence capabilities.

- Maritime defence capabilities.

- Military health (support) capabilities.

- Defence diplomacy, which includes
- The deployment of Defence Attachés;
- The servicing of defence-related Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs); and
- Participation in the defence and security structures of the UN, the AU and SADC.

- The provision of defence-related policy and ministerial advice.

- Cryptographic security services for Government departments.


-----

- The National Codifi cation Bureau.

- The provision of appropriate frameworks for sound policy direction and advice, and the systemic
monitoring and evaluation thereof.

- The provision of defence capabilities that respond to the needs of South Africa within the evolving
policy and national priority trajectory that characterise a developmental state.


###### TRANSLATION OF DOD OUTPUTS IN TERMS OF PROGRAMMES


For fi nancial allocation and reporting purposes, the outputs of the DOD are presented in terms of
programmes that are all-encompassing. The programmes represent the contribution of various
Services and Divisions within the DOD. The allocation provided for each programme thus represents the
collective contribution as indicated and is not representative of each Service’s allocation in real terms.
The outputs of individual Divisions and Services are described in the Appendix A to the Strategic Plan.
Eight programmes that support the outputs of the DOD are as follows:

|Table 6: Programme Purpose|Col2|
|---|---|
|Programme|Purpose|
|Administration|Conduct the policy development, management and administration of the Department.|
|Force Employment|Successfully conduct all operations, as well as joint interdepartmental and multinational military exercises.|
|Landward Defence|Provide prepared and supported landward defence capabilities for the defence and protection of South Africa.|
|Air Defence|Provide prepared and supported air defence capabilities for the defence and protection of South Africa.|
|Maritime Defence|Provide prepared and supported maritime defence capabilities for the defence and protection of South Africa.|
|Military Health Support|Provide prepared and supported military health capabilities and services for the defence and protection of South Africa.|
|Defence Intelligence|Provide a Defence intelligence and counter-intelligence capability.|
|General Support|Provide general support capabilities and services to the Department.|


###### LINKING THE STRATEGIC PLAN WITH THE ESTIMATE OF NATIONAL EXPENDITURE


The analysis is introduced through the presentation of selected indicators, which the DOD has chosen
to track over time in terms of outputs and outcomes as well as impact assessment. In addition, strategic
objectives to provide an integrated approach to organisational and individual performance, as gleaned
from the implementation of the Balanced Scorecard, are presented.

Table 7 contains the selected performance and operation indicators that defi ne the mandate of the
DOD. The detailed performance indicators of the Department are refl ected in the plans of the Services
and Divisions (Level 2) and their substructures (Levels 3 and 4).


-----

###### SELECTED PERFORMANCE AND OPERATIONS INDICATORS


Table 7: Selected Performance and Operations Indicators for the FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

Programme Indicator Past Cur- Projections
Name (s) rent

2006/ 2007/ 2008/ 2009/ 2010/ 2011/ 2012/
07 08 09 10 11 12 13

Landward Total number of 13 050 12 583 19 763 24 400 31 500 35 500 39 500
Defence active Reserves

Force Number of external 14 11 9 12 12 12 12
Employment operations each year

Force Average number of 4 810 2 698 2 931 3 024 2 102 2 102 2 102
employment personnel deployed
daily in external
operations

Force Number of Internal 3 3 6 5 5 4 4
Employment operations in support
of other Government
departments per year

Force Number of person - 515 231 156 515 208 208
Employment days used during 516 608 381 516 609 609
internal operations

Force Number of joint, in- 16 10 10 9 9 7 8
Employment ter-departmental and
multinational military
exercises conducted
per year

Landward Number of Military 4 710 4 677 6 736 8 833 11 140 11 140 11 140
Defence Skills Development
members in the system per year

Air Defence Number of fl ying 9 788 12 271 11 099 9 500 9 500 9 500 9 500
hours in support of
operations per year

Maritime Number of sea hours 9 949 9 648 8 236 11 000 10 000 9 000 9 000
Defence on patrol in South African maritime zones
per year

Military Health Number of health - - - 2 400 2 400 2 400 2 400
Support care activities per 000 000 000 000
year

4 A non-recurring increase due to support to 2010 FIFA World Cup.
5 The increase from 2009/10 to 2011/12 will depend on the scale of the South African National Defence Force’s involvement in
Borderline Control.
6 A combined Air Transport exercise involving the South African and Namibian Air Forces and the Lesotho Air Wing is an Air Force
unique exercise and is included from 2010/11.
7 The performance indicator was changed to provide an overview of the South African Military Health Service performance in
terms of number of health care activities which include health assessments and medical support services in the 88 geographic
health care facilities; 3 military hospitals and the military health institutes as well as to national and international dignitaries and
during internal and external operations.

|Programme Name (s)|Indicator|Past|Col4|Col5|Cur- rent|Projections|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2006/ 07|2007/ 08|2008/ 09|2009/ 10|2010/ 11|2011/ 12|2012/ 13|
|Landward Defence|Total number of active Reserves|13 050|12 583|19 763|24 400|31 500|35 500|39 500|
|Force Employment|Number of external operations each year|14|11|9|12|12|12|12|
|Force employment|Average number of personnel deployed daily in external operations|4 810|2 698|2 931|3 024|2 102|2 102|2 102|
|Force Employment|Number of Internal operations in support of other Government departments per year|3|3|6|5|5|4|4|
|Force Employment|Number of person days used during internal operations|-|515 516|231 608|156 381|515 516|208 609|208 609|
|Force Employment|Number of joint, in- ter-departmental and multinational military exercises conducted per year|16|10|10|9|9|7|8|
|Landward Defence|Number of Military Skills Development members in the sys- tem per year|4 710|4 677|6 736|8 833|11 140|11 140|11 140|
|Air Defence|Number of f yling hours in support of operations per year|9 788|12 271|11 099|9 500|9 500|9 500|9 500|
|Maritime Defence|Number of sea hours on patrol in South Af- rican maritime zones per year|9 949|9 648|8 236|11 000|10 000|9 000|9 000|
|Military Health Support|Number of health care activities per year|-|-|-|2 400 000|2 400 000|2 400 000|2 400 000|


-----

###### DETAILED OVERVIEW OF THE DOD’S PROGRAMMES


For fi nancial reporting, the DOD’s mandate is packaged into eight programmes. Below is the overview
of the various programmes, as gleaned from the ENE 2010. The detailed performance information is
contained in Appendix A.


###### PROGRAMME 1: ADMINISTRATION


This programme is aimed at facilitating the overall management of the Department, as well as discharging
the responsibilities of the Accounting Offi cer, in pursuit of the Minister’s Policy, as well as charging
divisions with the development of norms and standards in the various areas. These responsibilities
include providing centralised human resource support; centralised fi nancial, religious and legal services;
centralised governance, risk and compliance expertise; and the determination of working methods and
procedures that improve internal controls, as well as the veracity of information provided.

###### PROGRAMME PURPOSE

The Administration Programme executes the Department’s overall management, administration and
policy development.

Table 8: Administration Programme

Sub programme Responsibility

Ministerial Direction: To provide political direction to the DOD Minister and Deputy Minister
to ensure the democratic defence of South Africa by meeting
the required defence commitments and providing appropriate
defence capabilities.

Departmental Direction: To provide departmental direction to Secretary for Defence
the DOD to ensure the eff ective, effi cient and proper conduct of
defence activities in accordance with legislation and policy.

SANDF Command and Control: To provide command and control Chief of the SANDF
for the SANDF.

Policy and Planning: To advise on national security policy matters Chief of Defence Strategy,
and co-ordinate the strategic direction process by developing, Policy and Planning
formulating, monitoring and adapting defence policy, strategy
and plans in accordance with national policy to enable the Chief of Military Policy, Strategy
eff ective, effi cient and proper conduct of defence activities. and Planning

Financial Services: To provide a cost-eff ective fi nancial Chief Financial Offi cer
management service to the Minister of Defence, the Secretary
for Defence and the Chief of the South African National Defence
Force within the evolving regulatory framework, by means of a
professional representative civilian fi nancial management corps
and an appropriate fi nancial management system.

Acquisition Services: To manage the DOD acquisition and Chief of Defence Matériel
procurement policies. Head of Defence Supply Chain
Integration

8 In the ENE, the policy and Planning allocation includes funding for the Corporate Staff Offi ce as well as the Military Policy,
Strategy and Planning Offi ce.

|Sub programme|Responsibility|
|---|---|
|Ministerial Direction: To provide political direction to the DOD to ensure the democratic defence of South Africa by meeting the required defence commitments and providing appropriate defence capabilities.|Minister and Deputy Minister|
|Departmental Direction: To provide departmental direction to the DOD to ensure the ef efctive, ef ficient and proper conduct of defence activities in accordance with legislation and policy.|Secretary for Defence|
|SANDF Command and Control: To provide command and control for the SANDF.|Chief of the SANDF|
|Policy and Planning: To advise on national security policy matters and co-ordinate the strategic direction process by developing, formulating, monitoring and adapting defence policy, strategy and plans in accordance with national policy to enable the ef efctive, ef cfiient and proper conduct of defence activities.|Chief of Defence Strategy, Policy and Planning Chief of Military Policy, Strategy and Planning|
|Financial Services: To provide a cost-ef efctive f ni ancial management service to the Minister of Defence, the Secretary for Defence and the Chief of the South African National Defence Force within the evolving regulatory framework, by means of a professional representative civilian f ni ancial management corps and an appropriate f inancial management system.|Chief Financial Of ficer|
|Acquisition Services: To manage the DOD acquisition and procurement policies.|Chief of Defence Matériel Head of Defence Supply Chain Integration|


-----

|Sub programme|Responsibility|
|---|---|
|Inspection Services: To ensure the validity and veracity of the management information of the DOD.|Inspector General Internal Audit|
|Human Resources Support Services: To provide full human resources support services to the DOD.|Chief of Human Resources|
|Legal Service: To provide professional, legitimate and deployable defence legal services and support commensurate to the needs of the DOD.|Chief of Defence Legal Services|
|Religious Services: To provide a chaplain service that cares for all DOD members and their dependants and promotes spiritual growth, social support and ethical conduct.|Chaplain General|
|Communication Services: To provide defence communication policy, strategy and plans in accordance with DOD policy and national (Government Communication and Information System – GCIS) policy, and provide a centralised corporate communication capability, services and products in order to enable ef efctive, ef ficient, interactive, two-way communication between the DOD and its publics/stakeholders.|Head of Communication|
|Defence Reserve Direction: To direct the development and maintenance of the Reserve Force system, to provide specialist advice on Reserve matters and to promote/market the Reserves and the volunteer Reserve system.|Chief of Defence Reserves|
|Defence Foreign Relations: To provide the DOD and MOD with a foreign relations capability and services.|Chief of Defence Foreign Relations Chief of Defence International Af fairs|
|Of fice Accommodation: To manage the payment of accommodation charges, leases and municipal services as a direct result of the devolution of a portion of the National Department of Public Works’ budget to national departments. (Managed within General Support Programme.)|Chief of Logistics|


-----

###### OBJECTIVES AND MEASURES

Develop an accountable defence administration that provides norms and standards for

- Providing sound defence direction and advice;

- providing defence-related social responsibilities;

- Developing consensus on defence;

- providing sound policy and administration;

- The provision of contingency-ready defence capabilities; and

- Systemic monitoring and evaluation.

###### FINANCIAL RESOURCES

The Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) allocations and estimates for the Defence
Administration Programme are refl ected in Table 9 below.

Table 9: Administration Programme: Allocations for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13

2010/11 2011/12 2012/13

(R’000) (R’000) (R’000)

3 247.1 3 617.2 3 991.7

_NOTE. These amounts include funds allocated for human resources managed corporately by Chief Human Resources, as well as_
_administrative support to the Interim National Defence Force Service Commission_

|2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|---|---|---|
|(R’000)|(R’000)|(R’000)|
|3 247.1|3 617.2|3 991.7|


###### PROGRAMME 2: FORCE EMPLOYMENT


###### PROGRAMME PURPOSE

The Force Employment Programme provides and employs defence capabilities, including an operational
capability to successfully conduct all operations, as well as joint, interdepartmental and multinational
military exercises.

###### SUB-PROGRAMMES

Strategic Direction formulates and controls strategies, policies and plans for the employment of forces.
Funding is based on the cost of operating a joint operations division headquarters.

Operational Direction provides operational direction to joint and multinational task forces and joint
tactical headquarters through an operational level headquarters. Funding is distributed according to
the cost of operating one operational and nine tactical headquarters.

Special Operations provides and employs a special operations capability within the approved Special
Forces mandate for the SANDF. Funding is distributed according to the number and size of units, systems
and equipment operating and maintenance requirements, and the number of special forces operations,
force preparation exercises and training courses.

9 Services and Divisions are primarily responsible for their own budget when participating in JIM exercises


-----

Regional Security provides for the deployment of forces in support of South Africa’s commitment to
regional, continental and global security. Funding is distributed according to the number, size and
duration of deployments, and systems and equipment operating and maintenance requirements.
Support to the People provides for the internal deployment of forces in support of the SAPS and
other Government departments. Funding is distributed according to the number, size and duration of
deployments, and systems and equipment operating and maintenance requirement.

Defence Capability Management provides for the planning and control of joint interdepartmental and
multinational (JIM) military force preparation exercises, the development of joint force employment
command and control plan and capability development management. Funding is distributed according
to the needs for exercise control equipment for JIM military exercises and contractual obligations for the
development of joint force employment command and control plans and capability development.

###### OBJECTIVES AND MEASURES

Provide and manage defence capabilities, including an operational capability, to conduct operations
and JIM military exercises by

a Providing and employing special operations capability in accordance with national requirements;
b Conducting an average of 12 external peace missions per year in accordance with requirements to
promote peace and security;
c Conducting 21 joint, interdepartmental and multinational military force preparation exercises over
the next 3 years (excluding Special Forces and multinational air transport exercises); and
d Conducting an average of 4 operations per year in support of other Government departments and
complying with international obligations.

###### FINANCIAL RESOURCES

The MTEF allocations and estimates for the Force Employment Programme are refl ected in Table 10. The
details of sub programmes Strategic Direction, Operational Direction and Special Forces are contained
in the internal departmental plan.

Table 10: Force Employment Programme: Financial Resources for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

|2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|---|---|---|
|(R’000)|(R’000)|(R’000)|
|1 908.9|1 997.1|2 086.3|


-----

###### PROGRAMME 3: LANDWARD DEFENCE


###### PROGRAMME PURPOSE

The Landward Defence Programme provides prepared and supported landward defence capabilities for
the defence and protection of South Africa.

###### SUB-PROGRAMMES

Strategic Direction directs, orchestrates and controls the South African Army in achieving its mission
to provide prepared and supported landward capabilities for the defence and protection of South
Africa. Funding is based on the cost of operating the landward defence headquarters and managing
centralised funds for scarce commodities and specialist services.

Infantry Capability provides combat-ready infantry capabilities through training, preparing, exercising
and supporting mechanised, motorised and airborne infantry units. Funding is distributed according to
the number and size of units, systems and equipment operating and maintenance requirements, and
the number of force preparation exercises and training courses.

Armour Capability provides combat-ready armour capabilities through training, preparing, exercising
and supporting tank and armoured car units. Funding is distributed according to the number and size
of units, systems and equipment operating and maintenance requirements, and the number of force
preparation exercises and training courses.

Artillery Capability provides combat-ready artillery capabilities through training, preparing, exercising
and supporting composite and light artillery units. Funding is distributed according to the number and
size of units, systems and equipment operating and maintenance requirements, and the number of
force preparation exercises and training courses.

Air Defence Artillery Capability provides combat-ready air defence artillery capabilities through training,
preparing, exercising and supporting air defence artillery units. Funding is distributed according to the
number and size of units, systems and equipment operating and maintenance requirements, and the
number of force preparation exercises and training courses.

Engineering Capability provides combat-ready engineering capabilities to ensure mobility and
establish infrastructure during exercises and deployments, through training, preparing, exercising and
supporting fi eld and construction engineer units. Funding is distributed according to the number and
size of units, systems and equipment operating and maintenance requirements, and the number of
force preparation exercises and training courses.

Operational Intelligence provides combat-ready operational intelligence capabilities to enable
successful planning and execution of operations, through training, preparing, exercising and supporting
intelligence units. Funding is distributed according to the number and size of units, systems and
equipment operating and maintenance requirements, and the number of force preparation exercises
and training courses.

10 As Instructed in Chief SANDF Directive No 176/2008 and updated through Chief SANDF Directive 133/2009


-----

Command and Control Capability provides combat-ready tactical command and control capabilities for
integrated forces during force preparation and force employment. Funding is distributed according to
the number and size of units, systems and equipment operating and maintenance requirements, and
the number of force preparation exercises and training courses.

Support Capability provides fi rst and second line support capabilities to units and bases and ensures
support to deployed combat units through the training, preparing, exercising and supporting of fi rst
and second line maintenance units and workshops. Funding is distributed according to the number and
size of units, systems and equipment operating and maintenance requirements, the number of force
preparation exercises and training courses and product systems requirement.

General Training Capability provides general training capabilities through basic military training, junior
leader training, common landward training and command and management training at the Training
Depot (and decentralised units), SA Army Gymnasium, the Combat Training Centre and the SA Army
College. Funding is distributed according to the number and size of units, equipment operating and
maintenance requirements, and the number of force preparation exercises and training courses.

Signal Capability provides combat-ready signal capabilities to ensure command, control and
communications during exercises and deployments, through training, preparing, exercising and
supporting signal units. Funding is distributed according to the number and size of units, systems and
equipment operating and maintenance requirements, and the number of force preparation exercises
and training courses.

###### OBJECTIVES AND MEASURES

Defend and protect South Africa and its territory by

- Preparing an infantry capability to provide 3 infantry battalions a year sustained for external
deployment, 1 airborne battalion as Chief of the South African National Defence Force Reaction
Force, 1 multi-role battalion for internal safety and security, 1 battalion in support of internal security
operations and 4 battalions involved in exercises;

- Preparing an armoured capability by exercising 1 tank regiment and 1 armoured car regiment with
one squadron for internal deployment a year;

- Preparing an artillery capability by exercising 1 composite artillery regiment and 1 light (airborne)
artillery battery, having 1 light artillery battery in reserve and 1 battery for internal deployment a
year;

- Preparing an air defence artillery capability by exercising 1 air defence artillery regiment and 1 light
(airborne) air defence artillery battery, and having 1 light air defence artillery battery as part of the
mobile capability and one battery for internal deployment a year;

- Preparing an engineer capability by providing 3 sustained composite engineer squadrons for external
deployment, 1 composite engineer squadron for internal reserve and exercising 1 light (airborne)
engineer squadron a year; and

- Preparing a signal capability by providing 2 signal regiments a year for external deployment, internal
reserve and involvement in exercises.


-----

###### FINANCIAL RESOURCES

The Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) allocations and estimates for Landward Defence are
refl ected in Table 11.

Table 11: Landward Defence Programme: Financial Resources for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

2010/11 2011/12 2012/13

(R’000) (R’000) (R’000)

9 982.9 10 431.2 11 062.1

_NOTE. These amounts include funds allocated for Armament Acquisitions managed by Chief Defence Matériel, as well as funds for_
_human resources managed corporately by Chief Human Resources_

|2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|---|---|---|
|(R’000)|(R’000)|(R’000)|
|9 982.9|10 431.2|11 062.1|


###### PROGRAMME 4: AIR DEFENCE


###### PROGRAMME PURPOSE

The Air Defence Programme provides prepared and supported air defence capabilities for the defence
and protection of South Africa.

###### SUB-PROGRAMMES

Strategic Direction provides strategic direction to the Air Defence programme by formulating
and controlling strategies, policies and plans via the Air Force Offi ce to prepare and provide the
capabilities required by Chief of the SANDF. Funding is based on the cost of operating the air defence
headquarters.

Operational Direction provides operational direction to the Air Defence programme by means of an Air
Command. Funding is based on the cost of operating the air command.

Helicopter Capability provides and sustains operationally ready light utility helicopters, medium
transport helicopters and combat support helicopters, crewed by appropriately qualifi ed personnel.
Funding is distributed according to the number and size of units, systems and equipment operating and
maintenance requirements, and the number of force preparation exercises and training courses.

Transport and Maritime Capability provides and sustains operationally ready transport and maritime
aircraft, crewed by appropriately qualifi ed personnel. Funding is distributed according to the number
and size of units, systems and equipment operating and maintenance requirements, and the number of
force preparation exercises and training courses.

Air Combat Capability provides and sustains operationally ready fi ghter aircraft, crewed by appropriately
qualifi ed personnel. Funding is distributed according to the number and size of units, systems and
equipment operating and maintenance requirements, and the number of force preparation exercises
and training courses.

Operational Support and Intelligence Capability prepares, develops, provides and supports protection
support, intelligence systems and counter-intelligence support to the South African Air Force (SAAF)


-----

through protection squadrons, intelligence subsystems and Air Force-unique intelligence training.
Funding is distributed according to the number and size of squadrons, systems and equipment operating
and maintenance requirements, and training courses.

Command and Control Capability supplies and maintains operationally ready command and control
elements in support of air battle space operations. Funding is distributed according to the number and
size of units, systems and equipment operating and maintenance requirements, and of force preparation
and training courses.

Base Support provides air base infrastructure facilities to squadrons and resident units on bases,
including maintenance of all relevant systems and personnel, to support fl ying operations. Funding
is distributed according to the number and size of Air Force bases and units, systems and equipment
operating and maintenance requirements, and the number of training courses.

Command Post renders command and control over all missions fl own. Funding is distributed according
to the number and size of command posts and deployments, and readiness and aircraft chartering
requirements.

Training Capability provides for the general education, training and development of SAAF personnel.
Funding is distributed according to the number and size of units, systems and equipment operations
and maintenance requirements, and the number of force preparation exercises and training courses.
Technical Support Services establishes, maintains and prepares optimised technical and tactical logistic
support capabilities to provide support to system groups and manage air service units. Funding
is distributed according to the number and size of units, systems and equipment operating and
maintenance requirements, and contracted human resources and product system requirements.

###### OBJECTIVES AND MEASURES

Defend and protect South Africa and its airspace by providing

- Four helicopter squadrons and one combat support squadron a year;

- Three medium transport squadrons, one maritime and transport squadron, one light transport
squadron and nine reserve squadrons at the required readiness levels a year;

- One air combat squadron a year; and

- A24-hour air command and control capability.

###### FINANCIAL RESOURCES

The MTEF allocations and estimates for the Air Defence Programme are refl ected in Table 12.

Table 12: Air Defence Programme: Financial Resources for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

2010/11 2011/12 2012/13

(R’000) (R’000) (R’000)

6 059.1 7 910.5 8 361 .9

_NOTE. These amounts include funds allocated for Armament Acquisitions managed by Chief Defence Matériel, as well as funds for_
_human resources managed corporately by Chief Human Resources_

|2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|---|---|---|
|(R’000)|(R’000)|(R’000)|
|6 059.1|7 910.5|8 361 .9|


-----

###### PROGRAMME 5: MARITIME DEFENCE


###### PROGRAMME PURPOSE

The Maritime Defence Programme provides prepared and supported maritime defence capabilities for
the defence and protection of South Africa.

###### SUB-PROGRAMMES

Maritime Direction provides strategic direction within the Maritime Defence programme by formulating
and controlling strategies, policies, plans and advice in order to prepare and provide the maritime
capabilities required for the defence and protection of the South Africa. Funding is distributed based on
the cost of operating the Naval Headquarters.

Maritime Combat Capability provides mission ready and supported maritime combat capabilities in
accordance with the approved force design of the DOD. Funding is distributed according to the number
and size of units, systems and equipment operating and maintenance requirements and the number of
force employment operations.

Maritime Logistic Support Capability sustains the availability of the force structure elements in the
naval force design to ensure compliance with ordered operational commitments. Funding is distributed
according to the number and size of units, systems and equipment operating and maintenance
requirements, and the number of force preparation exercises and training courses.

Maritime Human Resources and Training Capability ensures that the maritime combat capability
requirements are met in terms of qualifi ed personnel for Regular and Reserve members. Funding
is distributed according to the number and size of units, systems and equipment operations and
maintenance requirements, and the number of force preparation and training courses.

Base Support Capability provides a general base support capability to ships and submarines, shore
units and other identifi ed clients to ensure that the fl eet complies with specifi ed operational-readiness
levels. Funding is distributed according to the size of the naval base, systems and equipment operating
and maintenance requirements.

###### OBJECTIVES AND MEASURES

Defend and protect South Africa and its maritime zones by providing

- A surface combat capability of four frigates, one combat support vessel, three off shore patrol vessels,
three inshore patrol vessels and a maritime reaction squadron in each annual operational cycle;

- A sub-surface combat capability of three submarines in each annual operational cycle;

- Two mine countermeasures systems in each annual operational cycle to ensure safe access to South
African harbours, and where mine clearance may be required; and

- An ongoing hydrographic survey capability to ensure safe navigation in charting areas and to meet
international obligations.


-----

###### FINANCIAL RESOURCES

The MTEF allocations and estimates for the Maritime Defence Programme are refl ected in Table 13.

Table 13: Maritime Defence Programme: Financial Resources for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

2010/11 2011/12 2012/13

(R’000) (R’000) (R’000)

2 179.8 2 320.0 2 574.2

_NOTE. These amounts include funds allocated for Armament Acquisitions managed by Chief Defence Matériel, as well as funds for_
_human resources managed corporately by Chief Human Resources_

|2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|---|---|---|
|(R’000)|(R’000)|(R’000)|
|2 179.8|2 320.0|2 574.2|


###### PROGRAMME 6: MILITARY HEALTH SUPPORT PROGRAMME


###### PROGRAMME PURPOSE

The Military Health Support Programme provides prepared and supported health capabilities and
services for the defence and protection of South Africa.

###### SUB-PROGRAMMES

Strategic Direction formulates strategy, policies and plans, and gives advice from the Surgeon General’s
Offi ce to prepare and provide the capabilities required by the Chief of the SANDF. Funding is based on
the cost of operating the military health headquarters.

Mobile Military Health Support provides health support elements for deployed and contingency forces.
Funding is distributed according to the number and size of units, systems and equipment operating and
maintenance requirements, and the number of force preparation activities.

Area Military Health Service provides a comprehensive, self-supporting, multidisciplinary geographic
military health service through a formation headquarters commanding and controlling nine area
military health units to ensure a healthy military community. Funding is distributed according to the
number and size of units and health care facilities, systems and equipment operating and maintenance
requirements and the number and type of patient health services rendered as well as force preparation
activities.

Specialist/Tertiary Military Health Service provides a specialist health service to develop and maintain
tertiary military health capabilities within the parameters of relevant legislation as contained in the
South African Military Health Service (SAMHS) strategy. Funding is distributed according to the number
and size of military hospitals and specialist units, systems and equipment operating and maintenance
requirements, the number of and type of patient health services rendered, as well as force preparation
activities.

Military Health Product Support Capability provides for warehousing pharmaceuticals, sundries,
military health mobilisation equipment and unique stock, procuring unique military health products,
materials and services; and an asset management service, military health product systems and cooperative common military health logistics. Funding is distributed according to the number and size
of units and the use of military health products, equipment and consumables and the requirements for
maintaining strategic military health reserves.


-----

Military Health Maintenance Capability provides general base support services to identifi ed SAMHS
units to sustain and maintain the approved force design and structure. Funding is distributed according
to the number and size of units, systems and equipment operating and maintenance requirements.

Military Health Training Capability provides a military health training service to develop and maintain
military health capabilities within the parameters of relevant legislation and policies. Funding is
distributed according to the training inputs of the sub-units, equipment operating and maintenance
requirement and the number of force preparation exercises and training courses presented to Southern
Africa Development Community (SADC) countries.

###### OBJECTIVES AND MEASURES

Provide prepared and supported health capabilities and services by providing

- A health support capability of fi ve medical battalion groups, including one specialist medical battalion
group, for deployed and contingency forces; and

- A comprehensive multidisciplinary military health service to a projected patient population of
230 000 members per year.

###### FINANCIAL RESOURCES

The MTEF allocations and estimates for the Military Health Support Programme are refl ected in
Table14.

Table 14: Military Health Support Programme: Financial Recourses for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

2010/11 2011/12 2012/13

(R’000) (R’000) (R’000)

2 770.2 2 961.3 3 201.3

_NOTE. These amounts include funds allocated for Armament Acquisitions managed by Chief Defence Matériel, as well as funds for_
_human resources managed corporately by Chief Human Resources_

|2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|---|---|---|
|(R’000)|(R’000)|(R’000)|
|2 770.2|2 961.3|3 201.3|


###### PROGRAMME 7: DEFENCE INTELLIGENCE


###### PROGRAMME PURPOSE

The Defence Intelligence Programme provides a defence intelligence and counter-intelligence
capability.

###### SUB-PROGRAMMES

Strategic Direction provides defence intelligence policy, doctrine and intelligence advice to support
the department’s decision-making and policy formulation processes. Funding is based on the cost of
operating the defence intelligence headquarters.

Operations provide timely defence prediction, intelligence and counter-intelligence capabilities
and services. Funding is distributed based on the number and size of intelligence offi ces, systems
and equipment operating and maintenance requirements, and the number of intelligence products
produced.


-----

Defence Intelligence Support Services provides human resource, logistic, planning, security, labour
relations, and training and information support services to the defence intelligence community.
Funding is distributed according to the number and size of units and offi ces, equipment operations and
maintenance requirements, and the number of force preparation exercises and training courses.

###### OBJECTIVES AND MEASURES

The detail of the output of Defence Intelligence is classifi ed and not available to the public.

###### FINANCIAL RESOURCES

The MTEF allocations and estimates for the Defence Intelligence Programme are refl ected in Table 15.

Table 15: Defence Intelligence Programme: Financial Recourses for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

2010/11 2011/12 2012/13

(R’000) (R’000) (R’000)

631.1 666.0 698.9

_NOTE. These amounts include funds allocated for Armament Acquisitions managed by Chief Defence Matériel, as well as funds for_
_human resources managed corporately by Chief Human Resources_

|2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|---|---|---|
|(R’000)|(R’000)|(R’000)|
|631.1|666.0|698.9|


###### PROGRAMME 8: GENERAL SUPPORT


###### PROGRAMME PURPOSE

The General Support Programme provides general support capabilities and services to the
department.

###### SUB-PROGRAMMES

Joint Logistic Services provides logistic services to the department. Funding is distributed according to
the number and size of units, use and warehousing requirements for ammunition, main equipment and
stores, the defence facility repair and maintenance programme, and the number of training courses.

Command and Management Information Systems provides command and management information
systems and related services to the department. Funding is distributed according to the number
and size of mainframe systems, the communication infrastructure operated by the department, and
maintenance and upgrading requirements.

Military Police provide a military policing capability to the department. Funding is distributed according
to the number and size of units, systems and equipment operating and maintenance requirements, and
the number of force preparation exercises and training courses.

British Peace Support and Training Team provides for the personnel from the United Kingdom DOD who
provides services to the SANDF. Funding is distributed based on the Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) with the United Kingdom .


-----

###### OBJECTIVES AND MEASURES

Provide general support capabilities and services by:

- Repairing and maintaining the department’s infrastructure at 33 bases over the next 3 years (13 in
2010/11, 9 in 2011/12 and 11 in 2012/13) and executing the Capital Works Plan in 52 projects (7 in
2010/11, 24 in 2011/12 and 21 in 2012/13).

- Providing appropriate, ready and sustained matériel, facilities, movement and logistic services
focusing on supply chain management to enable force preparation and employment.

Provide the department with key information and communication systems by

- Ensuring that the mainframe service is available 98 per cent of the time and the Wide Area Network
95 per cent of the time.

- Providing Information and Communication Systems solutions in accordance with the Defence

Enterprise Information Systems (DEIS) Master Plan, as per the programme and project milestones and
associated deliverables.

Reduce the number of new criminal cases under investigation by the military police by 10 per cent a
year, and sustaining 1 provost company for deployment, 4 regional head- quarters, 22 area offi ces and
22 detachments for investigations and crime prevention, and 2 military correctional facilities.

###### FINANCIAL RESOURCES

The MTEF allocations and estimates for the General Support Programme are refl ected in Table 16

Table 16: General Support Programme: Financial Resources for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

2010/11 2011/12 2012/13

(R’000) (R’000) (R’000)

3 936.2 4 028.1 4 410.1

_NOTE. These amounts include funds allocated for Armament Acquisitions managed by Chief Defence Matériel, as well as funds for_
_human resources managed corporately by Chief Human Resources_

|2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|---|---|---|
|(R’000)|(R’000)|(R’000)|
|3 936.2|4 028.1|4 410.1|


-----

###### APPENDIX A

 DETAILED PERFORMANCE INFORMATION FOR THE PROGRAMMES OUTPUTS, PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND TARGETS


###### PROGRAMME 1: ADMINISTRATION


###### OUTPUTS

The main outputs of this programme are refl ected in Table 17.

Table 17: Outputs of the Administration Programme for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Ministerial Direction|||||
|Ministerial direction to the DOD|Alignment of the DOD’s priorities and activities with Government’s Programme of Action and Cabinet Lekgotla resolutions|Full implementation of Minister’s priorities.|Full implementation of Minister’s priorities.|Full implementation of Minister’s priorities.|
|Defence policy advisory products and services|Timely, relevant and quality defence and security policy updates, inputs and proposals|Provide the national policy framework on Defence matters for the approval of Cabinet and Parliament and direct and oversee the implementation of such policy in the Department|Provide the national policy framework on Defence matters for the approval of Cabinet and Parliament and direct and oversee the implementation of such policy in the Department|Provide the national policy framework on Defence matters for the approval of Cabinet and Parliament and direct and oversee the implementation of such policy in the Department|
|Departmental Direction|||||
|Defence policy advice to the Minister of Defence|Defence policies aligned with Government priorities;|Ministerial directives to the DOD|Ministerial directives to the DOD|Ministerial directives to the DOD|
||Timeliness, relevance and quality of policy advice to the Minister (‘client’)|Complete client satis-faction|Complete client satis-faction|Complete client satis-faction|


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Departmental direction to the DOD|Quality of directives to the Department and planning guidelines to the Department as a whole|Timeous directives to the Department and the delegation of f ni ancial authority to the C SANDF|Timeous directives to the Department and the full implementation of delegation of f inancial authority to the C SANDF|Timeous directives to the Department and the review of delegation of f ni ancial authority to the C SANDF|
|Departmental direction to the DOD|Quality of directives to the Department and planning guidelines to the Department as a whole|Evaluate the imple-mentation of structure for accounting and reporting by C SANDF and make improvements|Continuous improvement of the accounting and reporting systems|Review conducted on the ef cfiacy of accounting and reporting systems|
|Departmental Direction|||||
|Directives issued to DOD-aligned Govern-ment programme of action|Timeous and relevant guidelines provide to the DOD|Full implementation of directives aligned to POA|Full implementation of directives aligned to POA|Full implementation of directives aligned to POA|
|Government Information Technology Of cfier (GITO)|||||
|To provide strategic direction for the management of information as a strategic resource in the Department|Promulgated DOD Information Strategy|100%|100%|100%|
|To manage the alignment of the Information and Communication System Policy Regulatory Framework|Percentage of Information and Communication System Policy aligned to Regulatory Framework|100%|100%|100%|


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Policy and Planning|||||
|Defence Policy, Strategy and Plan|||||
|To provide expert products, advice and support services on National Defence and Security Policy|Quality, policy decision support is given according to decision-makers’ requirement.|Consistent provision of comprehensive, expert and credible advice is given timeously to defence decision makers for the achievement of the Defence Mandate|Consistent provision of comprehensive, expect and credible advice is given timeously to Defence decision makers for the achievement of the Defence Mandate|Consistent provision of comprehensive, expect and credible advice is given timeously to Defence decision makers for the achievement of the Defence Mandate|
||Operational commitments products prepared per requirement according to law for authorisation by defence decision makers|New and current Defence deployments are properly mandated as required by law and duly adjusted or terminated when re-quired|New and current Defence deployments are properly mandated as required by law and duly adjusted or terminated when re-quired|New and current Defence deployments are properly mandated as required by law and duly adjusted or terminated when required|
||Timeous and relevant reports and policy inputs to ensure appropriate DOD representation and participation in the DG Cluster system in accordance with Government objectives.|Def ined DOD responses and quality positions are provided timeously Defence decision makers are kept updated on cluster activities Integration of Government priorities into departmental strategic direction|Def ined DOD responses and quality positions are provided timeously|Def ined DOD responses and quality positions are provided timeously|


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Defence Policy, Strategy and Plan|||||
|To provide expert products, advice and support services on National Defence and Security Policy|Departmental policies are well developed maintained, and accessible according to department and Government objectives.|Policy Board operates and takes ef efctive control over policy products according to its constitution|Policy Board operates and takes ef efctive control over policy products according to its constitution|Policy Board operates and takes ef efctive control over policy products according to its constitution|
|To provide ef efctive DOD Strategic Management|Defence Strategy aligned with Constitutional Mandate and Government priorities|Defence Strategy will be presented for conside-ration and approval by Clusters, Cabinet and Parliament by October 2010|Defence Strategy imple-mentation plan develop-ped by October 2011|Continuous monitoring of the phased implement- tation of Defence Strategy|
||Timeliness, relevance and quality of DOD Strategic Plan and Annual Performance Plan|Strategic Plan and Annual Performance Plan aligned with requirement of Presidency, National Treasury as per prescribed timelines|Strategic Plan and Annual Performance Plan aligned with requirement of Presidency and National Treasury as per prescribed timeline|Strategic Plan and Annual Performance Plan aligned with requirement of Presidency and National Treasury as per prescribed timelines|
||Timeliness, relevance and quality of DOD performance reports|DOD Performance reports are provided as per Government requirements|DOD Performance reports are provided as per Government requirement|DOD Performance reports are provided as per Government requirement|
||Business process and structures aligned with Departmental require-ments|DOD structures that support the Defence Strategy|DOD structures that support the Defence Strategy|DOD structures that support the Defence Strategy|
||All enterprise risks are identif eid, assessed/ appreciated and contingency measures are considered|Risk Management Framework promulgated|Risk Management strategy, policy and plan approved|Risk Management framework, strategy, policy and plan ef efctively implemented|


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Provide ef efctive and ef ficient Administrative Support to the National Conventional Arms Control Committee (NCACC)|Arms transfers conducted in line with the National Conventional Arms Control Act and Government policy.|Timely issuing of permits and professional service in terms of applicable standards.|Timely issuing of permits and professional service in terms of applicable standards.|Timely issuing of permits and professional service in terms of applicable standards.|
||Applications dealt with in terms of the determination of the NCACC in the context of the Act.|Timely processing of applications for authorisation in terms of applicable Act.|Timely processing of applications for authorisation in terms of applicable Act.|Timely processing of applications for authorisation in terms of applicable Act.|
|Military Policy, Strategy and Planning Of cfie|||||
|Managing the strategic/ control and programming process of the SANDF|Degree to which SANDF strategic planning and reporting objectives are met according to C SANDF Directives|SANDF plans and reports submitted timeously|SANDF plans and reports submitted timeously|SANDF plans and reports submitted timeously|
|Providing a military strategising capability and service for the Chief of the SANDF|The degree of alignment of the Military Strategy with National Security Strategy imperatives and the successful implementation thereof|Monitoring of compliance with Military Strategy in the SANDF|Reviewed fully aligned and approved Military Strategy|Monitoring of compliance with Military Strategy in the SANDF|
|Financial Services|||||
|Provide an ef efctive and ef ficient Financial Management service|Budget Preparations: Percentage deviation from National Treasury budget guidelines|Complete and accurate Defence estimate of Revenue and Expenditure|Complete and accurate Defence estimate of Revenue and Expenditure|Complete and accurate Defence estimate of Revenue and Expenditure|
||Budget Control: Percentage of under expenditure|Fully expended budget|Fully expended budget|Fully expended budget|
||Financial Accounting: Number of adverse audit f indings|Complete and accurate f ni ancial statements|Complete and accurate f ni ancial statements|Complete and accurate f ni ancial statements|


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Provide an ef efctive and ef ficient Financial Management service|Financial Services (Governance Risk Compliance): Number of incidences of non compliance with the framework|Compliance with regulatory framework and appropriate King report|Compliance with regulatory framework and appropriate King report|Compliance with regulatory framework and appropriate King report.|
|Ef efctive and ef cfiient provision of depart-mental support through the timeous settlement of f inancial obligations. by the Department|Timeous payments claims against the Department|Within 30 days of receipt of a court order|Within 30 days of receipt of a court order|Within 30 days of receipt of a court order|
||Timeous payments for external auditing for services rendered to the department|Within 30 days of receipt of substantiating invoice|Within 30 days of receipt of substantiating invoice|Within 30 days of receipt of substantiating invoice|
||Timeous payments of transaction cost, including bank charges|Within 30 days of substantiating documentation|Within 30 days of substantiating documentation|Within 30 days of substantiating documentation|
|Human Resources Support Services|||||
|Transformation management service to the DOD|Compilation and submission of an annual DOD Equity Report|October|October|October|
|Human Resources (HR) Strategic Direc- tion and Plans service to the DOD|Annual approved DOD corporate HR Support Plan|1|1|1|
||Annual reduction of DOD collective grievances|20%|30%|50%|
|HR management service to the DOD|Percentage completion of Non- statutory Forces Pension Project|30%|70%|100%|
|Directed, orchestrated and controlled HR development for the DOD|Approved DOD HR Development Strategy|Approved|Implemented|Implemented|
||Implementation of an operational Level 2 DOD Law of Armed Conf ilct capability|Implemented|80% Operational|100% Operational|


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Professional and non-combat/ mission common functional education training and development for the DOD|Annual graduation of Executive National Security Programme (ENSP) members with a certif icate in National Security|72 Members|72 Members|72 Members|
||Annual graduation of learners with a Military Academy Bachelor’s Degree (B Mil)|56 Learners|56 Learners|56 Learners|
|Labour market entry enablement and redeployment capability for the SANDF|Annual availability of re-skilling training opportunities to learners exiting the DOD|150 Opportunities|150 Opportunities|150 Opportunities|
||Obtain full accreditation of the Centre for Advanced Training (CAT) provided skills programmes/ courses|Fully accredited|Fully accredited|Fully accredited|
|Military Veterans support services14|||||
|Establishment of a fully functional Department of Military Veterans|Fully functional Structure in place with appropriate systems, process and policy.|Functional macro organisationl structure apporved|Full implementation of the structre in line with the mandate|Continued implementation of the organisational structure|
|||Develop and f ni alise appropriate policies and procedures|Full implementation of policies and procedures|Full implementation of policies and procedures|


14 Military Veterans Support Services: Pursuant to the Proclamation made in December 2009, in compliance with the relevant
legislation guiding the transfer of a legal entity as a going concern, migration of this service to the Department of Military Veterans
will be eff ected during FY 2010/11.
15 Establishment of a fully functional Department for Military Veterans: 0n 28 December 2009, the President of the RSA, proclaimed
the Department of Military Veterans through Proclamation No 92 of 2009. The Department of Military Veterans will be responsible
for the overall management and administration of military veterans aff airs including, but not limited to, developing policy,
legislation, programmes, benefi ts and services that facilitates the transition from active service to civilian life.


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|British Peace Support and Training Team|||||
|Peace Mission Training Centre|Fully operational Peace Mission Training Centre|100%|-|-|
|Legal Services|||||
|Defence Legal Service capability and services|Degree to which Military Justice inputs and legal support have been provided as prescribed in the Military Discipline Supplementary Measures Act (MDSMA), Act No 16 of 1999, the Defence Act, Act 42 of 2002 and any other applicable legislation|Military justice inputs and legal support provided as prescribed|Military justice inputs and legal support provided as prescribed|Military justice inputs and legal support provided as prescribed|
||Degree to which a comprehensive legal advice service and capability are provided to the MOD, Sec Def and the Chief of the SANDF|100% of all requested legal advice provided|100% of all requested legal advice provided|100% of all requested legal advice provided|
|||80% of all facilitated litigation must be attended to|80% of all facilitated litigation must be attended to|80% of all facilitated litigation must be attended to|
||Percentage compliance with the Chief of the SANDF requirements with regard to operational legal advice and support for all external and internal operations|100%|100%|100%|
|Legal advice and support service to the DOD|Timelines and quality to which HR, Policy, MOU and Legislative legal advice complies with DOD Legislation, Policy Prescripts and Instructions|Full compliance with regulatory framework|Full compliance with regulatory framework|Full compliance with regulatory framework|


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Legal advice and support service to the DOD|The degree to which operations and force preparations legal advice policy and procedures complies with DOD legislation and instructions|Full compliance with regulatory framework to ensure deployable operational legal advice and support services to the SANDF (CJ Ops), and relevant Divisions|Full compliance with regulatory framework to ensure deployable operational legal advice and support services to the SANDF (CJ Ops), and relevant Divisions|Full compliance with regulatory framework to ensure deployable operational legal advice and support services to the SANDF (CJ Ops), and relevant Divisions|
|Military judiciary service to the SANDF|The degree to which DLSD plans and procedures in respect of Military Judges, Presiding Of ficers and Assessors complies with the provisions of Defence Act, Act No 42 of 2002 and the MDSMA, Act No 16 of 1999|Full compliance with regulatory framework|Full compliance with regulatory framework|Full compliance with regulatory framework|
|Military Defence Counsel service to the SANDF|The degree to which Military Defence Counsel sectoral policy wrt Military Counsel and procedures complies with the Defence Act, Act No 42 of 2002 and the MDSMA Act No 16 of 1999 and instructions|Full compliance with regulatory framework|Full compliance with regulatory framework|Full compliance with regulatory framework|
|Military judicial review process to the SANDF|The degree to which Military Judicial Review policy and procedures complies with the Defence Act, Act No 42 of 2002 and the MDSMA Act No 16 of 1999|Full compliance with regulatory framework|Full compliance with regulatory framework|Full compliance with regulatory framework|


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Defence Legal Services Support|The degree to which an ETD service (legal training) is provided to the DOD and the DLSD|Provide and implement an ef efctive ETD Service. “In accordance with DOD Policy and Prescripts” expressed ito percentage of functions conducted|Provide and implement an ef efctive ETD Service. “In accordance with DOD Policy and Prescripts” expressed ito percentage of functions conducted|Provide and implement an ef efctive ETD Service. “In accordance with DOD Policy and Prescripts” expressed ito percentage of functions conducted|
|Inspection Services|||||
|Performance Audit capability|Number of performance audit reports f ni alised according to the Annual Performance Audit Schedule|30|30|30|
|Compliance Audit capability|Number of compliance audit reports f ni alised according to the Annual Compliance Audit Schedule|65|65|65|
|Anti-Fraud and Anti-Corruption capability|Number of members sensitised on the reporting of fraud and corruption in the DOD through an awareness campaign|10 000|10 000|10 000|
|Inspection Service capability|Number of inspection reports f inalised according to the Annual Inspection schedule|6|8|8|
|Closing Down capability|Number of closing down audit reports completed according to the Annual Closing Down Schedule|90|90|90|


14 The Chief of Human Resources manages the output of the sub-programme. Funding is provided within the General Support
Programme


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Perception Survey capability|Number of perception survey reports completed according to the Annual Perception Survey Schedule|50|50|50|
|Inspectorate – National Conventional Arms Control Committee (NCACC)|||||
|Ensure trade in conventional arms is conducted in com-pliance with the NCACC|Audit, inspections and investigations of registered/ unregistered armaments- related companies nationally, with respect to trade in said armaments|Continued audits, inspections and investigations|Continued audits, inspections and investigations|Continued audits, inspections and investigations|
|Ensure the internal regulatory processes of the NCACC are complied with|Audits and attendance of Scrutiny Council (SC) meetings. Guidance to NCACC on internal processes|Continued attendance of SC and NCACC meetings and conducting audits of role- players involved in the internal processes of the NCACC|Continued attendance of SC and NCACC meetings and conducting audits of role-players involved in the internal processes of the NCACC|Continued attendance of SC and NCACC meetings and conducting audits of role- players involved in the internal processes of the NCACC|
|Acquisition Services|||||
|Defence Matériel|||||
|Defence Acquisition Management|Timely, relevance and quality of advice and direction provided with respect to Defence acquisition matters|Advice and direction provided as and when required|Advice and direction provided as and when required|Advice and direction provided as and when required|
||Execution of Defence acquisition projects as approved on the SCAMP|Execution of Defence acquisition projects as approved on the SCAMP|Execution of Defence acquisition projects as approved on the SCAMP|Execution of Defence acquisition projects as approved on the SCAMP|


15 Acquisition Services includes Defence Matériel and Defence Supply Chain Integration.
16 Table only includes output related to Armament Acquisition and Technology Development. Excludes Supply Chain Integration
and Matériel Governance, Risk and Compliance.


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Technology Development|Technology Development projects approved and funded by the Defence Research and Development Board (DRDB)|Technology development projects approved and funded|Technology development projects approved and funded|Technology development projects approved and funded|
||Timely, relevance and quality of advice and direction provided during execution of Technology Develop-ment projects|Advice provided as and when required|Advice provided as and when required|Advice provided as and when required|
|Defence Supply Chain Integration|||||
|Category 1 Matériel Procurement|Procurement activities monitored to ensure client satisfaction|Zero complaints from clients|Zero complaints from clients|Zero complaints from clients|
|Category 1 Matériel Disposal|Cat 1 Matériel disposed in accordance with legislation|100% compliance with legislation|100% compliance with legislation|100% compliance with legislation|
|Procurement for Missions abroad|Approved contracts|100% of contracts in place|100% of contracts in place|100% of contracts in place|
|Provide an ef efctive ASD Service|ASD services provided in accordance with ASD and PPP policy|100% compliance to policy|100% compliance to policy|100% compliance to policy|
||Number of monthly ASD meetings held|12 meetings per annum|12 meetings per annum|12 meetings per annum|
|Management of the DOD E- Proqure System|Fully utilised E- Proqure system providing reductions in overall procurement lead- times.|85% (Current utilisation of System is 66%)|95%|100%|


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Contract administration and management (procurement for missions)|Satisf ied clients Contracts approved on time|Zero complaints from clients|Zero complaints from clients|Zero complaints from clients|
|Defence Industry Strategy (DIS)|Improved local industry capability|Defence Industry Support Strategy developed and implemented|Monitor and evaluate Defence Industry Support ef efctiveness|Review Defence Industry Support Strategy|
|Communication Services (Corporate Communication)|||||
|Corporate Communication Policy, Strategy and specialist advice|Timeliness, relevance and quality of corporate communication advice to the DOD|Corporate communication advice provided as and when required|Corporate communication advice provided as and when required|Corporate communication advice provided as and when required|
||Degree of integrated and aligned DOD Corporate Communication Strategy, Policy and Guidelines provided to the DOD|Promulgated and implemented Corporate Communication Strategy and Policy|Monitoring of compliance with Corporate Communication Strategy, Policy and Guidelines|Reviewed, fully aligned and approved Corporate Communication Strategy, Policy and Guidelines|
|Corporate Communication products and services|Percentage compliance with annual requirements in terms of media liaison, communication information products and services, as well as marketing and communication support requirements|95%|95%|95%|
|SANDF Command and Control|||||
|Military policy advice to the Minister of Defence (MOD)|Timeliness, relevance and quality of military policy advice to the Minister|Military policy advice provided as and when required|Military policy advice provided as and when required|Military policy advice provided as and when required|


17 Funds for Technology Development captured under General Support Programme


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Command and control of the SANDF|Provision of strategic direction on operational readiness according to SANDF Force Employment requirements|Readiness maintained in accordance with force employment guidelines|Readiness maintained in accordance with force employment guidelines|Readiness maintained in accordance with force employment guidelines|
||Level of success of ordered commitments|Successful conduct of ordered commitments|Successful conduct of ordered commitments|Successful conduct of ordered commitments|
|Corporate Staf f Of fice|||||
|Corporate staf f capability for Chief of the SANDF (Military Policy, Strategy and Planning, Religious Services, Corporate Communication and Defence Reserve Direction)|Timeliness, relevance and quality of strategic advice to the Chief of the SANDF|Strategic advice provided as and when required|Strategic advice provided as and when required|Strategic advice provided as and when required|
||Timeliness, relevance and quality of direction provided to the Divisions and Of fices within the Corporate Staf f Division|Direction provided as and when required|Direction provided as and when required|Direction provided as and when required|
||Timeliness, relevance and quality of staf f co-ordination of the Supporting Divisions as delegated by the Chief of the SANDF|Staf fco- ordination provided as and when required|Staf fco-ordination provided as and when required|Staf fco- ordination provided as and when required|
|Religious Services|||||
|Religious policy advice and chaplain capability and service for the SANDF|Degree of relevance and credibility of religious policies and guidelines according to National and Departmental policy as well as Religious Advisory Board guidelines|Monitoring of compliance with religious policies and guidelines in the SANDF|Reviewed, fully aligned and approved religious policies and guidelines by 31 March|Monitoring of compliance with religious policies and guidelines in the SANDF|


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Religious policy advice and chaplain capability and service for the SANDF|Level of acceptance of SANDF Religious Services by Religious Advisory Boards (RABs) of major religions represented within the DOD|DOD religious policy accepted by all RABs|DOD religious policy accepted by all RABs|DOD religious policy accepted by all RABs|
||Ef efctive spiritual, ethical and social support is available at all levels of the DOD|A chaplain available to ensure support at 92% of units|A chaplain available to ensure support at 95% of units|A chaplain available to ensure support at 98% of units|
|Defence Reserve Direction|||||
|Strategic Direction to the development and maintenance of the Reserve system|Timeliness, relevance and quality of Reserve strategic and policy advice to the DOD|Reserve strategic and policy advice provided as and when required|Reserve strategic and policy advice provided as and when required|Reserve strategic and policy advice provided as and when required|
|Reserve promotion and employer’s support service to the Chief of the SANDF|Number of Provincial Business Liaison Forum structures functional|6|8|10|
||Number of public events facilitated to market the Reserve System|20|20|20|
|Defence Foreign Relations|||||
|Defence International Af fairs|||||
|Aligned Foreign Relations Policy with Government and Defence needs|Timeliness, relevance and quality of policy advice and support to the DOD|Collaboratively developed Defence foreign policy that is aligned with Government policy|Defence Foreign Policy implemented|Evaluate the imple- mentation of Defence Foreign Relations Policy|
|Marketing strategy and Plan of the Defence Foreign Relations Policy|Improved compliance with the policy|Information campaign targeting DOD and other social partners|Information campaign targeting DOD, Parliamentary oversight structures|Evaluate the impact of the implementation of the marketing strategy|


18 Budget within Policy and Planning


-----

|Output Performance Target Indicator 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Foreign Relations Strategy|Defence Diplomacy informed by foreign policy and DOD foreign relations strategy|Position Paper on DOD Foreign relation Strategy|Draft Foreign Relations strategy developed|Strategy approved by PDSC and relevant FOSAD clusters|
|Legal instruments to inform Defence Diplomacy|Legal instruments in line with the Constitutional mandate, Government prescripts and International Law|Timeliness, relevance quality servicing of legal instrument|Timeliness, relevance, quality servicing of legal instrument|Timeliness, relevance quality servicing of legal instrument|
|Defence Foreign Relations|||||
|Defence foreign relations capability and services|Level of compliance with timely and accurate delivery of consular services as required|Full compliance|Full compliance|Full compliance|
||Number of diplomatic missions|37|37|37|
|Of cfie Accommodation|||||
|Payment of accommodation charges, leases and municipal services|Percentage expenditure according to plan in respect of the service level agreements with National Department of Public Works|100%|100%|100%|


19 This is addressed within the General Support Programme. Funding is provided within the Administration Programme


-----

###### PROGRAMME 2: FORCE EMPLOYMENT OUTPUTS


###### PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND ANNUAL TARGETS

The performance output detailed in the table below refl ects the outputs of the objectives and
measures related to the main outputs of the Programme. The details of sub-programme Strategic
Direction and Operational Direction are contained in the internal departmental plan.

Table 18: Force Employment: Output Details for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

Output Performance Indicator Target

2010/11 2011/12 2012/13

Regional Security

Peace Support Number of Large  to Medium  Scale Peace 4 4 4
Operations Support Operations

Number of Small Scale Peace Support 4 4 4
Operations

Number of Small Scale General Military 4 4 4
Assistance Operations

Support to the People

Internal Operations Percentage compliance with approved 100% 100% 100%
border-safeguarding tasks (Operation
CORONA)

Percentage compliance with approved 100% 100% 100%
safety and security support requests
(Operation PROSPER)

Percentage compliance with approved 100% 100% 100%
disaster aid and disaster relief requests
(Operation CHARIOT)

Percentage compliance with approved 100% 100% 100%
search and rescue requests
(Operation ARABELLA)

Percentage compliance with requirements 100%
for support to the 2010 FIFA World Cup by 31
(Operation KGWELE) July

2010

Defence Capability Management

Controlled JIM The number of JIM exercises (excluding 8 6 7
exercises Special Forces exercises) controlled annually

20 Large Scale Deployment. Unit size joint task force/formed elements with command and control capabilities, main equipment
including tailor-made support and specialist elements from the force providers
21 Medium Scale Deployment. Unit size (minus) joint task force/formed elements with command and control capabilities, main
equipment including tailor-made support and specialist elements from the force providers
22 Small Scale Deployment. Subunit joint task force/formed elements including specialised elements and tailor-made support
from force providers
23 Excluding Special Forces and multinational air transport exercises

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Regional Security|||||
|Peace Support Operations|Number of Large to Medium Scale Peace Support Operations|4|4|4|
||Number of Small Scale Peace Support Operations|4|4|4|
||Number of Small Scale General Military Assistance Operations|4|4|4|
|Support to the People|||||
|Internal Operations|Percentage compliance with approved border-safeguarding tasks (Operation CORONA)|100%|100%|100%|
||Percentage compliance with approved safety and security support requests (Operation PROSPER)|100%|100%|100%|
||Percentage compliance with approved disaster aid and disaster relief requests (Operation CHARIOT)|100%|100%|100%|
||Percentage compliance with approved search and rescue requests (Operation ARABELLA)|100%|100%|100%|
||Percentage compliance with requirements for support to the 2010 FIFA World Cup (Operation KGWELE)|100% by 31 July 2010|||
|Defence Capability Management|||||
|Controlled JIM exercises|The number of JIM exercises (excluding Special Forces exercises) controlled annually|8|6|7|


-----

###### JOINT, INTERDEPARTMENTAL AND MULTINATIONAL EXERCISES

JIM exercises detailed in the table below refl ect the planning and control of the exercises executed by
the Force Employment Programme. Services and Divisions fund their participation in these exercises.

Table 19: Force Employment: Joint, Interdepartmental and Multinational Exercises for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

|Exercise|Aim|Scheduling|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Joint Exercises|||||
|Exercise NDLOVU|Exercise is to exercise/maintain the SANDF Reaction Force and major combat capability|-|October/ November|-|
|INTERDEPARTMENTAL EXERCISES|||||
|Exercise SHIELD|Command post exercise in preparation for Operation KGWELE (2010 FIFA Word Cup)|April/May|-|-|
|Exercise WAYSIDE|Maintenance of the Provincial Chemical, Biological and Radiological Response Teams and interdepartmental co-operation for the management of Chemical, Biological and Radiological incidents|May|May/ September|May/ September|
|Multinational Exercises|||||
|Exercise OXIDE incorporating Exercise BOURBON|Field training exercise to develop and maintain maritime co-operation at the operational and tactical levels between the SA Navy and French forces based in La Réunion|November La Réunion|-|September RSA|
|Exercise TRANS- OCEANIC|Command post exercise to exercise naval control and guidance of shipping (NCAGS) and to represent the SANDF as a full-time member of the TRANSOCEANIC organisation|August|August|August|
|Exercise BELL BUOY|Command post exercise to exercise NCAGS and to represent the SANDF as a full-time member of the Pacif ic and Indian Ocean Ship Work Group|May|May|May|
|Exercise FAIRWAY BUOY|Command post exercise to exercise NCAGS within Southern African Development Community context|June Namibia|June|June|
|Exercise ATLASUR|Exercise to maintain and promote maritime co-operation between the SA Navy and South American countries (Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay)|September Argentina|-|May RSA|


-----

|Exercise IBSAMAR|Field training exercise to maintain and promote maritime co-operation between the SA Navy and South American countries (Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay)|September|-|June|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Exercise GOOD HOPE|Enhance and maintain comprehensive defence capabilities of the RSA through the exercising of its maritime and air conventional capabilities in conjunction with the German Navy and Air Force|-|February/ March RSA|-|


24 The exercise venue will alternate between the RSA and South America (Argentina). The venue will determine RSA force levels.


-----

###### PROGRAMME 3: LANDWARD DEFENCE OUTPUTS


###### PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND ANNUAL TARGETS

The performance output detailed in the table below refl ects the outputs of the objectives and
measures related to the main outputs of the Programme. The details of sub-programmes Strategic
Direction, Operational Intelligence, Command and Control Capability, as well as Support Capability,
are contained in the internal departmental plan.

Table 20: Landward Defence: Output Details for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Infantry Capability|||||
|Mecha- nised Capability|Number of units prepared according to force requirements|One battalion combat- ready for conventional exercises|One battalion combat- ready for conventional exercises|One battalion combat- ready for conventional exercises|
|Airborne Capability|Number of units prepared according to force requirements|One parachute batallion combat- ready for conventional exercises and Chief of the SANDF reserve|One parachute batallion c ombat- ready for conventional exercises and Chief of the SANDF reserve|One parachute batallion c ombat- ready for conventional exercises and Chief of the SANDF reserve|
|Motorised Capability|Number of units prepared according to force requirements|Three battalions combat-ready for peace support operations|Three battalions combat-ready for peace support operations|Three battalions combat-ready for peace support operations|
|||Two battalions combat- ready for conventional exercises|Two battalions combat-ready for conventional exercises|Two battalions combat-ready for conventional exercises|
|||Two battalions combat-ready at all times for internal reserve|Two battalions combat-ready at all times for internal reserve|Two battalions combat-ready at all times for internal reserve|
|Armour Capability|||||
|Tank Capability|Number of units prepared according to force requirements|One tank regiment (minus) combat-ready for conventional exercices|One tank regiment (minus) combat-ready for conventional exercices|One tank regiment (minus) combat- ready for conventional exercices|
|Armoured Car Capability|Number of units prepared according to force requirements|One armoured car regiment (minus) combat-ready for conventional exercices|One armoured car regiment (minus) combat-ready for conventional exercice|One armoured car regiment (minus) combat-ready for conventional exercices|


-----

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Artillery Capability|||||
|Composite Artillery|Number of units prepared according to force requirements|One composite artillery regiment (minus) combat-ready for conventional exercices (sustained)|One composite artillery regiment (minus) combat-ready for conventional exercices (sustained)|One composite artillery regiment (minus) combat-ready for conventional exercices (sustained)|
|||One light (parachute) artillery battery combat-ready for conventional exercises and Chief of the SANDF reserve (sustained)|One light (parachute) artillery battery combat-ready for conventional exercises and Chief of the SANDF reserve (sustained)|One light (parachute) artillery battery combat-ready for conventional exercises and Chief of the SANDF reserve (sustained)|
|Air Defence Artillery Capability|||||
|Composite Air Defence Artillery Capability|Number of units prepared according to Force Requirements|One air defence artillery regiment (minus) combat- ready for conventional exercises|One air defence artillery regiment (minus) combat- ready for conventional exer- cises|One air defence artillery regiment (minus) combat- ready for conventional exercises|
|||One light (parachute) air defence artillery battery combat-ready for conventional exercises and Chief of the SANDF reserve|One light (parachute) air defence artillery battery combat-ready for conventional exercises and Chief of the SANDF reserve|One light (parachute) air defence artillery battery combat-ready for conventional exercises and Chief of the SANDF reserve|
|Engineer Capability|||||
|Field Engineer Capability|Number of units prepared according to force require- ments|One engineer regiment (minus) combat-ready for conventional exercises|One engineer regiment (minus) combat-ready for conventional exercises|One engineer regiment (minus) combat-ready for conventional exercises|
|||Three composite squadrons combat- ready for peace support operations|Three composite squadrons combat- ready for peace support operations|Three composite squadrons combat- ready for peace support operations|
|||One composite squadron for internal deployment as required (sustained)|One composite squadron for internal deployment as required (sustained)|One composite squadron for internal deployment as required (sustained)|


-----

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Engineer Capability|||||
|Field Engineer Capability|Number of units prepared according to force require- ments|One light (parachute) f ield engineer squadron combat- ready at all times for Chief of the SANDF reserve and conventional exercises|One light (parachute) f eild engineer squadron combat- ready at all times for Chief of the SANDF reserve and conventional exercises|One light (parachute) f eild engineer squadron combat- ready at all times for Chief of the SANDF reserve and conventional exercises|
|General Training Capability|||||
|General training for Regu- lar and Reserve members|Number of learners on planned courses|4 375 learners|4 375 learners|4 375 learners|
|Signal Capability|||||
|Signal Capability|Number of units prepared according to force requirements|Two signal regiments (minus) combat- ready for conventional exercises and peace support operations|Two signal regiments (minus) combat- ready for conventional exercis- es and peace support operations|Two signal regiments (minus) combat- ready for conventional exercises and peace support operations|


###### EXERCISES

Planned service unique exercises are indicated in Table 21.

Table 21: Landward Defence: Planned Service Unique Exercises for FY 2010/11 to FY 2012/13

Exercise Name and Aim 2010/11 20011/12 2012/13

A b c d

Exercise SEBOKA. Conventional exercise for one Brigade November November November
(minus)

Exercise YOUNG EAGLE. Conventional exercise for one February February February
Airborne Brigade (minus) in compliance with Chief of the
SANDF reserve

_Note. SA Army participation in joint, interdepartmental and multinational (JIM) exercises included in Table 19 – Force Employment._
_Services and Divisions provide funding for participation in JIM exercises. This table does not include continuation training._

|Exercise Name and Aim|2010/11|20011/12|2012/13|
|---|---|---|---|
|A|b|c|d|
|Exercise SEBOKA. Conventional exercise for one Brigade (minus)|November|November|November|
|Exercise YOUNG EAGLE. Conventional exercise for one Airborne Brigade (minus) in compliance with Chief of the SANDF reserve|February|February|February|


-----

###### PROGRAMME 4: AIR DEFENCE OUTPUTS


###### PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND ANNUAL TARGETS

The performance output detailed in the table below refl ects the outputs of the objectives and measures
related to the main outputs of the Programme. Details of the sub-programmes Strategic Direction,
Operational Direction, Operational Support and Intelligence Capability, as well as Technical Support
Services, are contained in the internal departmental plan.

Table 22: Air Defence: Output Details for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Helicopter Capability|||||
|Medium and Light Transport Capability Combat Support Capability|Number of f yling hours|12 900|12 500|12 800|
||Number of squadrons available according to force requirements|Four mixed (medium and light) squadrons|Four mixed (medium and light) squadrons|Four mixed (medium and light) squadrons|
|||One combat support squadron|One combat support squadron|One combat support squadron|
|Transport and Maritime Surveillance Capability|||||
|Very important persons (VIP) Transport Capability, Medium and Light Transport Capability, Maritime Capability|Number of f yling hours|11 394|14 210|14 410|
||Number of squadrons available according to force requirements|Three medium transport squadrons including one VIP squadron|Three medium transport squadrons including one VIP squadron|Three medium transport squadrons including one VIP squadron|
|||One maritime surveillance and transport squadron|One maritime surveillance and transport squadron|One maritime surveillance and transport squadron|
|||One light transport squadron|One light transport squadron|One light transport squadron|
|||Nine Air Force Reserve squadrons|Nine Air Force Reserve squadrons|Nine Air Force Reserve squadrons|
|Air Combat Capability|||||
|Fighter Capability|Number of f yling hours|550|250|250|
||Number of squadrons available according to Force Requirements|One combat squadron|One combat squadron|One combat squadron|


-----

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Air Base Support Capability|||||
|Base Support Capability countrywide|Number of air bases/stations provided throughout the year, ensuring compliance with force requirements|Eight air bases|Eight air bases|Eight air bases|
|||One air station|One air station|One air station|
|Command and Control Capability|||||
|Air Defence Management Capability|Number of mission- ready mission controllers available|27 daily|27 daily|27 daily|
||Percentage availability of two mission-ready static control centres|95 % at all times|95 % at all times|95 % at all times|
||Number of radar systems available|10 at all times|10 at all times|10 at all times|
|Air Traf cfi Management Capability|Number of mission-ready Air Traf fic Controllers available|64 daily|64 daily|64 daily|
||Percentage availability of seven mission- ready air traf cfi service units|98 % at all times|98 % at all times|98 % at all times|
|Training Capability|||||
|General education, training and development of SA Air Force personnel|Number of learners on planned courses|2 556 learners|2 684 learners|2 634 learners|


-----

###### EXERCISES

Planned service unique exercises are indicated in table 23.

Table 23: Air Defence: Planned Service Unique Exercises for FY 2010/11 to FY2012/13

Exercise Name and Aim 2010/11 20011/12 2012/13

Electronic Warfare (EW) Camp, providing Air Force pilots an August September September
opportunity to fl y in a high density EW threat environment

Exercise NEW HORIZON, an Air Defence exercise with - October October
Command & Control elements

Table 24 indicates the Joint, Inter-departmental and Multi-national (JIM) exercises for FY 2010/11 to
2012/13.

Table 24: Air Defence: Joint, Inter-departmental and Multi-national Exercises for FY2010/11 to 2012/13

Exercise Name and Aim 2010/11 20011/12 2012/13

Multi-national Exercises

Exercise PEGASUS, a combined air transport September/ September/ September/
exercise involving the South African and October October October
Regional Air Forces Botswana Lesotho Namibia

_NOTE. SA Air Force participation in JIM exercises is not included in Chapter 19 – Force Employment. Services and Divisions provide_
_funding for participation in JIM exercises. This table does not include formal and informal work-up and continuation training._

|Exercise Name and Aim|2010/11|20011/12|2012/13|
|---|---|---|---|
|Electronic Warfare (EW) Camp, providing Air Force pilots an opportunity to f yl in a high density EW threat environment|August|September|September|
|Exercise NEW HORIZON, an Air Defence exercise with Command & Control elements|-|October|October|

|Exercise Name and Aim|2010/11|20011/12|2012/13|
|---|---|---|---|
|Multi-national Exercises||||
|Exercise PEGASUS, a combined air transport exercise involving the South African and Regional Air Forces|September/ October Botswana|September/ October Lesotho|September/ October Namibia|


-----

###### PROGRAMME 5: MARITIME DEFENCE OUTPUTS


###### PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND ANNUAL TARGETS

The performance output detailed in the table below refl ects the outputs of the objectives and measures
related to the main outputs of the Programme. The details of the sub-programmes Maritime Direction
and Maritime Logistic Support Capability are contained in the internal departmental plan.

Table 25: Maritime Defence: Performance Indicators and Annual Targets for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Maritime Combat Capability|||||
|Surface Warfare Capability|Number of vessels operated in the annual operational cycle|Four frigates|Four frigates|Four frigates|
|Submarine Warfare Capability|Number of submarines operated in the annual operational cycle|Three|Three|Three|
|Combat Support & Sealift Capability|Number of combat support vessels operated in the annual operational cycle|One|One|One|
|Mine Warfare Capability|Number of mine counter-measure vessels operated in the annual operational cycle|Three|Three|Three|
|Hydrographic Services Capability|Number of hydrographic vessels and mobile hydrographic survey teams operated in the annual operational cycle|One vessel|One vessel|One vessel|
|||One mobile hydrographic survey team|One mobile hydrographic survey team|One mobile hydrographic survey team|
|Patrol Capability|Number of patrol vessels operated in the annual operational cycle|Three inshore vessels|Three inshore vessels|Three inshore vessels|
|||Three of f-shore vessels|Three of f-shore vessels|Three of f-shore vessels|


-----

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Maritime Reaction Squadron Capability|Number of teams of the Operational Boat Division prepared in accordance with the Navy Force Design|Three|Three|Three|
||Number of teams of the Operational Diving Division prepared in accordance with the Navy Force Design|Three|Three|Three|
||Number of platoons of the Naval Reaction Division prepared in accordance with the Navy Force Design|Three|Three|Three|
|Maritime Human Resources and Training Capability|||||
|General education, training and development of Navy personnel|Number of learners on planned courses|4 964|4 964|4 964|
|Base Support Capability|||||
|Base Support Capability|Number of Naval Bases/Stations provided, ensuring compliance with force requirements|One Naval Base|One Naval Base|One Naval Base|
|||Two Naval Stations|Two Naval Stations|Two Naval Stations|


25 Vessels scheduled to continue with 2nd phase of refi t in latter part of 2011.


-----

###### PLANNED EXERCISES

Planned service unique exercises are indicated in table 26.

Table 26: Maritime Defence: Planned Service Unique Exercises for FY2010/11 to 2012/13

Exercise Name and Aim 2010/11 20011/12 2012/13

Exercise RED LION: Annual Task Force exercise February/ February/ February/
March March March

DIVEX: Annual diving exercise September September September

_Note: SA Naval participation in JIM exercises is included in Table 19 under Force Employment. Services and Divisions provide funding for_
_participation in JIM exercises. This table does not include formal and informal work-up and continuation training_

|Exercise Name and Aim|2010/11|20011/12|2012/13|
|---|---|---|---|
|Exercise RED LION: Annual Task Force exercise|February/ March|February/ March|February/ March|
|DIVEX: Annual diving exercise|September|September|September|


-----

###### PROGRAMME 6: MILITARY HEALTH SUPPORT PROGRAMME OUTPUTS


###### PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND ANNUAL TARGETS

The performance output detailed in the table below refl ects the outputs of the objectives and measures
related to the main outputs of the Programme. The details of sub-programme Strategic Direction and
SAMHS Maintenance Capability are contained in the internal departmental plan.

Table 27: Military Health Support: Output Details for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Mobile Military Health Support Capability|||||
|Combat-ready Military Health Support Elements for deployed and contingency forces|Number of units prepared according to force requirements|One conventional medical battalion group|One conventional medical battalion group|Two conventional medical battalion groups|
|||One specialist battalion group|One specialist battalion group|One specialist battalion group|
|||Three Reserve medical battalion groups|Three Reserve medical battalion groups|Three Reserve medical battalion groups|
|Area Military Health Service|||||
|Comprehensive, self-supporting, multidisciplinary geographic military health service|Number of health care activities at the 88 geographic health care facilities|1 300 000|1 400 000|1 500 000|
||Number of health assessment activities executed at the 88 geographic health care facilities|125 000|127 000|130 000|
||Number of medical support activities at the 88 geographic health care facilities|2 200|2 300|2 400|


-----

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Specialist/Tertiary Military Health Service|||||
|Specialist/Tertiary military health services and capabilities by means of military hospitals, institutes and a unit for dignitary and VIP health services|Number of health care activities at the three military hospitals|990 000|995 000|1 000 000|
||Maximum number of aviation health care activities|15 850|15 850|15 850|
||Maximum number of maritime health care activities|60 000|61 000|62 000|
||Maximum number of Military Psychological Institute contacts|10 200|10 500|10 700|
||Number of animal health activities|3 240|3 260|3 280|
||Number of national and international dignitary and VIP medical support and health care activities|584|620|650|


-----

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Military Health Product Support Capability|||||
|Warehousing of pharmaceuticals and sundries, and military health mobilisation and unique stock|Percentage availability of stock at all times|75%|78%|80%|
|Procurement of unique military health products, materials and services|Percentage compliance with stock procurement and delivery requirements|80%|83%|85%|
|Asset and life-cycle management of main medical equipment|Number of main medical equipment assets verif eid and registered|17 853|19 300|20 800|
|Military Health Training Capability|||||
|Military health training capability|Number of learners on planned courses|3 966|4 200|4 500|


###### PLANNED EXERCISES

Planned service unique exercises are indicated in table 28.

Table 28: Military Health Support: Planned Service Unique Exercises for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

Exercise Name and Aim 2010/11 20011/12 2012/13

Exercise LANCET: force preparation exercise - September/ September/
November November

Exercise WAYSIDE: force preparation exercise March/April September/ September/
November November

_NOTE. SAMHS participation in JIM exercises included in Table 19 under Force Employment. Services and Divisions provide funding for_
_participation in JIM exercises. This table does not include continuation training._

26 Number of health care activities at the geographic health care facilities includes pharmacy, ancillary health, medical, nursing,
oral health, occupational health and safety, social work and psychology activities, but excludes health assessment activities.
27 Number of medical support activities includes patient evacuations, i.e. ambulance and medical support to Force Preparation
activities, such as training and exercises.
28 Number of health care activities at the three military hospitals, includes health assessment activities, pharmacy, ancillary health,
medical, nursing, laboratory services, social work and psychology activities.
29 Number of aviation health activities includes aviation assessments and fl ight medicals, medical boards, confi rmations and
certifi cations of A & B licenses, medical selections for aircrews.
30 Number of maritime health activities includes diving and submarine medicals, medical support to ship deployments, medical
boards, primary health care service and health assessment.
31 Number of animal health activities include number of animal health clinical consultations and number of animal health related
training of dogs and personnel.

|Exercise Name and Aim|2010/11|20011/12|2012/13|
|---|---|---|---|
|Exercise LANCET: force preparation exercise|-|September/ November|September/ November|
|Exercise WAYSIDE: force preparation exercise|March/April|September/ November|September/ November|


-----

###### PROGRAMME 7: DEFENCE INTELLIGENCE OUTPUTS


###### PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND ANNUAL TARGETS

The performance output detailed in the table below refl ects the outputs of the objectives and measures
related to the main outputs of the Programme. Details of the sub-programmes Strategic Direction and
Defence Intelligence Support Services are contained in the internal departmental plan.

Table 29: Defence Intelligence: Output Details for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Operations|||||
|Intelligence processing capability|Number of defence intelligence products according to the annual schedule and client requirements|331|340|324|
|Counter- Intelligence capability|Number of vetting decisions taken in accordance with requirement|6 500|7 000|4 000|


-----

###### PROGRAMME 8: GENERAL SUPPORT


###### OUTPUTS

 PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND ANNUAL TARGETS

The performance output detailed in the table below refl ects the outputs of the objectives and measures
related to the main outputs of the Programme.

Table 30: General Support: Output Details for FY2010911 to FY2012/13

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Joint Logistic Services|||||
|Centralised Logis- tic Capabilities|Number of units prepared and maintained to support force em- ployment require- ments|One joint logistic operational sup- port unit|One joint logistic operational sup- port|One joint logistic operational sup- port|
|||One main ord- nance depot|One main ord- nance depot|One main ord- nance depot|
|||Two ordnance sub-depots|Two ordnance sub-depots|Two ordnance sub-depots|
|||Three ammuni- tion depots|Three ammuni- tion depots|Three ammuni- tion depots|
|||One technical service unit|One technical service unit|One technical service unit|
|||One mobilisation centre|One mobilisation centre|One mobilisation centre|
|||Two central pro- curement service centres|Two central pro- curement service centres|Two central pro- curement service centres|
|||One logistics school|One logistics school|One logistics school|
|||One ammunition school|One ammunition school|One ammunition school|
|||One hospitality school|One hospitality school|One hospitality school|
|||One South African Forces Institute|One South African Forces Institute|One South African Forces Institute|


-----

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Centralised Logis- tic Services|Percentage compliance with Capital Works Programme|100%|100%|100%|
||Percentage compliance with Repair and Maintenance Programme|100%|100%|100%|
||Percentage compliance with environmental services project requirements|100%|100%|100%|
||Percentage compliance with DOD codif ication requirements|100%|100%|100%|
||Percentage tonnes of ammunition disposed in accordance with disposal plan|100%|100%|100%|
||Percentage of procurements of commercial vehicles for the DOD versus total requests|100%|100%|100%|
||Percentage cours- es successfully completed SANDF requirement|100%|100%|100%|
||Percentage procurement requests satis- f ied versus DOD requirement|90%|100%|100%|
||Total stock verif ciation of items found cor- rect versus it ems on charge within test site|80%|100%|100%|


-----

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Command and Management Information Systems|||||
|Integrated Information and Communication Systems (ICS) solutions and en- ablers for the DOD|Level of compli- ance with the DOD ICS Project Portfolio (DEIS Master Plan) wrt ICS solutions|90%|90%|90%|
|Supported DOD ICS and Joint Command and Control Product System Capability|Minimum per- centage availabil- ity of ICS support capability|98% availability of mainframe service at all times|98% availability of mainframe service at all times|98% availability of mainframe service at all times|
|||95% availability of the Wide Area Network at all times|95% availability of the Wide Area Network at all times|95% availability of the Wide Area Network at all times|
||Percentage availability of all corporate tele- communications and information technology prod- uct systems and products|98% availability of the DOD tele- communication backbone at all times|98% availability of the DOD tele- communication backbone at all times.|98% availability of the DOD tele- communication backbone at all times.|
|Joint Information Warfare (JIW) Strategic Direc- tion Capability for the DOD|Percentage imple- mentation of JIW policies, strategic plans and controls in the DOD|30%|30%|30%|
||Minimum per- centage secured Information Sys- tem Security (ISS) solutions pro- vided for DOD ICS Projects according to requirements at all times|80%|80%|80%|


-----

|Output|Performance Indicator|Target|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|
|Military Police|||||
|Military Policing (MP) capability to the DOD|Number of military policing service units|Four regional headquarters|Four regional headquarters|Four regional headquarters|
|||22 Area of fices|22 Area of fices|22 Area of fices|
|||22 Detachments|22 Detachments|22 Detachments|
|||Two military cor- rectional facilities|Two military cor- rectional facilities for the year|Two military cor- rectional facilities|
||Reducing the number of crimi- nal cases under investigation by the MP that go to court|10%|10%|10%|
|Military policing combat capability|Number of com- bat-ready provost companies avail- able according to force require- ments|One|One|One|


32 No project can be released if it is not 100% ISS secured.


-----

###### APPENDIX B

 LINKS TO OTHER RESOURCE PLANS


###### OVERVIEW OF THE DOD INFORMATION STRATEGY


###### BACKGROUND

Information, as a resource, is entrenched in all activities of the DOD – it is used by everyone, in every
format, everywhere and at every time to a lesser or a larger degree – from the strategic level right down
to the tactical level of the organisation.

In essence, the requirement for quality decision-making and the precise execution of activities as
intended by the Defence Strategy demands a quality information resource. In turn, quality information
requires quality Information Systems and Information and Communication Technologies in order to
enable the DOD to achieve its objectives.

As a result of this, the DOD’s Information Strategy was reviewed and approved for promulgation during
the fi rst quarter of 2010. The reviewed Information Strategy not only promotes the management of the
Department’s information as a strategic resource, but it also sets out to elevate the Department’s level
of maturity from a systems-oriented organisation to an information-oriented organisation. However,
key to achieving the outcome of Information Excellence associated with an information-oriented
organisation is the implementation of the Defence Enterprise Information System (DEIS) Master Plan,
which will improve the Department’s maturity level from a technology-oriented organisation to a
systems oriented organisation.

###### STRATEGIC GOALS

The Information Strategy presents a set of strategic goals, objectives, and implementation guidelines for
managing and utilising information as a strategic resource through its lifecycle immaterial of the format
in which the information is kept (electronic or hard copy) or of the system in which the information is
used by (manual or automated).
The following high level strategic goals were identifi ed as key to the implementation and execution of
the Information Strategy:

- Creating a common understanding of what the departmental information requirement entails,
the provisioning of which will enable the successful execution of the organisational processes and
objectives.

- Establishing an organisation driven by an information culture and the sharing thereof, whilst ensuring
eff ective and effi cient control over the information resource.

The application of the following high-level concepts will enable the achievement of the strategic
objectives:

- Network Centric Defence. This concept is the DOD’s answer to the rapid changes in the threat
landscape and entails the application of information and communication systems, people, processes,
etc in a manner that ensures the timely and secure distribution of information to where and when it is
required, for purposes of supporting defence business (defence administration) and providing military
commanders with an informational advantage over adversaries during the full range of operations
(network centric warfare).


-----

- Information as a Strategic Resource. The DOD Information Strategy sets forth a number of principles
and characteristics that will improve and add value to the information resource. As a result, an approach
is taken that the departmental information requirement must be known and properly analysed so as
to have a clear understanding not only of the kind of information required under whatever situation
and for what purpose, but also from where the information is sourced or originates.

- Information Management and Administration Practices. This relates to the departmental capability to
practise and live out the principles, processes, and procedures inherent to the holistic management
of information within the ambit of legal requirements and best practices.

- Human Cognitive Ability. This concept relates to the level of cognitive maturity that is required of
Defence personnel to be able to make eff ective use of the information resource. This includes being
able to eff ectively communicate one’s understanding of the information to one’s peers in a collaborative
environment, thereby not only eff ectively sharing knowledge but also adding to a more comprehensive
situational awareness amongst team members and peers.

- Information Distribution. To enable the secure, eff ective and effi cient distribution of information to
where and when it is required, the DOD implements a fully scalable, robust and interoperable
Information and Communication Infrastructure realised by the implementation of the DEIS Master
Plan.


###### IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DEIS MASTER PLAN


The DEIS Master Plan serves as the primary mechanism through which the DOD Information Strategy is
realised. Furthermore, the DEIS Master Plan facilitates the strategic alignment between the information
requirements of the DOD, on the one hand, and the enabling of information solutions for DOD
requirements, on the other hand.

The DEIS Master Plan therefore directs and co-ordinates all ICS&S investments being made across
the entire DOD, in order to ensure that the DOD gains the best value from money spent on ICS&S in
accordance with DOD Strategies, Plans and Priorities. For this reason, the scope of the DEIS Master Plan
covers all levels of management and command (across the strategic, operational and tactical levels). It
includes all defence functions, from the staff support and administrative functions in the rear, through
the various Headquarters along the military chain of command and right down to the information and
communication systems that extend into the tactical battlefi eld – and which facilitate the network
enabling of SANDF military capabilities.

As a result, the DEIS Master Plan focuses on the achievement of the requisite levels of technical and nontechnical interoperability. For this purpose, CMIS Division places a high premium on the establishment
and utilisation of the SANDF Interoperability Development Environment (IDE). The IDE will increasingly
provide the mechanisms and services needed to ensure the achievement of such levels of ICS&S
enabling and interoperability that are needed to signifi cantly increase the eff ectiveness of the DOD
both in military operations, as well as in the administrative environment.

###### CONCLUSION

The DOD information strategy is fully aligned with the top-level balanced scorecard strategic maps
of the department, thus creating the required synergy with departmental strategic objectives. As a
result of this, the execution of the information strategy and the realisation of information excellence,
as expressed in the information vision, are dependent on the achievement of the above-mentioned
strategic goals and their associated objectives.


-----

###### DEIS MASTER PLAN


Table 31: DEIS Master Plan

|Ser|Renewal Area|FY 2010/2011 R’000|FY 2011/2012 R’000|FY 2012/2013 R’000|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|1|Portfolio 1: Defence Enterprise Architecture. Enterprise Architecture def ines an enterprise- wide, integrated set of components that incorporates strategic business thinking, information assets and the technical infra- structure of an enterprise to promote information sharing across agency and organisational boundaries||||
||11 030|11 361|11 701||
|2|Portfolio 2: Defence Management Applications. These applications support functionality such as external situation analysis, internal control, planning and tasking of any military capability or part thereof. They span from strategic to tactical level.||||
||18 141|18 195|18 741||
|3|Portfolio 3: Defence Functional Applications. These applications support all resources throughout respective life cycles, as well as any specialised services. The applications should react on instructions received from and should provide internal situation awareness to management applications||||
||13 432|13 835|14 250||
|4|Portfolio 4: Defence Common Applications. These applications support communication of unstructured content within all management and operating processes and between the management and operating applications when feasible. Communication of structured content is always developed as an integral part of management and operating applications.|17 785|18 319|18 868|
|5|Portfolio 5: Defence Information and Communication Infrastructure (DICI). The DICI is the required foundation of the Defence Enterprise Information System, which comprises a collection of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) equipment and foundation software that provide suf ficient capacity to capture, store, process, communicate, protect, sustain, integrate and present information at every location of the DOD business and military mission areas|134 700|135 731|138 791|


-----

|Ser|Renewal Area|FY 2010/2011 R’000|FY 2011/2012 R’000|FY 2012/2013 R’000|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|6|Portfolio 6: Defence Data/Information Resource. The Information and Data Resource represents the total information requirement as determined from the Business processes of the DOD.|4 912|5 059|5 211|
|7|Portfolio 7: Defence Information Assurance|0|0|0|
|8|Total:|200 000|202 500|207 562|


_Notes:_
_1. The detailed projects of the various portfolios are contained in the Departmental Plan._
_2. The budget fi gures are only for the Renewal Portfolio (DEIS MP)._
_3. It is to be noted that the above fi gures represent only the CMIS Divisions contribution to the funding of the DEIS MP (other role players,_
_such as DMD through the Strategic Capital Acquisition Master Plan (SCAMP), and the various Services and Divisions are excluded)._


###### OVERVIEW OF THE DOD HUMAN RESOURCE STRATEGY


The DOD Overarching Human Resource Strategy was approved on 7 August 2009. The intent of the
DOD Overarching Human Resource Strategy is to achieve, maintain, manage and account for a defence
human resource complement that optimally executes the Department’s mandate, mission and strategic
objectives in support of the DOD’s corporate vision and mission. During the current planning cycle, the
DOD must achieve its strategic vision for human resources, being “mission-ready human resources”, and
execute the mission of the strategy, which is “ensuring well managed mission-ready human resources
through the application of sound human resource management practices”. The strategy is structured
around three themes, namely “Human Resources of the Appropriate Quality, Quantity, Composition
and Cost”, which relates to defence-specifi c and military-specifi c human resource imperatives and
initiatives; “Accountable HR Management and Administration”, which relates to the generic human
resource management functions and other specifi c human resource management focus areas; and
“Commitments met in Pursuance of Government Human Resource Policy and Strategy” which relates to
defence-related social responsibility functions.

Supporting the Defence and Military Strategies, the DOD Overarching Human Resource Strategy
provides strategic direction to the “provide human resource process” over the medium to long term.
It emphasises the fundamental strategic goals and objectives that must be achieved to improve the
effi cacy of the way in which the DOD manages its members and employees within the ambit of the
above-mentioned three themes.

The strategy also provides capstone guidance for human resource management in the DOD through
directing the development of derived human resource sub strategies, functional policies and human
resource support plans. It furthermore enhances internal human resource processes with the main aim
to build for the future.

The implementation of the DOD Overarching Human Resource Strategy is supported by a multi-year
Departmental Human Resource Strategy Implementation Plan and an annual Departmental Corporate


-----

Human Resource Support Plan will give impetus to the DOD’s strategic direction process from a human
resource viewpoint. Such plans contain the detail in respect of implementation guidelines, targets (ways
and means), responsibilities, timelines and performance success indicators.

The DOD Overarching Human Resource Strategy is an important milestone in continuing the journey
during the Second Decade of Freedom towards improved strategic direction of the DOD’s human
capital.


###### JOINT LOGISTICS STRATEGY


The purpose of the logistics strategy of the DOD is to ensure optimal integrated logistic support to the
DOD for military operations and other assigned tasks.

Logistic support is provided on a joint and multinational basis with a single point of functional authority
(Chief of Logistics), recognising the uniqueness of systems operating on land, in the air and at sea, as well
as those by military health services. This logistic support system supports force provision, preparation
and employment.

Logistic strategy, as for military strategy, comprises ends (the desired outcome), ways (the manner
in which it is executed) and means (that with which it is carried out). Logistic activities at strategic,
operational and tactical level make it possible for the forces being supported to accomplish their
mission.

At the national or strategic level, the capacity of the industrial base, funding, availability of raw materials
and other resources, including transportation and competing needs of the civilian population, must be
considered.

At the operational and tactical level, the availability of supplies, transport, maintenance services and the
competing demands of other forces are the limiting factors.

The following are the desired outcomes of the logistics strategy:

- Logistics enables the Defence Mandate.

- Logistic risks are reduced to as low as reasonably practicable.

- Logistics contributes to the Department’s positive image.

- Logistics complies with the regulatory framework, Government priorities, internal governance and
stakeholder requirements.

Logistics provides the following outputs:

- Appropriate, ready and sustained matériel.

- Appropriate, ready and sustained facilities.

- Appropriate, ready and sustained movement and logistic services.

Logistic support within the DOD is determined by the Secretary for Defence and the Chief of the SANDF
as follows:

- The Secretariat will provide Governance, Risk and Compliance management.

- Chief of Logistics and staff will provide centralised strategic logistic direction and functional authority
as Staff Offi cer of Chief of the SANDF, including logistic strategy, policy and doctrine, integrated
planning (vertical and horizontal alignment of objective and resource allocation), and consolidated
reporting, internal control and risk management.


-----

- Those logistics functions most eff ectively, effi ciently and economically executed in a joint/centralised
manner will be performed by either DOD Logistic Support Formation or Joint Ops Div.

- Those logistics functions most eff ectively, effi ciently and economically executed in a de-centralised
manner will be performed by the Services and other Divisions.

The logistics will, over the next decade, focus on acquiring the optimal level of logistic capabilities to
ensure an eff ective, effi cient, and economic, transparent, mission-ready and integrated DOD/SANDF
logistic support system.

The logistics will, over the medium term, through the Logistic Intervention and Realignment Programme
(LIRP), focus on transforming DOD/SANDF logistics processes, systems and structures so as to establish
the required environmental conditions to achieve improved logistic operational readiness.

The logistics will, in the short term, focus on supporting defence operational and other commitments
ordered by Government, within current constraints, and on the elimination of logistic related audit
qualifi cations.

The DOD’s challenge in providing logistic support remains the continuous improvement of the skills and
capacity of logisticians, and the quality of equipment, systems and facilities. To this end, special focus
will be placed on ensuring the availability of logistics skills through attracting, recruiting, educating,
training, developing, retaining, motivating, correctly deploying and eventually redeploying suffi cient
competent logistics members.

An equal challenge is the establishment of a single logistics process throughout the DOD/SANDF.
The process shall be

- Comprehensive, providing for the unique requirements and activities of the diff erent
environments, Services and Divisions;

- Rigorous, to ensure eff ectiveness, effi ciency and economy, while maintaining integrity;

- Tailorable, to enhance fl exibility, appropriateness and responsiveness; and

- Based on best logistic practice and the operationalisation of the “Core Growth – One Force” concept.

The process will integrate the logistics perspectives of Life Cycle and Asset Management, from
realisation of need to commissioning, operation, support and eventual disposal of systems; and Supply
Chain Management, from provisioning and sourcing to front-line delivery of items, including return if
required; and will follow a systems, quality and process approach.

Currently, the DOD uses several parallel logistic information systems, including manual methods and
divergent logistic processes. This complicates the provision of integrated management information
to DOD decision-makers. The establishment of a single logistics process will enable migration to a
single logistics information system, in co-operation with the National Treasury’s Integrated Financial
Management System (IFMS) initiative.

Other technological means to achieve eff ectiveness, effi ciency, economy and integrity in the logistics
process, including but not limited to automated inventory and asset tracking, shall be investigated and
implemented.

The defence-related industry, defence institutes and the private sector are to be positioned to support
the DOD in both Life Cycle and Supply Chain Management.


-----

Common-use systems will be managed by a single point of responsibility, so as to achieve economy of
scale through standardisation and consolidation.

Strategic, operational and tactical reserve stock levels will be determined through a risk-based approach
to ensure that the characteristics of demand and supply are aff ordably reconciled.

###### ASSET MANAGEMENT

 MOVABLE CAPITAL ASSETS, CAPITAL INVESTMENTS, REHABILITATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PHYSICAL ASSETS

Continuing funding constraints have severely impacted on the maintenance of Defence equipment and
infrastructure, giving rise to a serious maintenance backlog, which impacts directly on the operational
readiness of the SANDF and its ability to provide, prepare, employ and support forces.

The DOD has instituted various programmes to

- Verify its stockholding of movable capital assets and inventory;

- Improve the accuracy of asset and inventory information;

- Be able to accurately disclose the depreciated value of its assets;

- Verify the footprint of immoveable assets;

- Determine the condition of immoveable assets in order to plan for their refurbishment and
maintenance, as well as to accurately disclose their value; and

- Establish a works capability to enable the DOD to eventually perform fi rst and second line maintenance
of own facilities and infrastructure.

Military Integrated Environmental Management will be applied to minimise the DOD’s impact on the
physical environment.


-----

###### RESOURCE PLANS


###### LOGISTIC PLAN

1. The DOD plans to acquire the following capital assets during the MTEF period for FY 2010 / 11 to FY
2012 / 2013:

Table 32: Capital Assets for FY 2010 to FY 2012/2013

Serial Description 2010 / 11 2011 / 12 2012 / 13
No R’000 R’000 R’000

A B C D

1 Immovable Assets (GDA), Folio 01 440 025 986 94 527 285 99 253 649

2 Moveable Assets (GDA), Folio 01 346 159 972 361 369 896 746 302 766

3 Special Defence Account (SDA), Folio 02 2 930 710 414 4 364 272 088 4 578 676 911

2. Based on sales trends and past performance, Armscor and the Department estimate that the
following income will be generated from sales of equipment.

Table 33: Income from Sales of Equipment for FY 2010 to FY 2012/2013

|Serial No|Description|2010 / 11 R’000|2011 / 12 R’000|2012 / 13 R’000|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||A|B|C|D|
|1|Immovable Assets (GDA), Folio 01|440 025 986|94 527 285|99 253 649|
|2|Moveable Assets (GDA), Folio 01|346 159 972|361 369 896|746 302 766|
|3|Special Defence Account (SDA), Folio 02|2 930 710 414|4 364 272 088|4 578 676 911|

|Serial No|Description|2010 / 11 R’000|2011 / 12 R’000|2012 / 13 R’000|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||A|B|C|D|
|1|Sales of military equipment|39 000 000|42 000 000|49 000 000|
|2|Sales of non-military equipment|12 000 000|12 000 000|12 000 000|


###### STRATEGIC CAPITAL ACQUISITION STRATEGY (ARMAMENT ACQUISITION)


The Defence Matériel Division (Def Mat Div) directs and manages the acquisition of DOD-specifi ed
matériel and technology requirements within the allocated budget and in accordance with policies and
prescripts.

Based on SANDF priorities allocated by Chief of Joint Operations (CJ Ops) combined with the prevalent
industrial capability, as well as the particular approval status and strategy of individual projects, Chief
of Defence Matériel (C Def Mat) schedules update and renewal projects within the limits of the MTEF
allocation agreed upon for weapon systems and technology development.

The medium term focus of Defence Acquisition will be on acquiring new equipment and upgrading
existing equipment, as prioritised by CJ Ops, to support ordered commitments assigned to the SANDF.
Parallel to this, specifi c technology programmes are pursued to ensure the retention of the required
technology base for eff ective local participation in scheduled acquisition programmes, in addition to
applying these technologies to optimise the remaining life of existing equipment.

During the medium term, Army Acquisition will focus on the fi nalisation of the commissioning of some
of the armour, rapid deployment, armoured personnel carrier and light machine gun capabilities.
Furthermore specifi c focus will be directed to satisfy the short term requirement priorities of the SA
Army, such as the mortar, operational earthmoving, night vision and anti-tank capabilities.


-----

The Air Force Acquisition portfolio includes, amongst others, projects funded by the Strategic Defence
Package (SDP) deals and also some projects with ring-fenced funding and/or foreign co-investment.
Some of these systems will play an integral role in the SANDF’s participation in providing security for the
2010 FIFA World Cup event. The following SDP’s are near completion of the acquisition process:

- 24 dual seat Hawk fi ghter training aircraft – all aircraft and most support equipment are delivered to
the SA Air Force (SAAF).

- Nine dual seat and 17 single seat Gripen fi ghter aircraft – the dual seat aircraft have been delivered to
the SAAF whilst delivery of the single seat aircraft will continue throughout the year.

- 30 A109 Light Utility Helicopters (LUH) – all aircraft have been delivered to the SAAF and the project
will be completed in the year.

FY 2010/11 will also see the handing-over for full operational utilisation to the SA Navy of four Super
Lynx Maritime Helicopters to augment the operational capability of the Valour class Frigates of the SA
Navy.

The programme aimed at providing a heavy lift transport capability for the SANDF by acquiring eight
A400M airlift aircraft was terminated by Cabinet in December 2009. The major contributing factors
for this decision are excessive timescale slippages, increased cost and technical risks. Chief of the SA
Air Force has been requested to do a complete needs analysis ito the need for a heavy lift transport
capability.

With the SA Navy’s SDP projects approaching completion during the medium term, having
operationalised four Meko 200 Frigates and delivering three Class 209 Type 1400 Submarines, the focus
of Naval Acquisition will be directed at upgrading and sustaining the SA Navy’s off -shore patrol and
hydrographic capabilities, as well as addressing the gaps within its mine warfare core capability and
Port/Unit Security environment.

In order to ensure optimised Defence spending, as well as optimised industrial potential to guarantee
cost-eff ective through-life support of defence equipment, the Division embarked on an enhanced
communication strategy with the Defence Industry. The fourth Defence Industry Day will be held in
FY 2010/11 with its main purpose to enhance open communication between all role players and to
indicate future acquisition and technology requirements. The Division, together with the Department
of Public Enterprises, is actively involved with the recapitalisation programme of DENEL


###### SERVICE DELIVERY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMME


In line with the guidelines from the Department of Public Service and Administration, the DOD has
identifi ed programmes and projects that embrace service delivery. These programmes include the MSDS
and the instruments aimed at improvement of systemic design, alignment and systemic performance
management. The details are as contained in Table 2.4.


-----

Table 34: Service Delivery Improvement Programme

|Key Service|Benef iciary|Current Standards|Desired Standards|
|---|---|---|---|
|Military Skills Development System. The MSDS will provide qualif ied military practitioners who will enhance the operational readiness of the SANDF(to deploy in external and internal operations) by rejuvenating Regulars and Reserves and granting development and empowerment opportunities to the SA Youth|DOD wrt HR rejuvenation of Regulars and Reserves Youth of the RSA Public and Private Enterprises wrt members exiting the DOD after two years of service|Quantity Planned entry – 2010 Calendar year of 5 570 In the system – 11 022 (inclusive of the above) The number leaving – approximately 1 350|Quantity That the planned strength of 5 570 will enter into service to ensure the rejuvenation of the Regulars and the Reserves, to enhance the DOD’s operational readiness and defence service delivery in peace missions. That approximately 1 350 empowered MSDS members join the Reserves to improve the conventional capability of the SANDF.|
|||Consultation Entry: During dedicated recruitment drives the benef its of serving in the SANDF are explained and that the MSDS is the primary means to enter the SANDF. It will also be highlighted that if the member opts to join, he/she will receive skills needed for a career in the SANDF, will acquire certain life skills prior to exiting the SANDF and will possess the skills to join the SANDF Reserves as an alternative form of service after his/her two years of service Exit: Interviewed by the Reserves to join the Reserves as a form of service|Consultation That the recruiting target set for the SANDF is met in terms of quality and quantity That members who exit the SANDF join the Reserves after Reserves brief ings That young school leavers are provided with both military and life skills before leaving the SANDF That service contracts are issued to those members who qualify to support the drive to rejuvenate the Regulars and Reserves.|


-----

|Key Service|Benef iciary|Current Standards|Desired Standards|
|---|---|---|---|
|||Access The DOD embarks on structured recruitment drives for school leavers to enter the MSDS, utilising physical recruitment visits and lectures at schools and by means of television, newspapers, periodicals, radio and the internet.|Access That the structured recruitment drives ensure that the correct quality and quantity of MSDS members are attracted to the DOD to support its drive for the rejuvenation of Regulars and Reserves and that it provides empowerment opportunities to the SA Youth.|
|||Courtesy When recruitment drives are done and when members are recruited, they are handled in a dignif ied manner and all SANDF members wear a uniform that indicates their rank and name All communication takes place in a programme where all participants know the timeframe and outcomes to allow them to make personal arrangements.|Courtesy That members who enter the SANDF and complete their two years of MSDS service, or are absorbed into the Regulars, express themselves positively and af firm that they have been treated in a dignif eid and humane manner when completing feedback questionnaires|
|||Openness and Transparency Throughout the process, the members are kept informed on how the programme is progressing in terms of achievements and future activities. This is done through detailed brief ing sessions and Commanding Of cfiers’ brief ing periods|Openness and Transparency To have informed MSDS members regarding the progress made during the programme in terms of achievements and future activities. This includes brief ings with regarding the process to select MSDS members who will be of efred a service contract in the Regulars (Core Service System)|


-----

|Key Service|Benef iciary|Current Standards|Desired Standards|
|---|---|---|---|
||||Should they opt to leave the SANDF, they will be linked with prospective employers in the public or private sector|
|||Information Information is provided through physical recruitment visits to schools, including lectures, and by means of television, brochures, pamphlets, periodicals, radio and the internet, open days and Commanding Of ficers’ brief ings, once in service|Information To inform school leavers about a possible career in the SANDF, as well as about empowerment programmes and SANDF support when exiting the SANDF to join the public or private sector|
|||Redress Redress is described in SANDF publications from platoon level to Minister of Defence and Military Veterans level. There is a written process with a clear audit trail|Redress That any aggrieved MSDS members have access to the system and that all grievances are satisfactorily addressed within the specif eid timeframes|
|||Value for Money The MSDS represents a cost-ef efctive service system component at the entry level in the SANDF, which contributes towards the achievements of an appropriate balance between the human resource and operating budget components|Value for Money That savings will be realised in the DOD through the MSDS system, which will allow for the funding of other DOD priorities.|
|||Time In the FY 2010/11, there are overlapping intakes of MSDS members in order to maintain continuity in force levels and sustained rejuvenation|Time That continuity and rejuvenation are achieved in a sustained manner.|
|||Cost Rb 1,872|Cost Rb 1,872|


-----

|Key Service|Benef iciary|Current Standards|Desired Standards|
|---|---|---|---|
|Implementation of performance management in the DOD by means of the Balanced Scorecard (BSC) methodology in order to empower leadership to make informed decisions and enhance visibility of performance.|DOD Leadership|Quantity Top three scorecards integrated to some level in this plan, fully integrated with National Treasury’s Logical Framework, Scorecards for services and divisions under development.|Quantity Top three scorecards fully integrated into the DOD 2011/12 Strategic Business Plan.|
|||Quality Top three scorecards approved by the PDSC|Quality DOD 2011/12 Strategic Business Plan approved in Balanced Scorecard Format.|
|||Consultation Department of Treasury involved in the full integration of the BSC into the DOD’s BSC.|Consultation Department of Treasury involved in the full integration of the BSC into the DOD’s BSC.|
|||Access Partial automation of the DOD’s BSC’s|Access Full implementation in an automated software environment in order to minimise human involvement in the reporting of the DOD’s performance.|
|||Openness and Transparency Limited visibility of the DOD’s performance according to the BSC.|Openness and Transparency Full and aligned visibility to all end users based on relevant security prof lies.|


-----

###### APPENDIX C

 OVERVIEW OF SERVICES TO BE DELIVERED THROUGH PUBLIC–PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS (PPPs)

Within the Human Resource sub-programme, Project BRILLIANT, Defence Training Institute, was
approved at the Plenary Defence Staff Council in January 2008. The Human Resources division requires
a total amount of Rm8 000 000 for the payment of the Transactional Advisor (Phase 1) fees as approved
by the National Treasury. In March 2009 an amount of R658 000 was paid towards the mobilisation fee
for the feasibility and procurement phase of the PPP.

###### AIR DEFENCE PROGRAMME

It is envisaged to establish a PPP for the commercial co-use of Air Force Base Ysterplaat, to reduce the
cost of ownership of the base to the State. The PPP process in the DOD has been stopped due to the
high cost of appointing Transactional Advisors. The project to appoint a Transactional Advisor for a
feasibility study on the possible co-use of Air Force Base Ysterplaat has been registered with the National
Treasury. The process to obtain funding from the DOD has been initiated via the Financial Management
Division.

###### MARITIME DEFENCE PROGRAMME

The South African Navy is currently involved with two PPPs. The fi rst is for the creation of a Sea Safety
Training Centre for the Navy. The feasibility study for this PPP is complete, however it must still pass
through the various committees for approval. The second PPP with which the Navy is involved is a
new Navy Headquarters building and Naval Mess. The Transaction Advisers have nearly completed the
feasibility study.

It is envisaged that Phase One of both the PPPs will be completed by the end of FY 09/10. The Unitary
Fee for the two PPPs appears to be very expensive and the SA Navy will not be able to aff ord it. A
decision whether to proceed with the PPPs will be made at the end of Phase One.

###### SOUTH AFRICAN MILITARY HEALTH SERVICE PROGRAMME

The PPP for Clinical Service Delivery will be operationalised in FY 2010/11. This will result in the SAMHS
having access in eight regions to private health care facilities to admit patients at special tariff s. Patients
will be treated in these facilities by SAMHS medical offi cers.

The PPP for a new Military Health Training Formation is still in the developmental stage. A tender will be
advertised to appoint a transactional advisor for the project in the FY 2010/11 and it is foreseen that the
feasibility study will be concluded by the end of the fi nancial year.

A Transaction Advisor was appointed for the new SAMHS Headquarters and the feasibility study will be
concluded by October 2010. Thereafter the next phase of the project will commence.


-----

###### PUBLIC ENTITIES REPORTING TO THE EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY


###### NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE SERVICE COMMISSION


Since the approval of the Interim National Defence Force Service Commission (INDFSC) by Cabinet on
9 September 2009, the announcement of the INDFSC on 21 September 2009 and the appointment of
the Commissioners on 1 October 2009, the INDFSC has adopted, and started to execute, a programme
of action to give eff ect to its Terms of Reference. Two of the most important aspects within the Terms
of Reference are that the INDFSC has to, fi rstly and secondly, make recommendations to the Minister
of Defence and Military Veterans on the establishment of a permanent National Defence Force Service
Commission (NDFSC) (Military Service Commission), inclusive of its terms of reference, functions, staff
components, relationship with Parliament, reporting responsibilities and oversight role.

The Strategic Plan of the NDFSC is prepared in terms of the Treasury Regulations.

This Strategic Plan guides the work of the NDFSC and serves as basis for an assessment of its performance
by stakeholders over the MTEF period 2010/2011 to 2012/2013.

In fulfi lling its complex and involved mandate, the INDFSC regards conditions of service within the
military context as an extended concept, being broader than merely encompassing salaries and
allowances.

The Executive Authority has entrusted the NDFSC to investigate, provide expert advice and make
recommendations regarding remuneration and the conditions of service of members of the SANDF
and, secondly, to make recommendations to the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans on the
establishment of a permanent NDFSC.

It seeks to cover vast and new ground relating to the appropriateness of remuneration patterns inherited
from our pre-democracy past.

The fi rst step is to gain insight into the objective content of the job of every member of the SANDF; that
is the nature, powers and responsibilities that the job entails, the complexity of the decisions required
and their impact or infl uence at the workplace and in the broader public. To that end, the INDFSC has to
compile job profi les for all SANDF individual ranks or as part of a class.

The second purpose of the review is to understand the relative content of the jobs. This implies a
measure of ranking or grading of the respective jobs by their relative content, complexity, infl uence,
seniority and status.

The third and perhaps most complex principal task of this review is to fi nd and adopt appropriate
remuneration benchmarks; that is justifi able, transparent and objective yardsticks against which the
actual levels of remuneration are compared and ultimately set at various levels of the graded positions
and their military uniqueness.

The fourth aim of this review is to introduce a total cost to employer remuneration regime that will
render the overall annual salary bill of the SANDF transparent and predictable, whilst at the same time
allowing members of the SANDF the fl exibility to structure their remuneration packages outside the
ambit of the Public Service Bargaining Council.


-----

###### STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE ANNUAL TARGETS FOR FY 2010/11 TO FY 2012/13 PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND ANNUAL TARGETS

Targets for the budget year and over the MTEF period for each strategic objective specifi ed in NDFSC
the Strategic Plan are indicated in Table 34 below.

Table 35: NDFSC: Output Details for FY2010/11 to FY2012/13

|Strategic objective|Outputs|Perfor- mance Indicator|Estimated perfor- mance 2010|Medium-term targets|Col6|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||2011|2012|2013|
|To make rec- ommenda- tions to the Minister of Defence and Military Vet- erans on the establish- ment of a permanent National De- fence Force Service Commission (Military Ser- vice Com- mission)|National De- fence Force Service Commission Act. 2010, and shall come into operation on a date f ixed by the President by proclama- tion in the process|Establish- ment of the NDFSC, its functions, staf fcom- ponents, relation- ship with Parliament, reporting responsi- bilities and oversight role|Success- ful imple- mentation of NDFSC structure|Promul- gated of the establish- ment NDFSC|Report with recommen- dations and f ni dings|Report with recommen- da-tions and f ni dings|
||||A three- phase imple- mentation process De- termination of actual f -i nancial cost to translate existing re- muneration to a total package structure.||||
|||||Report with f ni dings and recom- mendations in respect of the resourc- es necessary to enable an NDFSC to perform its functions ef efctively|||
||||Communi- cation of the imple- mentation process and package structuring options to all current SANDF members. Administra- tion and systems changes|Accurate advice and support to the Minister|||


-----

|Strategic objective|Outputs|Perfor- mance Indicator|Estimated perfor- mance 2010|Medium-term targets|Col6|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||2011|2012|2013|
|Investigate, provide ex- pert advice and make recom- mendations regarding remunera- tion and the conditions of service of members of the SANDF|To conduct a compre- hensive and credible benchmark- ing exercise, the Com- mission considered comparators in private sector, se- nior public service, se- nior execu- tives in State Owned Entities and institutions||||||
||Grading and bench- marking of all public of fice bearer positions should be done both scientif cially and artisti- cally on the basis of the job prof iles of each posi- tion|Report with recommen- dations and f indings|Report with recommen- dations and f ni dings|Report with recommen- dations and f ni dings|Report with recommen- dations and f ni dings||
||Advise on the regula- tory frame- work for the unique service dis- pensation|Develop a regulatory framework for the unique ser- vice dispen- sation|Report with recommen- dations and f ni dings|Review of the regula- tory frame- work on the unique dispensa- tion|Annual Re- view of the regulatory framework on the unique dis- pensation|Annual Re- view of the regulatory framework on the unique dis- pensation|


-----

|Strategic objective|Outputs|Perfor- mance Indicator|Estimated perfor- mance 2010|Medium-term targets|Col6|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||2011|2012|2013|
||Advise and make recom- menda-tions on a unique service dispensa- tion outside the ambit of the Public Service|Recommen- da-tions and f indings for the unique service dis- pensation|Review of the current conditions of services dispensa- tion|Review of the current conditions of services dispensa- tion|Review of the current conditions of services dispensa- tion|Review of the current conditions of services dispensa- tion|
||Develop a framework for deter- mining the salaries and conditions of service for the SANDF that the new NDFSC will be able to develop and implement|Report with recommen- da-tions and f indings|Review of the regula- tory frame- work on the unique dispensa- tion|Annual Re- view of the regulatory framework on the unique dis- pensation|Annual Re- view of the regulatory framework on the unique dis- pensation|Report with recommen- dations and f ni dings|
||To enhance the DOD Labour relations and man- agement practices|To conduct a compre- hend-sive and credible benchmark- ing exercise, the Com- mission considered compara- tors on the establish- ment of the grievance commission|Report on f indings and recom- mendations grievance Commission in the DOD produced|Monitoring the imple- menta- tion of the amended grievance rules|Analysis of the impact of the DOD on the grievance resolution|Trends analysis of grievance resolution in the DOD (SANDF)|


-----

###### ARMAMENT CORPORATION OF SOUTH AFRICA (ARMSCOR)


ARMSCOR is a schedule 2 entity of the PFMA, 1999, mandated to support the delivery of the strategic
capabilities of defence. According to the prescriptions of the Public Finance Management Act, the
Corporate Plan for Schedule 2 Public Entities is to be submitted to the Executive Authority and National
Treasury one month before the commencement of a fi nancial year.

###### THE MANDATE OF ARMSCOR

The objectives of ARMSCOR are defi ned in the Armaments Corporation of South Africa Limited Act
No.53 of 2003 as follows:

1.1.1 To meet the defence matériel requirements of the DOD eff ectively, effi ciently and economically.
1.1.2 To meet the defence technology, research, development, analysis, test and evaluation
requirements of the DOD eff ectively, effi ciently and economically.
1.1.3 To adhere to accepted corporate governance principles, best practices and generally accepted
accounting practices within a framework of established norms and standards that refl ect fairness,
equity, transparency, economy, effi ciency, accountability and lawfulness.


###### CASTLE CONTROL BOARD


###### MANDATE OF THE CASTLE CONTROL BOARD

The Castle Management Act (Act 207 of 1993) addresses the mandate of the Castle Control Board in
terms of the following:

There is hereby established a juristic person to be known as the Castle Control Board, which shall exercise
the powers and perform the functions and duties conferred and imposed upon it by this Act.

Therefore, the Castle Control Board, as a public entity under the Public Finance Management Act (Act
1 of 1999) Sec 1, has the mandate to manage and protect the Castle of Good Hope on behalf of the
Minister of Defence having the ultimate ownership responsibility for the Castle

- As a defence endowment property under the Defence Endowment Property and Account Act (Act 33
of 1922) Sec 3;

- As a national monument under the National Heritage Resources Act (Act 25 of 1999) Sec 27(20); and

- As the Executive Authority of the Castle under the Castle Management Act (Act 207 of 1993) Sec 4(1)


-----

-----

-----

-----

-----

