Publication Registration Number

11-1290000-000446-11


-----

-----

#### Minister’s Message

Our recent security situation is extremely complex and grave, both

internally and externally. Neighboring countries of the Korean Peninsula

continue to reinforce their cutting-edge military capabilities, pushing their

own priorities while expanding their military domains not only in the sea

and air but also to space and cyber. In addition, transnational and non
military threats such as COVID-19, disasters and terrorism are emerging as

challenges to national security. In particular, with the spread of COVID-19

and the strategic competition between the United States and China, the

fluidity and uncertainty of the regional security structure are increasing.

Meanwhile, despite showing its willingness to improve inter-Korean

relations following the conclusion of the Comprehensive Military Agreement

in 2018, North Korea has not responded proactively to the efforts of our

government and the international community towards peace establishment.

Amid such challenges within the security landscape, the ROK Armed

Forces maintains a robust military readiness posture based on "formidable

force" and unwavering ROK–US Alliance while fulfilling the role and

responsibility as "Armed Forces for the people", exerting their utmost efforts

to construct "Strong Security, Proud Armed Forces and United National

Defense".

The ROK Armed Forces maintains a combined defense posture and a

military readiness posture that can respond to local provocations and all-out


-----

war, while also strengthening realistic and practical education and training

focused on combat missions. In addition, by preemptively and proactively

responding to COVID-19, our Armed Forces has executed the sworn duties

of protecting the lives and safety of the people.

As the linchpin of peace and prosperity on the Korean Peninsula and in the

region, the ROK–US Alliance continues to develop into a comprehensive

strategic alliance, sharing common values. The Armed Forces of both

countries will continue preparing for a further leap forward for the Alliance

while pursuing the transition of wartime operational control (OPCON) and

establishment of a new combined defense structure. Furthermore, through

strategic defense exchange and cooperation with our surrounding countries

and diversification of defense diplomacy partners, the ROK Armed Forces

is driving forward the substantialization and expansion of outer edges of

defense exchange and cooperation. The ROK Armed Forces will continue

contributing to world peace via active defense diplomacy activities in the

future.

The ROK Armed Forces is building defense capabilities suitable for

the future battlefield environment. We are strengthening both the ROK

Armed Forces’ and ROK–US combined capabilities against threats of

various weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons; we are

also reinforcing core forces, centered around critical military capabilities.

Furthermore, we are endeavoring to transform into a cutting-edge science


-----

and technology force by promoting Defense Reform 2.0 and smart defense

innovation. We are reorganizing the structure of our Armed Forces into an

advanced science and technology-based elite unit structure suitable for the

future battlefield and an operations and combat-focused personnel structure

while actively implementing advanced technology of the Fourth Industrial

Revolution, including drones, artificial intelligence and robots into the

field of defense. Going forward, we will construct formidable military

power, which will lead the future by building defense capabilities based on

technological development.

In addition, in order to create a content national defense environment

and transform into a force trusted by the people, we are firmly establishing

a fair, transparent and efficient national defense management structure

and embedding an inclusive culture within our Armed Forces. We are

establishing a transparent, efficient national defense management structure

through the expansion of public participation, transparency in defense

projects, and enhancement of the defense industry’s competitiveness.

Furthermore, we are actively promoting policies to enhance the convenience

for the people, such as relocation of military airbases and creation of military

facilities that coexist with local communities. In addition, we are building

a "force that stands alongside and is trusted by the people" by dramatically

improving the service conditions for servicemembers and the military

medical system, and by preparing support measures capable of embracing

discharged servicemembers and veterans.


-----

Peace on the ground, at sea, and in the air on the Korean Peninsula is the

path for both the Republic of Korea and North Korea. Koreas. Therefore, our

Armed Forces will actively implement the Comprehensive Military Agree
ment and establish a strong defense posture to backstop with "formidable

force" the complete denuclearization of and establishment of lasting peace

on the Korean Peninsula.

The 2020 Defense White Paper contains the key achievements in the

field of defense over the past two years and the future policy direction to

thoroughly inform the public of such efforts of our Armed Forces. I hope

that the 2020 Defense White Paper will assist its readers in expanding their

understanding and appreciation of our Armed Forces, and I request your

unwavering support and encouragement towards our Armed Forces, which

are endeavoring tirelessly to realize "Strong Security, Proud Armed Forces

and United National Defense".

December 31, 2020

Suh Wook

Minister of National Defense, Republic of Korea


-----

#### Contents


Chapter 1 Changes and Challenges in the Security Environment

Section 1 Global Security Environment 010

Section 2 Security Environment of Northeast Asia 014

Section 3 North Korean Situation and Military Threats 024

Chapter 2 National Security Strategy and Defense Policy

Section 1 National Security Strategy 042

Section 2 National Defense Policy and Military Strategy 046

Section 3 Defense Reform 2.0 053

Chapter 3 Safeguarding Peace by Establishing a Robust Defense Posture

Against Omnidirectional Security Threats

Section 1 Establishing a Robust Defense Posture 062

Section 2 Reinforcing Counter Capabilities Against Nuclear and other WMD Threats 073

Section 3 Establishing a Response System for Transnational and Nonmilitary Security Threats 080

Section 4 Establishing an Integrated Civilian–Government–Military–Police Defense Posture 096

Section 5 Education and Training Focused on Combat Missions and 101

Strengthening the Spiritual and Mental Force

Chapter 4 Building an Innovative Force by Promoting Strong Defense Reform

Section 1 Reorganizing the Elite Unit Structure Using Advanced Technology 120

Section 2 Reorganizing Defense Manpower Structure Focused on Operation 124

and Combat and Priming the Reserved Forces into an Elite Force

Section 3 Force Enhancement Based on Jointness 131

Section 4 Creation of a "Strong, Digital Military and Smart National Defense" 138

Based on the Fourth Industrial Revolution Technology

Chapter 5 Establishing a Fair, Transparent, and Efficient National Defense Operation System

Section 1 Innovation of an Efficient Defense Manpower Operation System 150

Section 2 Upholding Civilian Control of the Military and Open Defense Operation 158

Section 3 Ensuring a Fair and Transparent National Defense for the Enhancement of the 165

Benefit of the People

Section 4 Improving Transparency in Defense Acquisition Program and Securing 179

Competitiveness in the Defense Industry

Section 5 Securing the Appropriate Defense Budget and the Efficiency 188

of Budget Operation for Steadfast Defense

Chapter 6 Developing a Robust ROK–US Alliance that is Mutually Complementary

and Promoting Defense Exchanges and Cooperation

Section 1 Developing a Mutually Complementary and Robust ROK-US Alliance 202

Section 2 Expeditious Wartime Operational Control Transition 211

Based on a Robust ROK–US Alliance

Section 3 Promoting Substantiality and Expansion of Defense Exchanges and Cooperation 215

Section 4 Contributing to International Peacekeeping and Protecting Overseas Koreans 241

Chapter 7 Embedding an Inclusive Culture in the Military: With the People,

Trusted by the People

Section 1 Embedding a New Barracks Culture Trusted by the People 262

Section 2 Improving the Welfare and Working Environment for Servicemembers 269


-----

Section 3 Reorganizing the Military Medical System 279

Section 4 Reinforcing Human Rights Protection for Servicemembers 285

Section 5 Reinforcing Support for Discharged and Retiring Servicemembers, 292

and Privileges for War Veterans

Chapter 8 Military Support for the Settlement of Peace on the Korean Peninsula

Section 1 Inter-Korean Military Confidence Building and Arms Control 304

Section 2 Military Assurance for Inter-Korean Exchanges and Cooperation 312

and Resolution of the ROK POW Issue

Special Appendix

1. Significance and Results of the Comprehensive 19th Military Agreement 320

2. 70th Anniversary of the Korean War Project 327

3. Introduction of Alternative Service Program for Military Service Objectors 333

Based on Religious Beliefs, Etc.

4. Use of Mobile Phones for Servicemembers After Work 336

5. COVID-19 Response of the ROK Armed Forces 341

Appendix

1. Force Posture of Neighboring Countries 354

2. Comparing Defense Budgets Around the World 356

3. Annual Defense Budget 357

4. Force Posture of the Two Koreas 358

5. Comparing the Economic Indicators of the Two Koreas 359

6. UNSC Resolutions on Sanctions Against North Korea 360

7. Key Denuclearization Agreements Regarding the North Korean Nuclear Issue 361

8. Status and Assessment of North Korean Nuclear and Missile Development 362

9. Agreement on the Implementation of the Historic Panmunjom Declaration 367

in the Military Domain

10. Chronicle of Inter-Korean Military Relations 380

11. Chronicle on North Korea’s Infiltrations and Local Provocations against the ROK 392

12. Combined·Joint Exercises and Training 394

13. Joint Communiqué of the 51st ROK–US Security Consultative Meeting 395

14. Future ROK–US Alliance Defense Vision 401

15. Joint Communiqué of the 52nd ROK–US Security Consultative Meeting 403

16. Guiding Principles Following the Transition of Wartime Operational Control 410

17. Direct and Indirect Financial Support for the Stationing of USFK 412

18. Status of Defense Industry Cooperation Agreements with Foreign Countries 414

19. Defense Cooperation Agreements with Foreing Countries 415

20. International Disarmament and Non-Proliferation Agreements and Organizations 416

21. Status of the Overseas Deployment of ROK Armed Forces 419

22. Changes in Enlisted Servicemembers Salaries 420

23. Changes in Mandatory Military Service Period 421

24. National Defense Organizations 422

25. Modification of Laws and Regulations Under the Jurisdiction of the Ministry 424

of National Defense

26. Organization and Major Activities of the National Defense Committee 439

of the National Assembly


#### Appendix


-----

|N|orth|Ko|rean Situati|on and Military|Threa|ts|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|


##### Chapter
# 1

## Changes and Challenges in the Security Environment

Section 1 Global Security Environment
Section 2 Security Environment of Northeast Asia
Section 3 North Korean Situation and Military Threats


-----

-----

## 1 Global Security Environment

While the global spread of COVID-19 has emerged as a new threat to international

security as it causes political, economic, and social instability in many countries across

the world, security threats continue to arise locally due to traditional causes of conflict

such as territorial and religious disputes. Against this backdrop, extreme nationalism is

intensifying in the international community but at the same time efforts to cooperate on

jointly responding to various security threats are being strengthened.

1. COVID-19 and Increased Variability in the Security Environment


The COVID-19 outbreak, which began at the end of 2019 and has since spread

rapidly across the world, has caused an unprecedented complex security crisis

situation in the international community. In just nine months after the World Health

Organization (WHO) declared the outbreak as a pandemic[1)] in March 2020, more

than 61 million cases have been confirmed and over 1.4 million people have died

worldwide, causing the worst level of casualties since World War II. COVID-19 has

paralyzed social systems including health care systems, and has brought about an

international economic crisis that includes a breakdown in the global supply chain,

contraction in economic activities, and mass unemployment. The pandemic has also

sparked social conflicts around the world, including racial hate crimes and protests

by the economically vulnerable against government quarantine measures. As the

crisis that started in the health care sector escalates into political, economic, and

social crises, it poses a grave security threat to the international community.

The intensifying strategic competition between the US and China, amid global

spread of COVID-19, adds instability and uncertainty to the international security

environment. The US is seeking new partnerships and a variety of cooperation

opportunities by further strengthening cooperation with its existing allies and

friendly nations while holding China’s expansion of influence in check through its

Indo-Pacific Strategy. China, on the other hand, is striving to protect its core interests

and expand its influence by pushing forward with its Belt and Road Initiative.

Also, in the initial response stages for COVID-19, members of the international

community showed a tendency to prioritize their own country, choosing to close


**1)**
State of great epidemic
outbreaks around the
world.


-----

their borders rather than deal with the disease in close cooperation with regional

partners and international organizations. This tendency is becoming a factor that

weakens international solidarity and multilateral security cooperation against a

variety of security threats.

Meanwhile, transnational and non-military security threats such as cyber

threats, terrorism, and natural and man-made disasters continue to pose threats

to international security. In a situation where telework, telemedicine, and remote

education are becoming more common in various sectors of society and the

dependency on digital technologies is intensifying in an effort to prevent the spread

of COVID-19, cyber-attacks are on the rise in proportion to the development of

information and communication technologies (ICT). Despite the COVID-19

situation, international terrorism continues to cause unrest as seen by the

reorganization of ISIS[2)] and al-Qaeda and instigation of terrorism targeting the

western world. Meanwhile, hijacking sailors and other acts of piracy are drastically

increasing due to the prolonged COVID-19 pandemic and deepening economic

difficulties. As shown by the catastrophic Australian bushfires and the South African

super cyclone in 2019, along with the volcanic eruption in the Philippines and the

earthquake in Turkey in 2020, natural disasters and catastrophes continue to wreak

havoc around the world. Forecasting natural disasters is difficult and damages caused

by natural disasters are becoming greater and greater. Accordingly, with limitations

in relief and recovery efforts by the disaster-stricken country alone, more emphasis is

being placed on the need for international cooperation and support.

2. Ever-present Traditional Threats


Conflicts persist due to arms races and geopolitical factors among the powerful

nations, and so do security threats due to traditional causes of conflict such as

territory and religion in various regions around the world as well.

In the Asia-Pacific region, the US and China continue to carry out military

activities that have perceived intentions to keep the other side in check. In addition,

there’s a possibility that the strategic competition between the US and Russia over

issues such as arms control will intensify as seen by the scrapping of the INF[3)]

by the US The conflict over jurisdiction of the border area west of the Himalayas

between China and India is still ongoing with a bloody clash between the two nations

occurring in June 2020.

The European region faces a variety of internal and external challenges including


**2)**
Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria.

**3)**
Intermediate-range Nuclear
Forces Treaty.


-----

the UK’s withdrawal from the European Union (EU) and tensions between the US

and Europe over NATO’s defense cost burden-sharing issue. In addition, tension

between the EU and Russia continues as the EU extended its economic sanctions

against Russia for six months, which had been scheduled to end in late July 2020, in

relation to the annexation of the Crimean Peninsula by Russia.

In the Middle East, violent extremist factions like ISIS are weakening, but

the years-long civil war in Syria and Yemen is unlikely to end in the near term.

Meanwhile, Iran’s threat to block the Strait of Hormuz after the US announced its

withdrawal from the JCPOA[4)] in May 2018 and restored its sanctions against Iran

escalated tensions in the region, and the conflict between Israel and Palestine persists

as well. On the other hand, with an agreement to normalize ties between the United

Arab Emirates, Bahrain, and Israel in 2020, the situation in the Middle East is

expected to change.

Political and economic instability continues in Africa as well due to power

struggles between political forces, ethnic conflicts, and terrorism by violent

extremists caused by chronic issues such as low development. Attacks by extremist

Islamic militants are still occurring in countries in the Sahel region[5)] and in Somalia

and other East African nations, while pirate attacks in the waters of the Gulf of

Guinea in West Africa are rapidly increasing.

3. International Cooperation on Responding to Security Threats

As the world continues to experience the spread of COVID-19, the need for

cooperation and collaboration in the international community is increasing. Given

that transnational and non-military security threats such as infectious diseases,

climate change, cyber terror, and terrorism are not limited to individual countries

or certain regions, countries around the world are strengthening their international

cooperation efforts through solidarity and cooperation to overcome the common

crisis.

Through the 2020 extraordinary G20 summit on COVID-19 held in March

2020, the Special ASEAN Plus Three (APT) Summit on COVID-19 in April, a

WHO meeting in May, an APEC summit in November, and a G20 video summit

in November, the participating leaders vowed to work together with international

organizations in responding to COVID-19, and urged the international community

to take joint action. Cooperation in the international community is underway as well,

including the provision of disinfection and quarantine supplies to countries in need


**4)**
An agreement on Iran’s
nuclear issue signed
in July 2015 with the
permanent members of the
UN Security Council and
Germany (P5+1) as Joint
Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA).

**5)**
Refers to an area south of
the Sahara Desert and the
five neighboring nations
in that area: Niger, Mali,
Mauritania, Burkina Faso,
and Chad.


-----

of medical assistance and fundraising for the development of COVID-19 vaccines

and treatments.

In addition, to effectively respond to cyber threats, the international community

continues to cooperate through the Global Conference on Cyberspace (GCCS),

GGE **[6)], OEWG** **[7)], SDD** **[8)] Cyber Working Group, and ADMM-Plus** **[9)] Experts’**

Working Group on Cyber Security.

As for providing rescue and recovery support measures for large-scale disasters,

discussions on cooperation by utilizing multilateral security consultative bodies such

as the ARF[10)], RHCC[11)], and regional consultative bodies under the UN Office for the

Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) are in progress.


**6)**
Group of Governmental
Experts.

**7)**
Open-Ended Working
Group.


**8)**
Seoul Defense Dialogue.

**9)**
ASEAN Defense Ministers’
Meeting-Plus.


**10)**
ASEAN Regional Forum.

**11)**
Regional HADR
(Humanitarian Assistance
Disaster Relief)
Coordination Center.


-----

## 2 Security Environment of

#### Northeast Asia

Amid the deepening strategic competition between the US and China in Northeast

Asia following the COVID-19 pandemic, China and Russia are strengthening strategic

solidarity while countries including Japan are continuously strengthening military power

and expanding their influence. Such security environment coupled with COVID-19 and

the Korean Peninsula denuclearization variable is increasing the fluidity and uncertainty

of the regional security structure.

1. Regional Security Situation


While the strategic competition and conflict between the US and China are

expanding to the political, economic, and military areas, uncertainty in Northeast

Asia is also growing due to the dynamics between the US, China, Japan, and Russia.

In particular, tensions in the region are escalating further due to the global spread of

COVID-19 and military activities of the US and China in the South China Sea.

Under the policy "peace through strength", the US classified China and Russia as

"Revisionist Power" in its National Security Strategy (NSS) and National Defense

Strategy (NDS), and officially declared its intention to commit to a long-term,

strategic competition with them. And based on the Indo-Pacific Strategy, the US is

strengthening bilateral and multilateral cooperation with countries in the region. In

particular, the US is continuously expanding its investment in force modernization

and readiness posture enhancements to include the reinforcement of forces deployed

in the Asia-Pacific region, strengthening of conventional forces, modernization of

nuclear deterrence capabilities, and the bolstering of missile defense capabilities in

the US mainland by continuously increasing its defense budget.

During the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China in October

2017, China, as a road map to realize the Chinese dream, presented the goals

of modernizing socialism based on a moderately prosperous society (xiaokang

shehui)[12)] between 2020 and 2035 and a full-scale construction of a socialist

powerhouse by "fostering a strong world-class force" by 2050. It is expected to set

out a foreign policy to establish a new international order led by China based on the

"community of common destiny". In September 2020, China declared to its people


**12)**
"Xiaokang shehui"
is a stage of social
development in China
that is supposed to follow
the stage of "wenbao,"
meaning warmness and
fullness. While "wenbao"
is about meeting the
basic needs of citizens,
"xiaokang sheshui" refers
to a middle-class society in
which its members are able
to enjoy culture and leisure.


-----

and the world that the country overcame COVID-19, and is seeking to expand its

influence through active disinfection and quarantine support for the international

community while emphasizing the superiority of its system.

Japan is adhering to the principle of maintaining the "exclusively defense-oriented

policy"[13)] based on its pacifist Constitution. However, it is also seeking to shift to a

more proactive defense policy under the reasoning of "proactive pacifism based on

the principles of international cooperation"[14)] to provide safety for Japan and realize

peace, stability, and prosperity in the international community. In addition, Japan is

aiming to enhance its operational capabilities in space, cyber, and electromagnetics

through "multidimensional integrated defense"[15)] based on its "multidimensional

joint defense force" concept, reflecting the changes in the security environment

including North Korea̓s nuclear and missile development and China’s military

buildup.

Russia continues to strengthen its defense capabilities by modernizing its military

force and developing nuclear and space weapons while strengthening its strategic

cooperation with China within Northeast Asia. Meanwhile, disputes with the US

over the withdrawal from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty and the

New START (US–Russia Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty) are deepening.

2. Defense Policies and Military Trends of Neighboring Countries


**13)**
It is a passive defense
strategy in accordance
with the spirit of the Peace
Constitution. According
to this strategy, defense
forces are utilized only
when attacked by the other
party, and the use and
sustainment of defense
forces is limited to a
minimum within the scope
necessary for self-defense.

**14)**
Fundamental ideology of
national security written in
Japan’s National Security
Strategy, The idea is that
Japan should contribute to
securing peace, stability,
and prosperity of the
international community
more proactively than ever
in line with its national
power.

**15)**
Ability to carry out crossdomain operations by
enhancing the overall
capability through the
synergy of organically
integrating the capabilities
of all areas including new
areas such as space,
cyber, and electronic
warfare in addition to
existing areas such as
land, sea, and air (Source:
Japanese Defense White
Paper)


The US maintains its strategic and military superiority in Northeast Asia while

China, Japan, and Russia are vying to build up their military strength, mainly their

naval and air forces. [Chart 1-1] summarizes the military strength of the four major

powers that are surrounding the Korean Peninsula.


-----

[Chart 1-1] Military Strengths of the Four Major Powers Surrounding the Korean

Peninsula

Russia United States

Defense Budget: USD 48.2 bn Defense Budget: USD 738 bn
No. of Troops: Approx. 900,000 No. of Troops: Approx. 1,380,000
Submarines: 49 Submarines: 67
Aircraft Carrier: 1 Aircraft Carrier: 11
Fighters: 1,183 Fighters: 2,670

Military Strength Military Strength
Nuclear capability enhancement, Nuclear capability enhancement
development of stealth fighters and and modernization, development of
strategic missiles, modernization of long-distance strategic bombers,
conventional weapons strengthening of missile defense,

cyber warfare and space

China Japan

Defense Budget: USD 181 bn Defense Budget: USD 48.6 bn
No. of Troops: Approx. 2,035,000 No. of Troops: Approx. 247,000
Submarines: 59 Submarines: 21
Aircraft Carrier: 2 Surface Combatants: 51
Fighters: 2,187 Fighters: 338

Military Strength Military Strength
Acquisition of new strategic Procurement of more F-35s, new
missiles, stealth fighters, and warning aircraft, Aegis destroyers,
aircraft carriers; strengthening of and submarines; reinforcement of
cyber warfare and space forces space, cyber, and electronic warfare

forces

 Sources: The Military Balance 2020 (International Institute for Strategic Studies, February 2020) and the National

Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020.


**United States** In the 2017 National Security Strategy (NSS) and the

2018 National Defense Strategy (NDS), the US set its core

interests as protecting the homeland and the American people, promoting national

prosperity, preserving peace through strength, and expanding American influence,

and underscored the need to maintain its military superiority to support these efforts

through strength. Meanwhile, assessing China and Russia as nations in strategic

competition, the US is pursuing a long-term position of keeping these nations in

check in various areas including diplomacy and security.

In 2019, the US Department of Defense announced the "Indo-Pacific Strategy",

which embodies the NSS and NDS, presenting a free and open Indo-Pacific as

its vision. It also stressed that this vision can be realized through joint forces that

possess lethal capabilities and the solidarity among strong allies and partners. And to

achieve this, the US is exerting efforts to enhance its readiness posture and promote

partnerships and regional networks. To this end, the US continues to promote the

modernization of military forces and force enhancements, while seeking to improve


-----

the military capabilities of allies and friendly nations by enhancing interoperability

through combined drills in the region. The US is bolstering cooperation with

existing allies and partners, and seeking opportunities to cooperate with new partner

countries. It is building an expanded security network by boosting smaller-scale

multilateral cooperation, as seen in the ROK–US–Japan, US–Japan–Australia, and

US–Japan–Australia–India relationships.

On the military front, the US is establishing an optimized Joint Forces Support

System by developing the Joint Concept for Access and Maneuver in the Global

Commons (JAM-GC). It is also implementing the Dynamic Force Employment,

which increases the operational unpredictability and the strategic flexibility of

strategic assets. Furthermore, the US continues its efforts to systematize joint

operational concepts that reflect new operational requirements. This concept aims

to integrate the military capabilities of each armed service by further dispersing

the deployment of forces but connecting them with advanced battlefield networks,

and is being pursued in the direction of encompassing the Army’s MDO[16)], the Air

Force’s ACE[17)], the Navy’s DMO[18)], and the Marine Corp’s EABO[19)]. Also, it is

continuing to pursue a multilayered missile defense system and is modernizing its

nuclear capability triad consisting of Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs),

Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missiles (SLBMs), and strategic bombers. The US

has deployed advanced naval and air force assets in the Asia-Pacific region such as

stealth fighters including the F-22 and the F-35, the P-8 Poseidon maritime patrol

aircraft, Virginia-class nuclear submarines, unmanned underwater vehicles, and

strategic bombers.

In December 2019, President Trump signed into law with bipartisan support

from both the House of Representatives and the Senate the National Defense

Authorization Act (NDAA) for Fiscal Year 2020, which compiled the largest

defense budget ever. As such, the US has increased its defense budget every

year since 2016 and consolidated the foundation for its pursuit of "peace through

strength". The 2020 NDAA authorizes a USD 21 billion year-on-year increase in

the defense budget, which amounts to USD 738 billion and represents about 3.3%

of the US Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and the addition of 1,400 active-duty

personnel while comprehensively addressing contents related to the strengthening

of military modernization and readiness posture, threat responses, support for

allies and partners; and servicemember welfare issues. In particular, the NDAA

reemphasizes the threats from China and Russia and recommends policies focusing

on these threats while urging the materialization of the Indo-Pacific strategy in the

perspective of responding to China.


**16)**
Multi Domain Operations

**17)**
Agile Combat Employment

**18)**
Distributed Maritime
Operations


**19)**
Expeditionary Advanced
Base Operations


-----

The US Army reduced its end-strength from the current 487,500 to 480,000 and

approved and compiled the budget for purchasing 165 tactical and multipurpose

vehicles and M1 tanks, 48 AH-64E helicopters, 98 UH-60 helicopters, and 53

Paladin self-propelled artillery. The US Navy increased its end-strength by 5,100

from its current 335,400, and approved the force enhancement projects to procure

18 vessels including 2 Virginia-class submarines, 3 Arleigh Burke-class destroyers,

and 1 new Gerald R. Ford-class aircraft carrier. The US Air Force saw an addition

of 3,700 to its 329,100 end-strength and the budget for acquisition and performance

improvement of existing fighters such as the F-35 and F/A-18 was compiled as

planned. Force enhancements including the KC-46 aerial refueling tanker were also

approved.

In addition, with an aim to strengthen its nuclear capabilities, the NDAA

compiled the budget for ground-based strategic missiles, long-range cruise missiles,

Colombian-class submarines, and B-21 bombers while emphasizing research on

new technologies such as space-based ballistic-missile interception system and on

strengthening homeland defense capability.

Furthermore, following the 2019 proposal of limiting the reduction of USFK’s

troop level to below 22,000, the 2020 NDAA prescribed an obligation on the US

Secretary of Defense to verify that: (a) the reduction of the USFK troop level to

below 28,500 is in accordance with US security interests; (b) such reduction does

not impede the security of allies in the region; and (c) appropriate discussion were

carried out with allies including ROK and Japan. Meanwhile, ROK and the US are

evaluating the role of the USFK through the annual Security Consultative Meeting

(SCM) and are continuing to confirm the US commitment to defend the ROK.

The US is also continuing to strive to strengthen its security posture in space and

cyberspace, and through the NDAA has mandated the Department of Defense to

submit annual reports to Congress on cyber attacks and intrusions by Russia, Iran,

North Korea and China. As seen by the inclusion of a new provision establishing

a senior level position to coordinate and oversee the overall cyber policy of the

Department, the US is continuing to expand its cyber capability efforts. In addition,

the US is accelerating efforts to maintain a comparative advantage in the space

domain, and the creation of the Space Force as the sixth US military service force[20)]

is a result of such effort.

Meanwhile, as changes in the US security policy are expected with the inauguration

of the Biden administration in January 2021, close cooperation between ROK and

US defense authorities is required to manage all alliance issues in a direction that

strengthens the combined defense posture.


**20)**
Army, Navy, Air Force,
Marine Corps, Coast
Guard, and Space Force


-----

**China** China, with the goal of building a strong world-class military, is

adjusting its military system and organization and reforming its

defense policies and institutions for the modernization and efficiency of the

military. Since President Xi Jinping’s declaration of reducing 300,000 troops in

2015, China has completed its military reform including the establishment of the

combined operational command organization, transition to six military types

(Ground Force, Navy, Air Force, Rocket Force, Strategic Support Force, and Joint

Logistics Command), and reorganization from seven military regions to five theater

commands, and it is spurring defense policy and institution reform such as the

improvement of the joint operations command system in 2019.

The People’s Liberation Army Ground Force (PLAGF) has accelerated its transition

from "regional defense to full-scale operation" to meet the strategic requirements and

has enhanced its operational capabilities by simplifying the operational command

system from a group army–division–regiment–battalion system to a group army–

brigade–battalion system.

The PLA Navy (PLAN) is improving its strategic deterrence, counterattack, and

maritime maneuvering and joint operational capabilities for the construction of a

modernized navy capable of "offshore defense and defense of national interests in

the open sea". In particular, while focusing on developing modernized weapons and

equipment such as aircraft carriers and new nuclear submarines in order to reinforce

its open sea capabilities, the PLAN established the PLAN Marine Corps (PLANMC)

to strengthen its amphibious operations execution capabilities.

The PLA Air Force (PLAAF) is improving its early warning, air strike, and air

defense capabilities in order to achieve the strategic goal of "air-space integration and

attack-defense combination".[21)] Also, it is continuing to pursue the field deployment

of platforms such as airborne early warning and control aircraft and aerial refueling

tankers to enhance its long-range operational capabilities and carry out attack

missions.

With the goal of "possessing both nuclear and conventional missile capabilities

and providing deterrence for the entire region", the PLA Rocket Force (PLARF) is

striving to enhance its nuclear deterrence, second-strike, and intermediate and long
range precision strike capabilities. It is also pursuing the field deployment of next
generation intermediate and long-range ballistic missiles and new ICBMs while

focusing on developing new weapons systems as seen through the test firing of a

new medium-range ballistic missile capable of carrying a Hypersonic Glide Vehicle

(HGV) warhead in response to the US missile defense system.

The PLA Strategic Support Force (SSF) is responsible for carrying out aviation,


**21)**
The goal of informatization
and integration of Air and
Space Forces and building
a powerful and modern
strategic Air Force with
both attack and defense
capabilities


-----

space, cyber operations, information collection, electronic, and psychological

warfare operations. With the goal of defense science and technology innovation,

it is strengthening the in-depth development of civil-military integration by

absorbing superior private sector technologies in various fields where the military

and the private sector converge such as artificial intelligence (AI), unmanned aerial

vehicles and unmanned system, information technology, and network safety, as

well as strengthening defense science capabilities and acquiring advanced overseas

technologies.

The PLA Joint Logistics Support Force (PLAJLSF) was formed to establish a

centralized command related logistics support and a military theatre support system.

It supports strategic maneuver of PLA units while overseeing supply and logistics

support operations at the Wuhan Joint Logistics Support Base. Meanwhile, five

support centers located in five theater regions are in charge of service support for

responsible operational units.

In order to strengthen its defense mobilization capability, China is striving to build

a reserve capacity as a paramilitary organization capable of executing missions

during emergency situations and wartime by focusing on improving the militia

structure and expanding the mobilization capacity. In particular, it is assessed that

the People’s Armed Forces Maritime Militia (PFAMM) possesses the capacity and

scale to carry out military operations such as reconnaissance, camouflage, feint

operations, and logistics support.

Recently, China has been actively engaged in military activities to expand its

influence in the region and respond to the US’s freedom of navigation operations in

the South China Sea and enhanced cooperation with Taiwan. Amid the COVID-19

pandemic, China conducted patrol activities near the South China Sea and offshore

drills in the Pacific Ocean as well as joint drills with major partners such as Pakistan,

Thailand, and Cambodia. Moreover, after elevating its partnership with Russia in

2019 to a "new era full-scale strategic partnership", the gradual increase in joint

military drills and expansion of cooperation in strategic hi-tech fields are expected.


**22)**
They include the new
enactment of the
International Peace
Support Act and the
revision of the SelfDefense Force Act, Ship
Inspection Operations
Act, International Peace
Cooperation Act,
Armed Attack Situations
Response Act, and Act
Concerning Measures to
Ensure Peace and Security
in Situations That Will Have
an Important Influence
on Japan’s Peace and
Security.


**Japan** In July 2014, under the mantra of "proactive pacifism", Japan changed

its constitutional interpretation of exercising the right to collective

self-defense, and has been since expanding the role of the Japan Self-Defense

Forces (JSDF). By revising the "Guidelines for US–Japan Defense Cooperation" in

April 2015, and amending national security laws and regulations[22)] in September

of the same year, Japan created the legal basis to use force by invoking the right

of collective self-defense against existential threats that may not necessarily be


-----

direct attacks to Japan. Should Japan deem a situation to significantly affect Japan,

Japan may now provide rear-area support including refueling and munitions supply

not only to the US forces, but also to other nations’ forces without geographical

limitations. The range of JSDF activities and types of missions have been extended to

include rescue operations for overseas Japanese nationals, protection of US and other

foreign troops in action with the JSDF, and security assistance and escort missions

in the context of peacekeeping operations (PKO). In addition, Japan is improving

its operational capabilities in space, cyber, and electromagnetic fields by building

a "multidimensional integrated defense capability", reflecting the rapidly changing

security environment including North Korea’s nuclear and missile development

and China’s military buildup. To that end, Japan established the "multidimensional

integrated defense force establishment committee" headed by the Minister of

Defense in March 2019, and is seeking to improve its defense capabilities.

The Japan Ground Self-Defense Force (JGSDF) is strengthening its high-level

mobility and surveillance capabilities to promptly respond to various contingencies

in Japan’s territorial islands. In April 2018, the JGSDF established the Ground

Central Command[23)] for the rapid and flexible employment of its divisions and

brigades; deployed coastal observation units, surface-to-ship and surface-to-air

missile units near Senkaku/Diaoyudao Islands; and launched the Amphibious

Rapid Deployment Brigade tasked with amphibious operations. A cyber unit and

an electromagnetic field operations unit were newly organized under the Ground

Central Command to strengthen operational capabilities in new areas.

The Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force (JMSDF) has been upgrading the response

capabilities of its frigate fleet and carrying out force buildup[24)] for its submarine and

fixed-wing patrol aircraft units in order to defend its coastal waters and secure sea

lanes.

The Japan Air Self-Defense Force (JASDF) is maintaining air alert and control

units for full-time surveillance of the airspace around Japan. In April 2014, the

JASDF founded the E-2C equipped Airborne Early Warning Group in Okinawa and

increased the number of F-15 fighter aircraft units in January 2016 to strengthen the

defense posture in the southwestern region. Japan is pursuing the expansion of its air

defense capabilities and operational radius through the introduction of a total of 147

F-35s which include the existing 42 F-35s and an addition of 42 F-35Bs capable of

short-distance takeoff and vertical landing, and by newly establishing air refueling

and transport units and unmanned aerial vehicle units.

In order to respond in space, cyber, and electromagnetic fields, Japan is

establishing an SSA[25)] system to secure stable use of space and improve capabilities


**23)**
It is an operations
command-level unit in
charge of the rapid and
flexible unified operation of
the JGSDF’s units across
the country. It is equivalent
to the ROK Army’s Ground
Operations Command.

**24)**
In its force buildup efforts,
by 2023, the JMSDF will
increase the number of
frigates from 47 to 54,
that of Aegis destroyers
from 6 to 8, that of patrol
helicopters from 76 to 80,
and that of submarines
from 16 to 22.

**25)**
Space Situational
Awareness.


-----

such as information collection, communication, and positioning. In 2020, Japan

newly formed the Space Operations Squadron under the JASDF and is looking

to expanding the size of this unit and commencing actual operations. For the

strengthening of capabilities in the cyber domain, Japan has reinforced the personnel

in the cyber defense forces and newly organized a cyber defense unit in the JGSDF.

It is also promoting the system connectivity among each JSDF service, collection of

radio wave information, and maintenance of measurement devices.


**Russia** Russia has been working on defense reforms including structure and

organization reform of the Russian Armed Forces, salary increases

for servicemembers, and the improvement of military housing. Despite worsening

economic conditions due to falling international oil prices and prolonged economic

sanctions by the West, the Russian government is continuing to implement the

national rearmament plan and is carrying out the modernization of is weapons

systems which include the development of hypersonic weapons.

The Russian Ground Forces, with the goal of military modernization, is

establishing new units, modernizing its equipment, and reinforcing its organization

with a focus on reinforcing the mobility and independent operation capabilities

centered on mechanized infantry units and tank units. In 2019, the Ground

Forces created 11 new units including 1 tank unit and is continuing to upgrade

the performance of tanks, armored vehicles and artillery, and field deploy new

equipment while partially implementing a recruitment system to replenish troops.

Externally, Russia is accumulating combat experience by mainly dispatching special

mission forces to battle zones in Syria. Meanwhile, national-level strategic command

staff training and combined training with neighboring countries such as China are

being carried out to strengthen combined and joint operational capabilities.

In 2018, the Russian Navy built three Borei-class strategic nuclear submarines

and is continuing to strengthen its nuclear deterrence capabilities, while continuing

to build new vessels including amphibious assault ships and aircraft carriers. The

Navy is developing advanced asymmetric strategic weapons such as the hypersonic

cruise missile "Zircon", "Kalibre-M", a supersonic cruise missile capable of carrying

nuclear warheads, and the nuclear-powered underwater drone "Poseidon". Externally,

Russia is improving its force projection capability through long-distance open sea

training by the North Sea Fleet and Pacific Fleet as well as regular combined training

with China and India.

The Russian Aerospace Forces is also making efforts for equipment modernization

and advanced aircraft development. For fighters, Russia is developing SU-57 and


-----

MIG-41 with stealth capabilities. In particular, the SU-57 was delivered to the

Aerospace Forces for the first time in 2019 for testing. For bombers, PAK-DA with

stealth capabilities is being developed while upgrades are being carried out for

electronic equipment and engines of the TU-22M long-range bomber and the TU
160strategic bomber. Lastly for the air defense weapon system, Russia began to

introduce S-350s, a low-altitude air defense weapon system, in March 2020, and it is

estimated that the S-500, a high-altitude air defense weapon system, will also be field

deployed in the near future.

The Strategic Missile Forces is continuing to retire old missiles and increasing the

rate of modernization by replacing the old missiles with new missiles such as the

RS-24 (Yars) and RS-28 (Sarmat). Since the introduction of RS-24 in 2011, older

missiles such as the RS-12M (Topol-M) are in the process of being replaced by RS
24s, and the testing of the RS-28 is being carried out with the aim of introduction in

2021. In particular, the RS-28 missile is expected to be equipped with avant-garde, a

hypersonic glide airframe.


-----

## 3 North Korean Situation and

#### Military Threats

Since State Affairs Commission Chairman Kim Jong-un took office in 2011, North

Korea has declared the completion of "state nuclear capability" in 2017 by focusing its

capabilities on advancing nuclear and missile capabilities, advocating the "Byungjin"

policy of simultaneously developing its economy and nuclear weapons. In 2018,

North Korea introduced the "line to focus all efforts on economic construction" as

a new strategic line and pursued active summit diplomacy, advocating the goal of

denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. However, the deadlock in denuclearization

negotiations has been prolonged since the breakdown of the US–North Korea Hanoi

Summit in 2019. While in 2020, even in a situation of deepening economic difficulties due

to COVID-19 and sanctions, North Korea is seeking to strengthen its operational posture

through the enhancement of its nuclear and missile capabilities and reinforcement of

selective conventional forces on the pretext of strengthening its self-defensive military

power.

1. North Korean Situation


**Internal Situation** Since State Affairs Commission Chairman Kim Jong-un

took office in 2011, North Korea has focused on advancing

its nuclear and missile capabilities. It declared the completion of "state nuclear

capability" in 2017 after launching various types of ballistic missiles and conducting

its sixth nuclear test. In the 2018 New Year’s address, Pyongyang emphasized the

legitimacy of its "Byungjin" policy of simultaneously developing its economy and

nuclear capabilities and highlighted the mass production and field deployment of

nuclear warheads and ballistic rockets.

At the 3rd Plenary Meeting of the 7th Central Committee of the Workers’ Party of

Korea on April 20, 2018, North Korea declared the success of the "Byungjin" policy

and officialized the "line to focus all efforts on constructing a socialist economy"

as its new strategic line. In the 2019 New Year’s message, it emphasized economic

construction through "self-reliance" and declared that it would not produce, test,

use, or proliferate nuclear weapons while expressing its resolve for complete

denuclearization.

Chairman Kim emphasized the "economic construction through the reinforcement


-----

of an independent economic foundation" at the 4th Plenary Meeting of the 7th

Central Committee on April 10, 2019, and once again stressed that economic

sanctions should be overcome through "self-reliance" during a keynote address at

the Supreme People’s Assembly for the first time since taking office on April 12.

Accordingly, in order to achieve progress on "the five-year strategy for national

economic development", the mobilization of the military was expanded to major

construction projects such as Samjiyeon District, Yangdok Hot Spring Cultural

Recreation Center, Wonsan-Galma Tourist Zone, and Eurangcheon Power Plant

under the slogan "Let the People’s Army take charge of both fatherland security and

socialist construction".

Meanwhile, as the deadlock was prolonged after the breakdown of the US–North

Korea denuclearization negotiations in 2019, North Korea presented a "frontal

breakthrough" focusing on "economic construction" while maintaining its "nuclear

deterrence mobilization posture" as a new strategic line through the 5th Plenary

Meeting of the 7th Central Committee in late December.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, Pyongyang switched to the national

emergency quarantine system at the end of January to control its border and

movement of residents, making efforts to block the inflow and spread of COVID-19.

To this end, a series of policy meetings were convened to realign and refine

quarantine measures and regulations to block infectious diseases while emphasizing

the implementation of a strict quarantine system. In July in particular, Pyongyang

held an emergency meeting of the General Political Bureau, ordering a complete

shutdown of Kaesong City. It has also strengthened the national emergency

quarantine system, fearing possible inflow of COVID-19 by North Korean defectors

who re-entered the country.

The prolonged sanctions and increased economic hardship due to the pandemic

and massive damage caused by torrential rains and typhoons in the summer have

intensified the residents’ difficulties, making it difficult for the North Korean

government to achieve the national goals set at the beginning of the year. As a

result, Pyongyang made efforts to complete the disaster recovery project earlier

by mobilizing the members of Workers’ Party and military units on a large scale,

emphasizing the unity of the "party-military-people".

Chairman Kim emphasized "the great people of the country" in his speech at

a military parade to celebrate the 75th anniversary of establishment of the Party

and expressed numerous times his gratitude to the residents who had overcome

COVID-19 and the disasters.

North Korea is expected to continue emphasizing self-reliance to overcome the


-----

economic hardships aggravated by the prolonged sanctions and the pandemic and

seek internal solidarity by strengthening its ideological armament and internal

control. In particular, it is estimated that North Korea will continue to advance its

nuclear and missile capabilities in the name of strengthening its self-reliant defense

capabilities and exert all efforts in achieving economic results by mobilizing all

available manpower and resources with the goal of substantially improving the lives

of the residents by 2022 which will be the 110th anniversary of Kim Il-sung’s birth.


**Inter-Korean Policy** The conditions for inter-Korean dialogue to resume were

prepared as North Korea sent a delegation to the 2018

Winter Olympics in response to the ROK government’s efforts to establish peace on

the Korean Peninsula including the Berlin Initiative in July 2017. Based on this, an

inter-Korean summit was held on April 27 for the first time in 11 years since 2007,

leading to the adoption of the Panmunjeom Declaration. Another summit was held in

Pyongyang from September 18 to 20, where the two Koreas agreed on the September

Pyongyang Joint Declaration ("Pyongyang Joint Declaration") and the Agreement on

the Implementation of the Historic Panmunjom Declaration in the Military Domain

("September 19th Military Agreement").

In 2019, North Korea defined the Panmunjom Declaration, the Pyongyang Joint

Declaration, and the September 19th Military Agreement as a de facto declaration of

non-aggression in its New Year’s Address, and raised expectations for inter-Korean

reconciliation and cooperation by showing its willingness to reopen the Kaesong

Industrial Complex and resume tours to Mt. Kumgang.

After the breakdown of the US-North Korea Hanoi Summit in February 2019,

however, North Korea has become passive towards inter-Korean dialogue and

exchanges, and Chairman Kim on April 12 urged the South Korean government

to promote an independent policy toward the North in his keynote address at the

Supreme People’s Assembly.

Since then, while arguing that the ROK’s force enhancement activities such as the

introduction of F-35s and ROK–US combined exercises are in violation of the inter
Korean military agreement and that they are causes of exacerbation in inter-Korean

relations, North Korea is generally complying with the Comprehensive Military

Agreement(CMA), including the implementation of measures to prevent accidental

clashes on land and at sea.

While the North Korea did not respond to the ROK’s proposal for inter-Korean

dialogue and cooperation, Chairman Kim on October 23 visited Mt. Kumgang

and ordered the demolition of facilities of ROK companies. In November, coastal


-----

artillery firing drill was conducted during his visit to Changlin Island located north

of the Northern Limit Line (NLL).

Although inter-Korean relations were not mentioned in the results of the 5th

Plenary Meeting of the 7th Central Committee announced on January 1, 2020,

a letter from Chairman Kim related to COVID-19 was delivered to the ROK

government in March in which a hint of willingness to improve inter-Korean

relations was included.

On May 3, however, North Korea carried out a provocation by firing 14.5mm

anti-aircraft machine gun rounds from a guard post in the Demilitarized Zone

(DMZ) in Cheorwon-gun, Gangwon-do at a ROK guard post (GP).[26)] In June, North

Korea demolished the Inter-Korea Liaison Office after cutting all inter-Korean

communication lines on the pretext that ROK civic groups scattered propaganda

leaflets into North Korea. Following these actions, North Korea announced a

military action plan involving military measures against the ROK, but the plan did

not lead to actual implementation as the announcement was suspended.

In September, North Korea shot and killed a ROK citizen who crossed into North

Korean waters in the West Sea and the ROK responded sternly by condemning

the North’s atrocity and demanding punishment of those responsible and a joint

investigation. In response, Chairman Kim extended his regrets and apologies in a

message while expressing a willingness on improving inter-Korean relations during his

speech at a military parade marking the 75th anniversary of the founding of the Party.


**Foreign Policy** On account of responding to the tough sanctions imposed

by the international community, North Korea, under the

diplomatic principle of "independence, peace, and goodwill", continues to make

efforts to improve its surrounding environment by strengthening diplomatic ties with

socialist countries and through summit diplomacy with countries surrounding the

Korean Peninsula.

Since official dialogue with the US were cut off in 2012 due to the abrogation of

the US–DPRK Leap Day Deal[27)], Pyongyang has focused on advancing its nuclear

capabilities despite the US government’s constant demand for denuclearization.

In particular, North Korea in August 2017 unveiled the "Guam strike plan" and in

November, launched a Hwasong-15 ICBM-class ballistic missile as part of a program

to develop long-range missiles capable of reaching the US mainland.

However, in March 2018, Pyongyang, after expressing its willingness for

"denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula" and dialogue with the US, declared a

"moratorium on nuclear and IBCM development" on April 20 and carried out an


**26)**
Since the signing of the
September 19th Military
Agreement, the agreement
was violated by North
Korea twice after the
coastal artillery firing drill on
Changlin Island (November
23, 2019) and the firing of
gun shots at a ROK GP
in the Central Front
(May 3, 2020).

**27)**
On February 29, 2012,
North Korea agreed to
suspend long-range missile
development and uranium
enrichment in exchange for
assistance from the US.


-----

event on May 24 to dismantle the Punggye-ri nuclear test site to which international

journalists were invited. On June 12, 2018, the first-ever US–North Korea Summit

took place in Singapore, and North Korea agreed to build new relations with the US,

denuclearize the Korean Peninsula, and repatriate the remains of US soldiers killed in

the Korean War. The remains of 55 soldiers were repatriated on July 27.

However, the relationship between the US has been stalled since the breakdown

of the US–North Korea Hanoi Summit in February 2019. The two countries agreed

to resume working-level negotiations at a sudden meeting between the leaders of

the ROK, North Korea and the US in June, but the working-level negotiations in

Stockholm in October ended without significant results.

At the conclusion of the 5th Plenary Meeting of the 7th Central Committee

announced in early 2020, Pyongyang declared that it would continue to develop

strategic weapons until the hostile US policy is withdrawn and a peace regime on

the Korean Peninsula is established. In addition, in commemoration of the second

anniversary of the Singapore summit, North Korea again emphasized its "nuclear

war deterrence," insisting that it would not resume negotiations until corresponding

compensations from the US are made, thus prolonging the deadlock in US–North

Korea dialogue.

Meanwhile, North Korea unveiled a new type of ICBM and SLBM during a military

parade marking the Party̕s 75th anniversary in October 2020. "War deterrence"

was also declared, emphasizing that it would not be used "preemptively" without

mentioning the US thus leaving room for future dialogue with the US.

North Korea’s relationship with Japan has seen no concrete progress despite the

Stockholm Agreement[28)] signed in May 2014. Prime Minister Abe expressed his

willingness to hold an "unconditional summit" with North Korean leader Kim Jong
un after the US–North Korea summit in 2019. In September, North Korea-Japan

friendly delegates from Yamanashi Prefecture visited North Korea. Since taking

office in September 2020, Yoshihide Suga has also expressed his enthusiasm to

meet with Leader Kim without conditions to resolve the abduction issue. However,

talks between North Korea and Japan have yet to begin in earnest, with North Korea

demanding for settlement of unresolved issues from the Japanese colonial era and for

a shift from Japan’s pressure policy against North Korea.

North Korea’s relations with China have fluctuated due to North Korea’s nuclear

development program. Bilateral relations were strained after North Korea’s third

nuclear test in 2013, but through five summit meetings from 2018 to 2019, the

traditional friendship with China was restored. The North Korea-China summit

was held before and after the US–North Korea dialogue thereby strengthening their


**28)**
During the director-level
talks between the two
countries’ foreign ministries
held in Stockholm,
Sweden, on May 26, 2014,
North Korea agreed to
launch a new inquiry into
Japanese abductees and
other Japanese nationals
who are residing in its
territory in exchange for the
partial easing of sanctions
imposed by Japan.


-----

strategic cooperative relations. After President Xi Jinping’s visit to Pyongyang

for the first time in June 2019 since his inauguration, the two countries agreed to

strengthen their exchanges and cooperation in areas such as economy and personnel.

Meanwhile, North Korea continues to make efforts to maintain its traditional

friendship with China despite restrictions on normal trade and human exchanges

following the blockade of the border between North Korea and China in late January

due to COVID-19 in 2020.

Since the launching of the North Korea-Russia Economic Cooperation Committee

in 2014, North Korea has maintained an amicable relationship with Russia after the

declaration of the "Year of Friendship" and the adoption of a joint resolution in March

2015. Chairman Kim made his visit to Vladivostok to hold a summit with President

Putin for the first time on April 25, 2019. In November, Choi Sun-hee, First Vice

Minister of Foreign Affairs of North Korea, visited Russia and held the first strategic

dialogue with Igor Morgulov, Russia’s Deputy Foreign Minister. In a situation where

personnel exchanges were restricted due to COVID-19 in 2020, Chairman Kim sent

a congratulatory message to President Putin on the 75th anniversary of Russia’s

victory, expressing his willingness on developing friendly relations between North

Korea and Russia.

2. North Korea’s Military Strategy and Military Command Structure


**Military Strategy** In 1962, in accordance with the principle of "self-defense in

national defense"[29)] embedded in the Juche ideology, North

Korea adopted four military guidelines and has since continued to bolster its military

strength. Chairman Kim, upon succeeding his father as the leader of North Korea,

proposed the "four core strategic lines" as a new strategic line to build the military of

the people into a powerful military. The four core strategic lines refer to (a) creating

a politically and ideologically stronger Korean People’s Army (KPA), (b) creating a

morally stronger KPA, (c) developing the KPA into an army of sophisticated tactics,

and (d) making the various branches of KPA stronger.

While maintaining a military strategy centered on guerrilla warfare, hybrid

warfare, and blitzkrieg, North Korea is also exploring a variety of strategies and

tactics. It has also selectively enhanced the performance of its conventional weapons

and built up asymmetrical capabilities such as nuclear weapons, WMD[30)], missiles,

long-range artilleries, submarines, Special Operation Forces, and cyber units. Since

May 2019, North Korea has been test-firing new short-range ballistic missiles based


**29)**
Article 60 of North Korea’s
Constitution provides, “The
State shall implement the
line of self-reliant defense,
the import of which is to
arm the entire people,
fortify the country, train the
army into a cadre army and
modernize the army on the
basis of equipping the army
and the people politically
and ideologically.”

**30)**
Weapons of Mass
Destruction


-----

on solid fuel; in particular, it is operating a 6,800-strong unit of cyber-warfare

specialists and is working to enhance cyber capabilities by continuing R&D on latest

technologies.

During contingencies, North Korean forces is highly likely to resort to guerilla

attacks that mainly employ asymmetric capabilities to shape favorable conditions and

end the war as soon as possible. In July 2019, Chairman Kim mentioned the "Party’s

military strategic plan" during his visit to the construction site of a new submarine

and once again emphasized the "Artillery Force Reinforcement Guideline" proposed

at the 4th Artillery Competition in 2020. Therefore, there is a possibility of a shift

in its military strategy considering external strategic environmental changes and

internal conditions such as economic difficulties.


**Military Command Structure** Chairman Kim wields full command and

control over the North Korean military as he

concurrently serves as the Supreme Commander of the KPA and the Chairman of

the party’s Central Military Commission.

The State Affairs Commission, as the supreme policy decision-making agency in

North Korea, carries out decision-making activities on key policies such as the national

defense force build up project. The Supreme Commander of the KPA has under his

command the General Political Bureau, the General Staff Department, the Ministry

of National Defense, the Military Security Bureau, and the Guard Command. The

General Political Bureau supervises party organs within the military and is responsible

for matters related to political ideology. The General Staff Department has the

command authority over military operations, and operates five military types-KPA

Ground Force, KPA Special Operation Force, KPA Naval Force, KPA Air and Anti
Air Force, and KPA Strategic Force. The Ministry of National Defense[31)] represents

the North Korean military externally and exercises military administrative authority

including military diplomacy, logistics, and finance. The Military Security Bureau is

in charge of investigation, pretrial, and execution of all military criminal activities in

the military, while the Guard Command is responsible for suppressing dissident coups

against the regime, protecting the personal safety of the supreme leader and his family

members, and guarding and managing the residence.

The Central Military Commission, pursuant to the Charter of the Korean Workers

Party, deliberates and decides upon measures necessary for implementing the party’s

military policy and guidelines, and provides guidance in overall defense affairs at the

party level. The military command structure of North Korea is visualized in [Chart

1-2] below.


**31)**
The Ministry of People’s
Armed Forces has been
renamed the Ministry
of National Defense in
October 2020.


-----

[Chart 1-2] North Korea’s Military Command Structure

Supreme Commander

Central Military Military Security

Guard Command

Commission Bureau

General Political General Staff Ministry of National

Bureau Department Defense

xxx xxx xxx xx xx xx

91 Capital Anti-Aircraft Cavalry

Regular Armored Artillery Special Naval Air and Anti-Air Strategic

Defense Artillery and Infantry

Corps (10) Division Division Operation Force Force Force Force

Corps Corps Division (6)

11th Corps, etc.

Ground Force


-  XXX: Corps XX: Division


3. Military Capabilities


**Ground Force** The Ground Force is comprised of 10 regular forward- and

rear-deployed corps, 91 Capital Defense Corps, Anti-Aircraft

Artillery Corps, 1 armored division, 6 mechanized divisions[32)], and 1 artillery

division under the control of the General Staff Department. The road construction

corps and the specialized construction units such as military engineering corps

are under the control of the Ministry of National Defense and the General Political

Bureau, respectively.

North Korea maintains a readiness posture capable of carrying out a surprise

attack at any given time by positioning 70% of its Ground Force south of the

Pyongyang-Wonsan line. The forward-deployed 170 mm self-propelled guns and

240 mm Multiple Rocket Launchers (MRLs), for instance, provide North Korea with

the capability for a large-scale and concentrated surprise fire targeted at the Greater

Seoul Metropolitan Area. It is focusing on building up its military force by operating

various MRLs that are powerful enough to strike the entire Korean Peninsula, such

as the recently developed 300 mm MRLs[33)] and super-large MRLs with extended
range munitions and precision-guided munitions. The armored and mechanized

units have more than 6,900 tanks and armored vehicles, and it has recently developed

new tanks with improved maneuverability and survivability as well as an armored

vehicle with various anti-tank guided missiles and mobile artillery, replacing old

forces. Key assets of the North Korean Ground Force and its new assets identified at

the military parade marking the 75th anniversary of establishment of its ruling party

are as shown in [Chart 1-3] and [Chart 1-4] below.


**32)**
Two mechanized corps
were renamed to divisions;
organized a total of six
mechanized divisions
including the existing four.

**33)**
North Korea has been
conducting several test
launches since 2012, and
the assets were unveiled
at the military parade
on the 70th anniversary
of establishment of the
Workers’ Party of Korea in
October 2015. Meanwhile,
the improved versions of
the assets were unveiled
during the 75th anniversary
in October 2020.


-----

[Chart 1-3] Key Assets of the North Korean Ground Force


Tanks

Approx. 4,300


Armored Vehicles

Approx. 2,600


Cannons

Approx. 8,800


MRLs

Approx. 5,500



[Chart 1-4] New Key Assets Identified at the Military Parade Marking the 75th

Anniversary of Its Ruling Party (October 10, 2020)


Anti-Tank Missile-Mounted
Tanks

Armored Vehicles


Armored Vehicle-Type

Self-Propelled Artillery
Mobile Artillery


**Special Operation Force** The KPA classified Special Operation Force[34)] as

a separate military unit to strengthen the status of

special warfare units. Special warfare units are organized in various ways by unit and

echelon, such as 11th Corps[35)], special operation battalions, light infantry divisions

and brigades, sniper brigades of the front corps, sniper brigades of the Naval Force

and the Air and Anti-Air Force, and light infantry brigades of the front divisions. The

troop level is estimated to be around 200,000. Special warfare units are expected to

use wartime tunnels or various infiltration means such as submarines, air-cushion

vehicles (ACVs), AN-2 aircrafts, and helicopters to infiltrate the forward and rear

areas and conduct hybrid operations in the form of striking major units and facilities,

assassinating key figures, and disturbing the rear area. They are also carrying out

strike training by establishing mockups of our strategic facilities as well as air, sea,

and ground infiltration training while continually reinforcing its forces as seen

through the modernization of armaments. Major activities of the North Korean

Special Operation Force are as shown in [Chart 1-5].


**34)**
11th Corps, marine and
air sniper brigades, and
special operation battalions
are classified as Special
Operation Force; separate
command is not organized
/ Commander unidentified

**35)**
Strategic special warfare
units, also known as
Storm Corps


-----

[Chart 1-5] Major Activities of the North Korean Special Operation Force


Special Operation Force Island Occupation

Military Parade
Flag Raising Training


Strike Drill for Allies’

Strategic Facilities


**Naval Force** The Naval Force is composed of 2 fleet commands, one for the

East Sea and one for the West Sea, 13 naval squadrons, and 2

maritime sniper brigades under the Naval Command.

With 60% of its forces positioned south of the Pyongyang-Wonsan line, the North

Korean Naval Force possesses the capability to carry out a surprise attack anytime.

However, its capacity for deep-sea operations is limited because its forces consist

mainly of small, high-speed vessels.

Surface forces are mostly composed of around 490 small, high-speed vessels such

as guided missile boats, torpedo boats, small patrol craft, and fire support patrol

craft. Their mission is to support the advancement of the Ground Force in connection

with ground operations while also carrying out coastal defense operations. More

recently, the Naval Force has built and field deployed new medium-to large-sized

vessels with some of them equipped with anti-ship missiles[36)] to enhance its long
range strike capability.

Underwater forces consist of some 70 Romeo-class and midget-type submarines.

They are designed to disrupt sea lanes, lay mines, attack surface vessels, and assist

special warfare units’ infiltrations. The North Korean Naval Force is continuing to

build up its forces by constructing new submarines capable of launching Submarine
Launched Ballistic Missiles (SLBMs)[37)].

The amphibious forces are composed of more than 250 vessels including ACVs

and high-speed landing crafts with most of them being small-sized vessels. The

amphibious force is expected to infiltrate special warfare forces into our rear area using

these vessels to strike major military and strategic facilities and secure key landing

shores. The coastal defense forces deploy a number of coastal artillery and surface-to
ship missiles along the east and west coasts to conduct missions such as attacking ships

approaching from the sea and defending against landing attempts. Recently, North

Korea has been improving its coastal defense capabilities by carrying out performance

upgrades of surface-to-ship missiles[38)] and extending their range. Key vessels and

surface-to-ship missiles of the North Korean Naval Force are as shown in [Chart 1-6].


**36)**
North Korea unveiled the
missile test in the waters
off Wonsan on February
6, 2015, with an estimated
range of about 100km.

**37)**
Submarine-Launched
Ballistic Missile


**38)**
New surface-to-ship
missiles were unveiled
during the 70th anniversary
of establishment of the
regime (September
9, 2018). while at the
75th anniversary of
establishment of its ruling
party, launchers were
increased from the existing
4 to 8 and the transporter
erector launchers (TELs)
replaced with the newly
improved surface-to-ship
missiles with an estimated
range of about 200km.


-----

[Chart 1-6] Key Vessels and Surface-To-Ship Missiles of the North Korean Naval Force


Surface Combatants

Approx. 430

**Air Force**


Auxiliary Vessels

Approx. 40


Submarines

Approx. 70


Amphibious Vessels

Approx. 250


Surface-To-Ship

Missiles


**Air Force** The North Korean Air Force consists of five flight divisions, one

tactical transport brigade, two air force sniper brigades, and air

defense units under the Air and Anti-Air Force Command[39)].

The North Korean Air Force, with around 1,580 aircraft, has positioned its forces

in four different zones. North Korea is postured to attack quickly with minimal

preparation by deploying about 40% of its 810 combat mission aircraft south of the

Pyongyang-Wonsan Line, and has the ability to infiltrate special warfare forces using

AN-2 and helicopters.

It is also continuing its efforts to improve the efficiency and modernize its air force

by retiring old training aircraft, producing additional AN-2s and light aircraft and

field deploying them, and developing various reconnaissance and attack drones.

However, due to limitations in introducing new combat mission aircraft, its air

defense capability is being reinforced through the development and realignment of

new surface-to-air missiles.

The North Korean air defense system, centered around the Air and Anti-Air Force

Command, integrates aircraft, surface-to-air missiles, anti-aircraft artilleries, and

radar air defense units. SA-2[40)] and SA-5[41)] surface-to-air missiles are deployed in

forward areas in the eastern and western regions, while SA-2 and SA-3[42)] surface
to-air missiles and anti-aircraft artilleries are concentrated in the Pyongyang area

to form a densely layered air defense system. Moreover, it is assumed that the

North Korean Air Force has developed a variety of electronic jamming equipment,

including GPS jammers, as additional means for air defense.

A large number of radar air defense units such as ground-controlled interception

bases and early warning bases are spread out across North Korea, enabling coverage

of the entire Korean Peninsula. To increase the detection accuracy of radar air

defense units and reduce the response time, North Korea is currently setting up an

automated air defense command and control system. Key aircraft and surface-to-air

missiles of the North Korean Air Force are as shown in [Chart 1-7].


**39)**
The Air Force Command
has been renamed the
Air and Anti-Air Force
Command in May 2012.

**40)**
A guided missile system
for striking mid- to highaltitude targets, with a
maximum range of 56km

**41)**
A guided missile system
for striking high-altitude
targets, with a maximum
range of 250km and
that was developed to
complement the SA-2

**42)**
A guided missile system
for striking mediumrange, low- to med-altitude
targets, with a maximum
range of 25km


-----

[Chart 1-7] Key Aircraft and Surface-To-Air Missiles of the North Korean Air Force


Transport Aircraft

(including AN-2s)

Approx. 350


Helicopters

(including Naval

Force’s) Approx. 290


Fighter Aircraft

Approx. 810


Surveillance Aircraft

Approx. 30


Surface-To-Air

Missiles


**Strategic Force** It is estimated that North Korea has organized 13 missile

brigades that operate Scud, Nodong, and Musudan rockets

under the Strategic Force which is a separate military command. It is likely to

perform functions similar to those of China’s Rocket Force and Russia’s Strategic

Missile Troops.

To enhance its strategic attack capabilities, North Korea has continuously

developed nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles, and chemical and biological weapons.

Since activating the 5MWe reactor located in the Yongbyon nuclear complex in

the 1980s, it is assessed that North Korea possesses around 50kg of weapon-grade

plutonium obtained by reprocessing spent fuel rods. It is also believed to possess

a substantial amount of highly enriched uranium (HEU) through its uranium

enrichment program. Considering that a total of six nuclear tests have been

conducted between October 2006 and September 2017, it is assessed that its ability to

miniaturize nuclear weapons has reached a significant level.

After beginning ballistic missile developments in the 1970s, North Korea

produced and field deployed Scud-B and Scud-C with ranges of 300km and 500km,

respectively, in the mid-1980s. In the late 1990s, North Korea field deployed the

Nodong missile with a range of 1,300km and, later, the Scud-ER, which is a scud

missiles with extended range. In 2007, North Korea field deployed the Musudan

missile with a range of over 3,000km. Through these successive additions to its

missile inventory, North Korea has gained direct strike capabilities against the ROK

and the surrounding countries of the Korean Peninsula.

Since 2012, North Korea has conducted in earnest test launches of missiles that

have been field deployed or are under development. In 2017, Pyongyang fired

Hwasong-12 missiles into the North Pacific Ocean, and test-fired Hwasong-14 and

Hwasong-15, which are capable of posing threats to the US mainland. However

further confirmation is required as North Korea hasn’t conducted actual range test

launches to verify whether it has acquired the atmosphere reentry technology. No

missile test was conducted in 2018. Since 2019, however, North Korea test-launched a

number of solid-fuel short-range ballistic missiles which have operational advantages


-----

and the Pukguksong-3 which is a new type of submarine-launched ballistic missile

(SLBM).

At the military parade marking the 75th anniversary of establishment of its ruling

party in October 2020, North Korea unveiled a total of nine types of ballistic missiles

including a new intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) and a new SLBM marked

"Pukguksong-4ㅅ." The new missiles identified at the military parade are shown in

[Chart 1-8]. The types and ranges of ballistic missiles currently being developed or

possessed by North Korea are shown in [Chart 1-9] and [Chart 1-10].

[Chart 1-8] New ICBM and SLBM Unveiled at the Military Parade Marking the 75th

Anniversary of Establishment of Its Ruling Party

New ICBM New SLBM

[Chart 1-9] Types of North Korean Ballistic Missiles in Inventory or Under Development


30

25

20


|Taepodo ngth (m)|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|(Not Confirmed) Hwasong-13 Enhanced|||||||
|Version Hwasong -15 Hwasong Hwasong|||||||
|Hwasong-13 -14 SCUD -12 Enhanced Nodong|||||||
|Version SCUD-B/C SCUD-ER Musudan 19-1 19-5 PukgukPukguk Pukguk SRBM SRBM song song-2 song-3|||||||
||19-4 SRBM|Pukguksong-2 Pukguksong|||||


|SRBM(Sh|ort Range) MRBM(Mediu|m Range)|ICBM(Inte|rcontinenta|
|---|---|---|---|---|


(More than 5,500㎞)


SCUD-B/C

19-1 19-5

SRBM SRBM

19-4

SRBM

SRBM(Short Range)

(300~1,000㎞)


15

10


MRBM(Medium Range)

(1,000~3,000㎞)


IRBM(Intermediate-Range)

(3,000~5,500㎞)


North Korea began producing chemical weapons in the 1980s and it is estimated

that it has in storage an estimated 2,500~5,000 tons of chemical weapons. Sources

indicate that North Korea is capable of cultivating and producing various types of

biological agents, such as anthrax, smallpox, and pest.


-----

[Chart 1-10] Ranges of North Korean Missiles





SCUD-C 500km

Russia Alaska

SCUD-ER 1,000km

North United States

Nodong 1,300km Korea Japan

Musudan More than 3,000km

Guam

Hawaii

Hwasong-12 5,000km

Hwasong-15 More than 10,000km


**Sustainability** The Reserve Forces of North Korea is composed of the Re
serve Military Training Unit, which is subject to combat

mobilization; the workplace-based and regional Worker-Peasant Red Guards; the

Red Youth Guard, which is a military organization in high schools; and paramilitary

units. Those in the age range between 14 and 60 are subject to mobilization, which

correspond to 7,620,000 or roughly 30% of the population. The Reserve Military

Training Unit, which can augment the combat capability of the regular armed

forces during contingency, is 600,000 strong. The unit maintains a level of training

comparable to that of regular armed forces. The status of the reserve forces in North

Korea is shown in [Chart 1-11].



[Chart 1-11] North Korean Reserve Forces

|Category|Strength|Remark|
|---|---|---|
|Total|Approx. 7.62 million||
|Reserve Military Training Unit|Approx. 600,000|Equivalent to the ROK’s mobilization reserve forces (men aged 17~50 years, unmarried women aged 17~30 years)|
|Worker-Peasant Red Guards|Approx. 5.7 million|Equivalent to the ROK’s local reserve forces (men aged 17~60 years, women aged 17~30 years who are not in the Reserve Military Training Unit)|
|Red Youth Guard|Approx. 1 million|Advanced middle-school military organization (boys and girls aged 14~16 years)|
|Paramilitary units|Approx. 320,000|Guard Command, Ministry of Social Security, etc.|


-----

North Korea is estimated to have secured war supplies that could last one to three

months during wartime. It is estimated that there are more than 300 munitions

factories in North Korea, including more than 100 civilian factories designed for

transformation into armament factories in a short span of time during wartime,

which are equipped with a wartime mobilization system enabling the factories

to produce military supplies rapidly during contingencies. Major military supply

production and storage facilities are believed to have been fortified underground

to ensure wartime survivability, with the ability to produce major weapons and

ammunition except combat mission aircraft. However, it is assessed that North

Korea is facing difficulties in fostering its military industry and maintaining war

sustainability in a steadfast manner as energy and raw material shortages intensify

due to the prolonged international sanctions against North Korea.


-----

-----

|Nat|io|na|l Secur|ity Stra|tegy|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|

|Na|tio|na|l|Defen|se|Pol|icy a|nd M|ilitar|y St|ra|teg|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|

|De|fen|se|Refor|
|---|---|---|---|


##### Chapter
# 2

## National Security Strategy and Defense Policy

Section 1 National Security Strategy
Section 2 National Defense Policy and Military Strategy
Section 3 Defense Reform 2.0


-----

-----

## 1 National Security Strategy

The Moon Jae-in administration’s national vision is "A Nation of the People, a Just

Republic of Korea" with "a peaceful and prosperous Korean Peninsula" as its goal of

governance in the field of security. Accordingly, the Moon administration has established

a National Security Strategy (NSS) to realize this goal and is implementing its NSS to

resolve the North Korean nuclear issue and establish permanent peace on the Korean

Peninsula while maintaining a robust national security posture.

1. National Vision and Security Objectives


To build a just nation of the people, the Moon Jae-in administration set its national

vision as "A Nation of the People, a Just Republic of Korea" and designated five goals

of governance: a government committed to serving its citizens; an economy centered

on the co-prosperity of all; a nation that ensures the well-being of its citizens;

balanced development across the nation; and a peaceful and prosperous Korean

Peninsula. Regarding the goal of governance for security, "a peaceful and prosperous

Korean Peninsula", the administration established three national security objectives:

a peaceful resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue and the establishment of

permanent peace; contribution to peace and prosperity in Northeast Asia and the

world; and the realization of a society where people’s safety and lives are protected.


-----

**Peaceful Resolution of the North Korean** Through concerted efforts with

**Nuclear Issue and the Establishment of** the international community, the

**Permanent Peace** Moon administration will achieve

a peaceful resolution of the North

Korean nuclear issue by comprehensively pursuing complete denuclearization of the

Korean Peninsula, establishment of a peace regime, confidence building between

the two Koreas, and implementation of arms control. At the same time, the Moon

administration will enhance the national defense capabilities of the ROK based on

the robust ROK–US alliance, thereby supporting the establishment of permanent

peace on the peninsula.


**Contribution to Peace and Prosperity in** The Moon administration will

**Northeast Asia and the World** strive to elevate the status of the

ROK as a nation that is leading

the efforts to achieve peace and cooperation by fostering an environment that brings

peace and prosperity to Northeast Asia and the world, while promoting the country’s

national interest. First, the ROK will take the lead in resolving the Korean Peninsula

issues through regional cooperation based on the ROK–US coordination. In

addition, the ROK will consolidate its political and economic cooperation with India,

ASEAN and other Eurasian countries, and contribute to peace, stability, and mutual

prosperity in the region by institutionalizing regional cooperation. Furthermore,

the Moon administration will actively participate in resolving security issues across

the world, such as climate change, international terrorism, infectious diseases, and

refugee crises.


**Realization of a Society that Protects** The Moon administration will protect

**People’s Safety and Lives** the properties and rights of individual

citizens from the standpoint of the

people, and protect their safety and lives from cyber-threats, terrorism, disasters,

safety accidents, and various threats and risks.


2. Tenets of the NSS

To achieve its goal of governance for security, "a peaceful and prosperous Korean

Peninsula", the Moon administration adopted strategies to be implemented in the

fields of national defense, unification, and diplomacy. These strategies include taking


-----

the initiative in the pursuit of a peaceful and prosperous Korean Peninsula; realizing

strong national security through steadfast defense; pursuing well-balanced and

cooperative diplomacy; and ensuring the people’s safety and protecting their rights.


**Taking the Initiative** As a directly involved party of Korean Penin
**for a Peaceful and** sula issue, the Moon administration will

**Prosperous Korean Peninsula** continue its efforts for peace and prosperity

on the Korean Peninsula. Once progress

is made on the North Korean nuclear issue and favorable conditions are set, the

Moon administration will create a virtuous cycle of peace and prosperity by fully

implementing the "Korean Peninsula New Economic Initiative"[1)]. Furthermore, the

Moon administration will develop a sustainable inter-Korean relationship through

regular inter-Korean talks, wider exchanges and cooperation across multiple fronts,

and the legislation of inter-Korean agreements.


**Ensuring Strong National Security** The Moon administration will establish

**through Steadfast Defense** a robust security posture by realizing

a steadfast national defense with the

mindset that "our defense is our responsibility". It will maintain a firm defense

posture to prepare for transitional security situations and, based on an ironclad ROK
US alliance, establish a new ROK-led combined defense system by completing

an expeditious transition of wartime Operational Control (OPCON). By robustly

pursuing "Defense Reform 2.0"–an intensive, future-oriented national policy

applying Fourth Industrial Revolution technology–the Moon administration will

improve the transparency and efficiency of the ROK’s defense programs and

reinforce the country’s national defense capacity so that the people do not grow

anxious during transitions in the external environment. In addition, the Moon

administration will cultivate a military that walks hand-in-hand with the people by

ensuring the human rights of servicemembers, improving the conditions for service,

and creating a new barracks culture.


**1)**
It is the core element of
the “realization of a new
economic community on
the Korean Peninsula,”
which is one of the three
goals of “Moon Jaein’s Policy on the Korean
Peninsula.” It aims to
secure a new growth
engine for the economy
by promoting inter-Korean
economic cooperation and
to cultivate a foundation
for economic unification
by inducing changes from
North Korea.


**Pursuing Well-Balanced,** The Moon administration will pursue well
**Cooperative Diplomacy** balanced and cooperative diplomacy by expanding

the scope of cooperation to ASEAN, Europe,

Middle East, and Africa while strengthening its cooperation with the four countries

surrounding the Korean Peninsula. First, while the Moon administration is further

advancing and developing the ROK–US alliance into a comprehensive relationship


-----

that encompasses security, economic cooperation, personnel exchanges and

global leadership, the Moon administration will contribute to peace and stability

in Northeast Asia and peacefully resolve the North Korean nuclear issue by

strengthening cooperative diplomacy with the surrounding countries. In addition,

the Moon administration will widen the horizon of the country’s diplomacy and

expand the foundation for peace and prosperity on the Korean Peninsula by pursuing

the New Northern Policy and New Southern Policy[2)]. It will work together with the

international community to address transnational threats such as natural disasters,

infectious diseases, drugs, and refugee issues. Moreover, the Moon administration

will actively pursue international cooperation and contributive diplomacy to a degree

that befits the country’s national standing in areas such as public diplomacy, global

economy, climate change and development cooperation.


**2)**
The government is
currently working toward
the Northeast Asia
Plus Community for
Responsibility Sharing to
foster favorable conditions
for peace and prosperity
in the surrounding areas
beyond the Korean
Peninsula and Northeast
Asia. The New Southern
Policy is a diplomatic
policy that aims to
enhance amicable political,
economic, cultural, and
personal cooperation
with 10 ASEAN members
and India to a level
corresponding to the
cooperation with Korea’s
surrounding nations. The
New Northern Policy aims
to create a new growth
engine for the Korean
economy and pursue
mutual prosperity by
linking the transportation,
logistics, and energy
infrastructure of Korea and
Eurasian countries north
of the Korean Peninsula
(Russia, China, Mongolia,
and Southeast Asian
countries) while promoting
peace and stability in
the Eurasian continent
including the peninsula.


**Ensuring Public Safety and** The Moon administration will establish an

**Protecting Their Rights** integrated disaster management system and

reinforce its on-site response capability to

enable responses to large-scale accidents and disasters at all times. It will enhance

the national-level capability of the ROK against cyber-threats, terrorism and other

nonmilitary security threats, and strengthen the country’s protection system for

citizens living overseas to ensure that there are no shortfalls in protecting them.


-----

## 2 National Defense Policy and

#### Military Strategy

The Ministry of National Defense (MND) is pursuing six National Defense Policy (NDP)

tenets to realize the vision of a "competent security and robust national defense". The

MND will continue to carry out the fundamental mission of maintaining a robust military

readiness posture and gain the public’s faith in the ROK Armed Forces by cultivating a

barracks culture that is attractive to both prospective servicemembers as well as their

family. Furthermore, the MND will support the establishment of permanent peace on the

Korean Peninsula with strength by reinforcing the national defense capabilities of the

ROK based on the solid ROK–US alliance.

1. National Defense Objectives


The national defense objectives are "protecting the nation from external military

threats and invasion"; "supporting a peaceful unification of the Korean Peninsula";

and "contributing to regional stability and world peace".


**Protecting the Nation from** The ROK Armed Forces considers

**External Military Threats and Invasion** any force that threatens and violates

the sovereignty, territory, people,

and properties of the ROK as an enemy. The relationship between South and

North Korea has alternated between military confrontation, reconciliation, and

cooperation. However, a new security environment was shaped in 2018 for the

denuclearization and the establishment of peace on the Korean Peninsula with

three inter-Korean summits, as well as the first-ever US–North Korea summit. In

particular, in September 2018, the military authorities of the two Koreas signed and

began the implementation of the "Agreement to Implement the Historic Panmunjom

Declaration in the Military Domain", thereby creating a foundation for easing

military tension and confidence building.

Nevertheless, North Korea’s WMDs are a threat to peace and stability on the

Korean Peninsula. Consequently, the ROK Armed Forces will provide military

support towards complete denuclearization and establishment of permanent peace

on the Korean Peninsula and will continue to prepare for all possible situations. In

addition, the ROK Armed Forces will continue to advance their ability to respond to


-----

transnational and nonmilitary threats such as terrorism, cyber-attacks, large-scale

disasters, and other potential threats.


**Supporting a Peaceful** Peace is an issue of the country’s survival and a

**Unification of** national interest of the highest level. Peace is also

**the Korean Peninsula** the foundation for achieving peaceful unification.

Without robust security, peace can neither be

maintained nor built. To this end, the ROK Armed Forces will support peace on the

Korean Peninsula through strength by establishing a ROK-led defense capabilities.


**Contributing to Regional Stability** Based on a solid ROK–US alliance, the

**and World Peace** ROK Armed Forces will contribute not

only to stability in Northeast Asia, but

also to world peace, by promoting amicable and cooperative relationships with the

surrounding nations, and by proactively participating in international peacekeeping

operations as well as defense cooperative exchanges.


2. National Defense Vision and Tenets of the NDP


**National Defense Vision** The ROK Armed Forces has set "competent secu
rity and robust national defense" as the vision for

national defense. "Competent security" signifies protecting the safety and lives of

the people and safeguarding the territory and sovereignty of the ROK from external

and internal threats and invasion "through strength" by acquiring a ROK-led war

capability based on advanced military force, field-based education and training, and

strong mentality. "Robust national defense" signifies establishing an omnidirectional

military readiness posture that guarantees victory in battle by deterring and actively

countering enemy provocations through ROK-led defense capabilities based on the

ironclad ROK–US alliance.


**Tenets of the National** The ROK Armed Forces is imple-menting six national

**Defense Policy** defense policy tenets, which serve as consistent

policy directions guiding the realization of its na
tional defense vision: (1) establishing a robust national defense posture against

omnidirectional security threats; (2) developing a mutually complementary and

robust ROK–US alliance and promoting exchanges and cooperation for national


-----

defense; (3) building a strong force that supports peace on the Korean Peninsula by

firmly implementing national defense reforms; (4) establishing a transparent and

efficient national defense operation system; (5) cultivating a high-morale military

culture that is inclusive of and trusted by the public; and (6) building a foundation

for establishing peace through inter-Korean military confidence building and arms

control. The NSS and the NDP are listed in [Chart 2-1].

[Chart 2-1] National Security Strategy and Defense Policy


National Defense

National Vision
Objectives

A Nation of the People, a Just Republic of Korea -  Protecting the nation from external military threats

and invasion

-  A government committed to serving its citizens

-  Supporting a peaceful unification of the Korean

-  An economy centered on the co-prosperity of all

Peninsula

-  A nation that ensures the well-being of its citizens

-  Contributing to regional stability and world peace

-  Balanced development across the nation

-  A peaceful and prosperous Korean Peninsula

National Security National Defense

Objectives Vision

-  Peaceful resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue

and the establishment of permanent peace

-  Contribution to peace and prosperity in Northeast

Asia and the world

-  Realization of a society that protects people’s safety

and lives

Six Tenets of National

Tenets of the NSS

Defense Policy

-  Taking the initiative for a peaceful and prosperous ① Establishing a robust national defense posture against

Korean Peninsula omnidirectional security threats

-  Ensuring strong national security through steadfast ② Developing a mutually complementary and robust

defense ROK–US Alliance, as well as promoting exchanges and

-  Pursuing a well-balanced and cooperative diplomacy cooperation for national defense

-  Ensuring public safety and protecting their rights ③ Building a strong force that supports peace on the

Korean Peninsula by firmly implementing national
defense reforms

④ Establishing a transparent and efficient national

defense operation system

Strategic Tasks ⑤ Cultivating a high-morale military culture that is

inclusive of and trusted by the public

① Working toward the denuclearization of the Korean ⑥ Building a foundation for establishing peace through

Peninsula and the establishment of peace inter-Korean military confidence building and arms

② Developing a sustainable inter-Korean relationship control

and achieving mutual prosperity

③ Taking the initiative in strengthening national defense

capabilities based on the ROK–US Alliance

④ Pursuing pragmatic diplomacy that focuses on the

people and the national interests

⑤ Reinforcing the national crisis management system

for a safer Republic of Korea


-----

**Establishing a Robust National** Based on the robust ROK–US combined

**Defense Posture Against** defense posture, the ROK Armed Forces

**Omnidirectional Security Threats** maintains omnidirectional military

readiness posture to deter provocations

from not just North Korea but also from any potential threat, and respond with

prompt and firm action in the event of a provocation. At the same time, the ROK

Armed Forces will enhance its ability to respond to cyber-attacks, terrorism,

infectious diseases, and disasters, as well as develop an integrated civilian
government-military-police defense posture to protect the safety and lives of the

people. In order to build a military centered on combat missions, the ROK Armed

Forces will strengthen the spiritual and mental force of servicemembers and create

an education and training environment based on advanced science and technology

where field-based education and training are possible at any time.


**Developing a Mutually Complementary** Based on the robust ROK–

**and Robust ROK-US Alliance,** US alliance, the ROK and the

**and Promoting Exchanges and Cooperation** US will pursue an expeditious

**for National Defense**

transition of wartime OPCON

in a stable manner in order

to realize a combined defense system led by the ROK Armed Forces. In addition,

the ROK Armed Forces will develop the alliance into a mutually complementary

relationship, promote exchanges and cooperation for national defense, and expand

and develop upon the success of overseas deployment of ROK troops to shape a more

favorable strategic environment for the ROK.


**Building a Strong Force that Supports** The ROK Armed Forces will

**Peace on the Korean Peninsula by Firmly** firmly implement Defense Re
**Implementing Defense Reform** form 2.0 to proactively respond to

changes in the security environ
ment and omnidirectional security threats, as well as support peace and prosperity

on the Korean Peninsula based on strength. To this end, the ROK Armed Forces will

work toward "steadfast national defense" where the ROK assumes responsibility for

national defense by building a strong, elite military powered by advanced technology

that enable flexible responses to omnidirectional security threats.


-----

**Establishing a Transparent and Efficient** To keep up with changes in social

**National Defense Management System** conditions and public demands, the

ROK Armed Forces will adopt the

technology of the Fourth Industrial Revolution to enhance the efficiency, openness,

and transparency of the overall national defense system. To this end, the ROK

Armed Forces plans to lay the legal foundation for maintaining political neutrality

and to continue to expand the public’s participation in the policy making process. In

addition, the ROK Armed Forces will establish and actively implement measures

to eradicate corruption in defense acquisition programs and take strict measures

to reduce defense expenditures by increasing the efficiency of national defense

management.


**Cultivating a High-Morale** The ROK Armed Forces will cultivate

**Military Culture that is Inclusive of** an advanced barracks culture that re
**and Trusted by the Public** flects social changes by drastically

improving the servicemembers’ work
ing conditions and ensuring their human rights to allow them to fully focus on their

combat missions. In addition, the ROK Armed Forces will continue to strive to earn

the public’s trust and support by actively and preemptively protecting the people’s

lives and safety through efforts, such as providing proactive support during national

disasters and advancing the interests of the people.


**Building a Foundation for Establishment** To resolve the North Korean nu
**of Peace through Inter-Korean Military** clear issue and shape the condi
**Confidence Building and Arms Control** tions to establish permanent peace

on the Korean Peninsula, the ROK

Armed Forces will work towards military de-escalation and inter-Korean confidence

building. The ROK Armed Forces will pursue stable military assurance measures in

connection with the progress from inter-Korean exchanges and cooperation projects

and will seek realistic arms control measures in line with advances made towards

denuclearization and the establishment of a peace regime.

3. Military Strategy

Military strategy set up the military strategic objectives to realize the NSS and NDP

in military domain and specifies the concept to employ military forces and direction


-----

to develop military forces to meet these objectives.


**Objective** In consideration of sudden changes in the security environment,

the ROK Armed Forces must prepare for North Korean threats

simultaneously, potential threats, and nonmilitary threats. The objective of the

military strategy is to deter provocations and aggression from external forces and, if

deterrence fails, achieve victory in the early phase "with the least damage within the

shortest time".


**Concept** The concept of the ROK Armed Forces’ military strategy is to

flexibly respond to changes in the security environment and

omnidirectional security threats while acquiring the capabilities to deter and respond

dominantly to omnidirectional threats based on the ironclad ROK–US alliance.

When it comes to the North Korean threats, ROK Armed Forces will establish and

implement a strategy for arms control capable of establishing a peace regime in

the long term and reduce the likelihood of outbreak of war by reducing the threats

posed by North Korea. Demonstrating strong deterrence based on the robust ROK–

US alliance and possessing the capabilities and posture to achieve complete victory

during contingencies are also part of the military strategy. Through these actions, the

ROK Armed Forces will deter North Korea’s provocations and aggressions, prevent

accidental military collisions, and manage situations to be stable with both rapid

responses and de-escalation measures in case of a provocation. In case deterrence

fails, the concept is to terminate the war in the early phase "with the least damage

within the shortest time".

The military strategy includes working closely with the neighboring countries

during peacetime to shape a favorable strategic environment and preventing conflict

with neighboring countries by enhancing the ROK’s deterrence capabilities. The

ROK Armed Forces will also preemptively prepare and actively respond against

cyber-threats by establishing comprehensive response strategies. When it comes

to nonmilitary threats, the military strategy is to prevent such threats by ensuring

military readiness to protect ROK citizens at home and abroad as well as establishing

an information sharing and joint response system with inter-agencies. In case of an

actual threat, the goal is to restore stability promptly on with a rapid response.


**Direction of Military Force**

**Development**


The objective for military force development

of the ROK Armed Forces is to build a military

power capable of responding flexibly to omnidi

-----

rectional security threats, including those from North Korea and other potential

threats. The ROK Armed Forces is to acquire the capabilities required to lead

combined operations by reorganizing the military structure (command, unit, troop,

and force structure) to be prepared for wartime OPCON transition. The military

force development objective also includes acquiring the required capabilities

to effectively respond to cyber and space threats and establishing an operations

execution system, as well as reinforcing the military support system to actively

counter nonmilitary threats such as terrorism, international crimes, and disasters.


-----

## 3 Defense Reform 2.0

With the goal of creating a "strong military" that supports peace and prosperity of the

Republic of Korea based on strength at an early date, the MND has adopted and is

pushing ahead with more feasible "Defense Reform 2.0 Basic Plan" in order to achieve

the objectives of the reform.

1. Goal and Tenets


The MND selected the early creation of a "strong military" that supports peace and

prosperity of the Republic of Korea with strength as the goal of Defense Reform 2.0.

"Strong military" means a military capable of taking the initiative in responding

to omnidirectional security threats, an elite military powered by cutting-edge

technology and a military managed in a way that befits the standing of a developed

country.

The three tenets of Defense Reform 2.0 are: (1) strengthen the structure and

foundation to enhance defense capabilities to take the lead in national defense; (2)

fully utilize the Fourth Industrial Revolution technology to overcome the ROK’s

limitations on its resources and adapt to future battlefields; and (3) gain nationwide

support by pursuing a national defense reform that is in line with the demands of the

nation and society.

The goal and the tenets of Defense Reform 2.0 are based on the National Defense

Reform Act enacted in 2006 and are in line with the national defense reforms

promoted by previous administrations. However, it is true that there have been

repeated adjustments and delays due to various changes in security conditions.

Recently, omnidirectional security threats have emerged, including deepening

instability in the security environment of Northeast Asia as well as threats from

North Korea, and increasing transnational and nonmilitary threats such as disasters,

terrorisms, and cyber-attacks. It is no longer possible to postpone national defense

reforms due to the rapid deterioration of the conditions for implementing defense

policies, such as shortage of military service resources due to a population cliff and


-----

public demand for human rights and welfare. Thus, the feasibility of Defense Reform

2.0 has been greatly enhanced by securing the required budget and promoting the

enactment and revision of laws and regulations with the aim of completing more

realistic reforms within the current administration’s term.

2. Tasks

In addition to the 43 tasks in the four major fields-military structure, defense

operation, military culture, and defense projects-tasks in the field of smart defense

innovation, which applies Fourth Industrial Revolution technology to all areas of

national defense, have been added to Defense Reform 2.0.

Military structure reform involves creating an elite military structure based on

cutting-edge science and technology so that it can take the initiative and respond

resiliently to omnidirectional security threats. To this end, unit reorganization will be

pursued with the goal of reducing the number of standing troops from 618,000 (2017)

to 500,000 by 2022 and reducing the number of army divisions from 39 to 33 in line

with such reduction. Although the number of troops and units will be reduced, actual

combat capabilities will be strengthened through the reorganization of the combat
oriented defense manpower structure, including reinforcement of officers in combat

units, expansion of the civilian workforce in the non-combat field, and fielding of

cutting-edge weapons systems.

Defense management reform aims to realize an advanced national defense

management system by enhancing high efficiency, reliability, and openness.

Accordingly, the MND will adjust the number of general officers, shorten the period

of mandatory service, increase the proportion of female soldiers, establish civilian

control, and improve participation of and communication with the public.

Military culture reform involves the establishing a military culture instilled with

morale and willingness to serve by guaranteeing human rights and welfare of the

soldiers to a point that satisfies the demands of the people. The MND will strive to

reform the military justice system and abolish the military confinement facilities to

protect servicemembers’ human rights and improve their welfare.

Defense projects reform aims to secure international competitiveness in terms

of efficiency, transparency, and expertise. To achieve this, initiatives such as

improvements to defense acquisition education and human resources system,

creative and challenging R&D, re-establishment of the roles of defense R&D

agencies, and stringent measures on prevention of corruption will be pursued.


-----

Smart defense innovation involves fostering a smart, strong force through defense

innovation based on the cutting-edge technology of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.

The MND will realize efficient defense management by cultivating ready-for
combat warriors based on the live, virtual, constructive (LVC) training system

and managing the life cycle of defense resources. At the same time, the MND will

continue to innovate its technology and foundations by creating a super-connected,

super-intelligent, and super-converged defense infrastructure, and innovate its force

system to prepare for future wars through intelligent and advanced weapon systems.

3. Outcomes


Along with the implementation of Defense Reform 2.0, the MND is also making

efforts to apply advanced science and technology of the Fourth Industrial Revolution

in all areas of defense. The current assessment is that the progress with implementing

plans regarding Defense Reform 2.0 so far is on track to achieving the final goal,

taking one step further towards enhancing the national defense capacity and

expeditiously creating a strong military.

In terms of military structure, the MND laid the foundation for the development

of future command structure, such as reorganization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

(JCS). In 2019, the ROK Army established the Ground Operations Command, which

integrated the First ROK Army (FROKA) and the Third ROK Army (TROKA).

In conjunction with the inactivation of four divisions, the total number of standing

troops of the Army, Navy, and Air Forces was reduced to 555,000 in 2020. The

Navy reorganized its Special Warfare Flotilla while the Marine Corps activated an

aviation battalion. The Air Force reorganized its units, including the activation of

a reconnaissance wing and a space operations unit. Reorganization is also being

carried out in the defense manpower structure by increasing the ratio of officers by

4.3%p in 2020 (2017: 31.6%; 2020: 35.9%) in tandem with the reduction of troops,

and by expanding the civilian workforce. Furthermore, in order to respond to

omnidirectional security threats, the MND is significantly reinforcing its combat

power by fielding cutting-edge weapons systems such as MRLs, unmanned aerial

reconnaissance vehicles, submarines (KSS-III), and F-35As. The MND is also in the

process of formulating a long-term military structure development plan to adapt to

the future security environment, considering potential changes in threats, alliances,

resources, and technology after the full implementation of Defense Reform 2.0.

As for the defense management, the following efforts have been made: (a) transition


-----

of additional director-general and director-level positions in the MND to the civilian

workforce; (b) reduction in the period of mandatory military service by 64 days in

the Army; (c) downsizing the total number of general officers by 46; (d) increase in

the proportion of female servicemembers to 7.4% and improvements in their working

conditions; (e) development of force operational capability based on advanced ICTs

including Big Data and IoT and the installation of scientific training centers for

reserve forces with the introduction of virtual simulation shooting equipment; and

(f) expansion of the scientific training system such as the application of the smart

reserve force training management system. Moreover, further improvements have

been made management, as well as installation of community-friendly military

facilities by relaxing and lifting military installation protection zones (428.8㎢, which

is 147 times the size of Yeouido), including civilian control line and the removal of

barbed-wire fences (34.7㎞) along coastlines and rivers. To respond to transnational

and nonmilitary security threats in relation to COVID-19, the MND has expanded

the existing task of "reinforcing professional competencies in preparation for

terrorism and disaster" to a more comprehensive task of "developing non-traditional

threat defense response system" and is proactively enhancing the military’s response

capabilities by developing relevant laws and systems, such as improving structures

and organizations, and strengthening the military’s support capabilities.

Regarding the barracks culture, the Military Service Act was revised in December

2019 to provide an alternative option to military service for those who object to

conscription based on religious beliefs; in August 2020, the military disciplinary

guardhouse system was replaced with human rights-friendly military training to

guarantee servicemembers’ human rights. Also, the a probe committee investigating

deaths in the military was established to support the efforts to ascertain the truth of

questionable deaths in the military. Furthermore, the MND has drastically improved

the service conditions for enlisted servicemembers through measures such as a

pay raise (i.e., KRW 540,900 for an army sergeant in 2020), increase in passes after

work hours on weekdays, full permission to use mobile phones, self-development

subsidies (KRW 100,000 per person in 2020), and a 50% increase in financial aid

to attend online college courses. The MND also improved the housing support

system to increase the number of officers who own a house and strengthened its

employment support for discharged soldiers while shaping the conditions to enable

enlisted servicemembers to fully concentrate on their duties by making it easier to

use military hospitals, as well as simplifying procedures for using private hospitals.

Furthermore, designation of adjudicators and reduction of punishment by officers

with convening authority are being strictly controlled and monitored, while the


-----

system where military prosecutors can voice their opinions is currently in place. The

MND will actively pursue a reform of the military justice system through measures

such as the integration of a military court within the Ministry and the establishment

of military prosecutor’s office in each service.

For defense projects, the Defense Acquisition Project Council has been newly

established to build an efficient collaborative system. The MND has also launched

a rapid technology acquisition project, a pilot project to promptly apply advanced

technology, namely the Fourth Industrial Revolution technology. Government

support for defense projects is increasing significantly through the expansion of core

technology and parts localization projects, pilot operation of defense innovation

clusters, and support for job creation in the defense industry and industry-led

R&D to strengthen R&D capabilities in the private sector. Moreover, practical

measures, such as reinforcing the anti-corruption system through revising the Code

of Conduct for Public Officials at the Defense Acquisition Program Administration

(DAPA) and regulating reemployment of retired officials, were implemented in

order to fundamentally prevent corruption in the defense industry, while improve

the efficiency and transparency of defense projects. The MND is committed to

developing the defense industry in a way it contributes to national interests by

leading a government-wide effort to promote defense exports.

With the launch of the "Fourth Industrial Revolution Smart Defense Innovation

Promotion TF" in January 2019, the MND aims to accelerate defense reform

through the Fourth Industrial Revolution Smart Defense Innovation and to promote

comprehensive and concrete defense innovation. The TF selected 71 projects for nine

major tasks targeting three areas of innovation–defense management, technology

and infrastructure, and military force systems–and secured the required budget,

with tangible outcomes through systematic project management so far. The MND

is bolstering cooperation at the government level by having its implementation

plan reviewed and passed at the Presidential Committee on the Fourth Industrial

Revolution and pursuing the task through cooperative work with relevant ministries,

such as the Ministry of Science and ICT (MSIT) and the Ministry of Trade, Industry,

and Energy (MOTIE). In particular, the MND is strengthening its national defense

R&D capabilities to contribute to the win-win growth of civilians and the military

by promoting various tasks such as development of ground-penetrating radar (GPR)

and autonomous vehicles for the recovery of remains, creation of intelligent and

smart troops, and military medical Big Data system. Here, the military utilizes the

civilian’s excellent technical capabilities and provides test beds for the private sector,

thereby verifying civilian technology. Accordingly, the MND will continue to


-----

pioneer and push ahead with new projects in line with the technological development

of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, while continuing to build a "digitally strong

military and smart defense" by creating tangible outcomes through civilian–

government–military cooperation.

An appropriate level of defense resources has been secured to ensure steady

implementation of Defense Reform 2.0. For the 2020 defense budget, a budget of

more than KRW 50 trillion has been secured–an increase of 7.4% from 2019 in terms

of the main budget. The total amount of financial resources in the 2021~2025 defense

mid-term plan is planned to be approximately KRW 300.7 trillion. Moreover,

around KRW 16.7 trillion was allocated for force enhancement in carrying out the

tasks under Defense Reform 2.0, such as military structure reorganization based

on advanced science and technology (8.5% increase from 2019). Efforts are being

made to further expand nuclear and WMD response forces and–essential forces

against transnational and nonmilitary threats–through continuous acquisition of the

required budget. The budget for force management cost reached KRW 33.4 trillion

(6.9% increase), which was used for defense management and barracks culture

reforms, including the increase in civilian workforce for the redesign of defense

manpower. Furthermore, in order to lay the legal foundation for Defense Reform 2.0,

70 cases of enactment and revision requirements were identified in a total of 56 laws

and ordinances, including the National Defense Reform Act, while 37 cases of them

related to 32 laws including the Military Service Act have already been successfully

enacted and revised. Especially in 2019, the MND provided systematic support to the

defense reform by passing legislations related to the introduction of "an alternative

service program for military service objectors based on religious beliefs, etc" and "a

military education system", both of which have received a nationwide interest.


-----

-----

##### Chapter
# 3

## Safeguarding Peace by Establishing a Robust Defense Posture Against Omnidirectional Security Threats

Section 1 Establishing a Robust Defense Posture
Section 2 Reinforcing Counter Capabilities Against Nuclear and other WMD

Threats

Section 3 Establishing a Response System for Transnational and Nonmilitary

Security Threats

Section 4 Establishing an Integrated Civilian–Government–Military–Police

Defense Posture

Section 5 Education and Training Focused on Combat Missions and

Strengthening the Spiritual and Mental Force


-----

-----

## 1 Establishing a Robust

#### Defense Posture

The ROK Armed Forces maintains a combined defense posture based on the robust

ROK–US alliance that is capable of countering local and full scale war provocations from

North Korea. For effective crisis management, the ROK Armed Forces has established

surveillance and early warning posture, enhanced its crisis management system, and

maintains readiness posture against provocations such as infiltrations, provocations and

terrorism on land, at sea, and in the air, and cyber-attacks. Furthermore, in preparation

against a full scare war provocation by North Korea, the ROK Armed Forces is enhancing

wartime operational capabilities and strengthening the ROK–US combined defense

posture while acquiring and maintaining the necessary forces, equipment, and supplies

to expand their war sustainability.

1. Military Organization and Forces


**Organization of the Joint** The Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) commands and

**Chiefs of Staff** supervises the combat operation units of the

Army, Navy, and Air Force, and conducts joint

and combined operations by commanding and supervising joint units. The JCS also

carries out civilian-government-military-police integrated defense operations and

tasks associated with martial law. The JCS was set up and operated within the MND

as a non-permanent organization until it was officially established in 1963 under its

current name.[1)] It consists of the Chairman, a Vice Chairman, five offices, and four

chief directorates. The organization of the JCS is shown in [Chart 3-1].



[Chart 3-1] Key Organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff


ROK Armed
Forces
promotional video

**1)**
Combined Chiefs of Staff
Council in 1948, Joint
Chiefs of Staff Council
in 1954, and Combined
Chiefs of Staff Bureau in
1961.


|Col1|Col2|Chairman of the JCS Combat Readiness Inspection Office Vice Chairman of the JCS|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Office of th|e S|taff Judge||Analy|si|
|||ate|Public Affairs Office Experimen|||
|rectorate of Chief Dir|ec|torate of Chief Dire||ctorate of Chief Dir|ec|


Intelligence


Chief Directorate of

Strategic Planning


Operations


Military Support


-----

The JCS strengthens jointness through close mutual support and integration with

the Army, Navy, and Air Force and continues to advance its task performance system

to perform its inherent missions and functions. Also, it continues to strengthen

warfighting capabilities led by the ROK Armed Forces by systematically developing

its organizational structure, functions, and military capabilities that are optimized

for future joint operations in preparation for wartime Operational Control (OPCON)

transition.


**Army** The Army consists of the Army Headquarters, two Operations

Commands, Capital Defense Command, Special Warfare Command,

Army Aviation Operations Command, Missile Command, Mobilization Force

Command, and support units. Key organizations and assets of the Army are shown

in [Chart 3-2].



[Chart 3-2] Key Organizations and Assets of the Army


Army HQ

Ground Operations Second Operations Capital Defense Special Warfare Army Aviation

Command Command Command Command Operations Command

Training and Doctrine Mobilization Force

Personnel Command Logistics Command Missile Command

Command Command

Corps (8)


Tanks

Approx. 2,130


Armored vehicles

Approx. 3,000


Field artillery/MLRS

Approx. 6,200


Guided weapons

Approx. 60


Troops

Approx. 420,000


Helicopters

Approx. 560


 Tanks, armored vehicles, and field artillery/MLRS include the forces of the Marine Corps.
 The Ground Operations Command was established on January 1, 2019.

The Ground Operations Command integrates all operational elements within

its operation area to conduct various ground operations. The Second Operations

Command carries out the mission of maintaining stability and war sustainability

of the joint rear area through integrated civilian-government-military operations.

The Capital Defense Command protects key facilities and urban infrastructure

of Seoul to ensure the city maintains its functions as the capital. The Special

Warfare Command is responsible for special operations in wartime and carries out

peace support operations during peacetime, while the Army Aviation Operations

Command is in charge of aviation operations. The Mobilization Force Command

ensures the combat readiness posture of mobilization divisions and mobilization


Army
promotional
video

Navy
promotional
video


Marine Corps
promotional
video


-----

support groups during peacetime to provide corps level units with mobilization

divisions and supplement battalions capable of exerting combat power equal to that

of standing troops in wartime. Other commands are responsible for personnel and

logistics support as well as education and training.

While efficiently utilizing its existing forces to the fullest extent, the Army is

restructuring its units so that they can carry out rapid decision operations in order to

realize the concept of future joint operations. To achieve this objective, the Army is

steadfastly acquiring its surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities including the

dronebot combat system[2)] that utilizes reconnaissance, attack, and electronic warfare

drones, as well as its maneuver and strike capabilities such as K2 battle tanks,

Korean Utility Helicopters, and multiple launch rocket system (MLRS)[3)].


**Navy** The Navy consists of the Navy Headquarters, the Republic of Korea

Fleet (COMROKFLT), Marine Corps Headquarters, Northwest Islands

Defense Command, and support units. Key organizations and assets of the Navy are

shown in [Chart 3-3].

[Chart 3-3] Key Organizations and Assets of the Navy

Navy HQ

Marine Corps HQ / Northwest Islands Training and Doctrine
COMROKFLT Logistics Command

Defense Command Command

Submarine Force Divisions (2),
Fleet Commands (3)

Command Brigades (2)

Troops Surface Amphibious Mine warfare Auxiliary vessels Submarines Aircraft

Approx. 70,000 combatants vessels vessels Approx. 20 Approx. 10 Approx. 60

Approx. 100 Approx. 10 Approx. 10


 Around 29,000 troops of the Marine Crops are included.

COMROKFLT has command authority over naval operations as a whole and

conducts anti-surface[4)], anti-submarine[5)], mine and countermine[6)], and amphibious

operations. Fleet Commands defend their assigned areas by deploying combatants

such as destroyers, frigates, patrol vessels, and patrol killer mediums. The Submarine

Force Command executes submarine operations. The Marine Corps Headquarters

executes amphibious operations and defense operations of its assigned areas and

strategic islands, and operates a Quick Maneuver Force. The Northwest Islands

Defense Command is responsible for security and defense missions regarding the

northwest islands. Other commands are in charge of logistics support as well as


**2)**
Dronebot is a portmanteau
of drone and robot. It
refers to a manned and
unmanned combat system
to supplement or replace
the capability of a manned
combat system.

**3)**
As a weapon capable of
delivering massive and
concentrated firepower at
once, it is a launch system
in which multiple rockets
are mounted in rectangular
or cylindrical launchers.

**4)**
Its operations are aimed at
securing and maintaining
maritime control and
destroying or neutralizing
the enemy’s maritime
forces using surface
combatants, submarines,
and aircraft.

**5)**
It conducts operations
to destroy or neutralize
the enemy’s submarines
to defend freedom of
navigation in the maritime
zones.

**6)**
It also conducts operations
of interdicting or
neutralizing the enemy’s
naval forces with the help
of mines, or repulsing the
enemy’s attempts at using
mines.


-----

education and training.

To effectively respond to various types of surface, underwater, and airborne

threats, the Navy is operating its multidimensional forces in an integrated manner

by acquiring next-generation submarines, destroyers, frigates and patrol killer

mediums, Aegis-class destroyers, maritime patrol aircraft, and maritime operations

helicopters. The Marine Corps will further develop its capabilities to carry out a

diverse range of missions including multidimensional and high-speed amphibious

operations and the defense of strategic islands.


**Air Force** The Air Force is composed of the Air Force Headquarters, Air

Force Operations Command, and other operational and support

units. Key organizations and assets of the Air Force are shown in [Chart 3-4].



[Chart 3-4] Key Organizations and Assets of the Air Force

|Air Force HQ Air Force Operations Training and Doctrine Logistics Command Command Command|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Air Mob|ility and||



Reconnaissance Command


Approx. 40 Air Force
promotional
video


Troops

Approx. 65,000


Fighter aircraft

Approx. 410


Transport aircraft

Approx. 50


Surveillance and

control aircraft

Approx. 50


Training aircraft

Approx. 190


Helicopters

Approx. 40


**7)**
Operations aimed at
neutralizing or destroying
the enemy’s aerospace
forces and anti-air system
to gain air superiority

**8)**
Operations aimed
at restricting the
enemy’s augmentation,
replenishment, and
mobility before its military
capabilities can be used
by stopping, disrupting,
delaying, or destroying
them

**9)**
Operations consisting of
attacking the enemy’s
military forces close to
friendly forces to support
friendly forces’ surface
attack, counterattack, or
defense operations


The Air Force Operations Command commands overall air operations and

conducts counter-air (CA) operations[7)], air interdiction (AI) operations[8)], and close

air support (CAS) operations[9)] as well as operations to effectively counter nuclear,

missile, and long-range artillery threats. The Air Combat Command executes

assigned combat missions under the control of the Air Force Operations Command

and ensures that all combat mission aircraft exert their combat power. The Air

Mobility and Reconnaissance Command is responsible for air mobility and aerial

refueling, surveillance and reconnaissance, early warning and air control, special

missions, and search-and-rescue (SAR) missions, and ensures that the air mobility

forces exert their combat power. The Air Defense Missile Command is in charge of

defense against a variety of airborne threats, such as ballistic missiles and aircraft,

while the Air Defense Control Command is responsible for air control, aerial

surveillance, aircraft identification, and air operation support within the Korean

peninsula theater.


-----

The Air Force will achieve overwhelming air superiority by continuing to acquire

the highly advanced fighters such as the F-35A, and will expand its air surveillance

and reconnaissance capabilities by introducing medium- to high-altitude

reconnaissance unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV).


**United States Forces Korea** The United States Forces Korea (USFK)

**and Augmentation Forces** consists of the 8th US Army, US Naval Forces

Korea, US Marine Forces Korea, Special

Operations Command Korea, and US Air Forces Korea. The USFK commander

concurrently serves as the commander of the UN Command and the commander

of the ROK–US Combined Forces Command. Key organizations and assets of the

USFK are shown in [Chart 3-5].

[Chart 3-5] Key Organizations and Assets of the USFK

USFK

U.S. Marine Forces Special Operations
8th U.S. Army U.S. Naval Forces Korea U.S. Air Forces Korea

Korea Command Korea

7th U.S. Air Force

Command

501st Military 19th Expeditionary

2nd Infantry 35th Air Defense 65th Medical

Intelligence 1st Signal Brigade Sustainment

Division Artillery Brigade Brigade

Brigade Command

8th Fighter Wing 51st Fighter Wing

Troops Fighters Attack helicopters Tanks Armored vehicles Field artillery/ Patriot missiles

Approx. 28,500 Approx. 90 Approx. 40 Approx. 50 Approx. 130 MLRS Approx. 60

Approx. 10 / 40


US augmentation forces that deploy to the Korean Peninsula during contingencies

to support the defense of the ROK consist of 690,000 troops, 160 vessels, and 2,000

aircraft from the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps. The augmentation

forces are deployed incrementally depending on how the crisis develops. It is done in

two different modes–Flexible Deterrence Option (FDO)[10)] and Time Phased Force

Deployment Data (TPFDD)[11)]–pursuant to Article 2 of the Mutual Defense Treaty

between the ROK and the US When a crisis builds up on the Korean Peninsula,

the FDO, which aims to deter war and mitigate the crisis, is executed to deploy

the designated forces. If an actual war begins, combat and support units will be

reinforced in accordance with the TPFDD to ensure the execution of the ROK–US

combined operations plan.


**10)**
A series of political,
economic, diplomatic,
and military options that
are part of the CFC Crisis
Action Standard Operating
Procedures and that have
to be promptly executed to
deter war

**11)**
Force deployment list
and data of the US
augmentation forces for the
execution of the ROK–US
joint operational plans


-----

For the defense of the Korean peninsula, the ROK Armed Forces will closely

consult with the US on developing augmentation forces deployment plans so that

there is no decline in the overall combat power between the two countries.

2. Maintaining Readiness Posture Against Local Provocations


**Establishing a Surveillance** Based on the close ROK–US combined intel
**and Early Warning Posture** ligence surveillance posture, the ROK Armed

Forces maintains a surveillance and early

warning posture against North Korea and military readiness posture that can

immediately respond to North Korean provocations. By utilizing the consolidated

and analyzed intelligence in operations, of which are collected not only from the

ROK–US combined information assets but also domestic and international agencies,

the ROK Armed Forces maintains military situations in a stable manner.

Moreover, the ROK Armed Forces also maintains a surveillance posture in

preparation for military activities by neighboring countries in our airspace and

waters, and continues to strengthen its independent surveillance capabilities through

force enhancement that includes medium and high-altitude reconnaissance UAV,

multipurpose satellites, and military reconnaissance satellites.


**Developing a Crisis** To effectively respond to various provocation threats

**Management System** from North Korea, the ROK Armed Forces has firmly

established the ROK forces-led crisis management

system and the ROK–US bilateral crisis management system. The "National Defense

Crisis Management Directive" was revised in March 2020 based on the National

Security Strategy Guidelines, the National Defense Policy, and the Basic Plan for

Defense Reform 2.0. Enhancements have also been made on crisis management

manuals for the security field. In addition, the ROK Armed Forces maintains

an around-the-clock crisis management posture through various means such as

devising whole-of-government response measures that are ironed out at national

security strategy game[12)] sessions wherein high-level policymakers from the relevant

ministries participate.

At the same time, the ROK Armed Forces continues to improve its crisis

management system to firmly respond to any provocations from North Korea by

reinforcing combined crisis management exercises and refining the ROK–US joint

crisis management system.


**12)**
It is a form of a practice
wherein experts in the
security field identify
issues by considering
various factors such as
politics, military, society,
and economy for major
security situations through
discussions and derive
policy alternatives


-----

**Establishing a Readiness Posture** In spite of agreeing to the issues related to

**Against Land, Sea, and Airspace** the Northern Limit Line (NLL) through

**infiltrations and Provocations** the Agreement on Reconciliation,

Non-aggression, and Exchanges and

Cooperation (1991) and the Protocol on the Implementation and Observance of

Chapter 2, Nonaggression (1992), North Korea has carried out provocations on land,

at sea, and in the air that nullifies the effectiveness of these agreements. Especially,

North Korea has continuously attempted high-intensity provocations in the northern

waters of the West Sea and the five northwest islands area. The five northwest islands

and the Northern Limit Line (NLL), which is the practical maritime boundary line,

have been defended robustly by the ROK Armed Forces, and the ROK Armed Forces

will continue to firmly adhere to the principle of observing the NLL and will sternly

respond to any type of provocations against the NLL.

With the GOP scientific security systems established in 2016, considerable

progress has been made to the ROK Armed Forces’ security posture, and for any

shortfalls identified while operating the systems, the ROK Armed Forces will

continue to upgrade and improve the systems’ performance in the future thereby

further developing the ROK Armed Forces’ readiness posture against infiltration and

provocations in an evolutionary manner.

The ROK Armed Forces will also establish a robust military readiness posture

through close ROK–US cooperation to deter provocations by North Korea and

to strongly and sternly retaliate in the event of a provocation. At the same time,

through the implementation of the Comprehensive Military Agreement (CMA), the

ROK Armed Forces will provide military support to the various efforts of the ROK

government to establish peace on the Korean Peninsula.

The ROK Armed Forces maintains a surveillance and immediate response posture

that covers the entire Korean peninsula in order to firmly defend the ROK’s entire

territorial land, waters, and airspace in the East Sea, West Sea, and South Sea,

including the northwest islands as well as Marado Island, Ulleungdo Island, and

Dokdo Island. In particular, the ROK Armed Forces maintains a firm commitment

and resolute readiness posture to safeguard Dokdo Island which is evidently the

ROK’s territory–historically, geographically, and according to international laws as

well.

To effectively respond to the changing operational environment, the ROK Armed

Forces will optimize its surveillance, decision-making, and strike systems in the

contact areas on land, at sea, and in the airspace, and continuously bolster its core

fighting capabilities.


-----

**Maintaining a Readiness** The ROK Armed Forces has been enhan
**Posture Against Other Types of** cing the civilian-government-military
**Provocations** police integrated defense posture in prepa
ration for potential terrorist and cyber
attacks against key national infrastructure and public facilities in the capital area and

rear areas. To complete the posture for executing integrated defense operations led by

the heads of local government, a civilian–government–military–police information–

sharing system has been built and is being operated while the integrated readiness

posture is being reinforced through the development of operational plans and

response manuals for each type of provocation as well as periodical defense exercises

and training. In addition, to swiftly counter diverse threats of terrorism, a military

counter-terrorism special forces unit and counter-terrorism operations units for

various types of terror threats have been additionally designated. The ROK Armed

Forces has also been establishing a thorough counter-terrorism readiness posture by

improving counter-terrorism operations carried out by the civilian–government–

military–police integrated defense system and enhancing the support posture for the

integrated defense system.

In addition, the ROK Armed Forces will strengthen the civilian-government
military-police cooperation system by setting up a collaboration system with the

Ministry of Science and ICT (MSIT) and updating the crisis response manual

for GPS signal disturbance to counter North Korea’s global positioning system

(GPS) jamming attempts, and will continue to improve preparedness and response

capabilities against cyber-attack attempts.


3. Maintaining a Readiness Posture Against Full Scale War


Dokdo, the beautiful
island of Korea

**13)**
It is an exercise for mission
execution by commanding
officers and staff
organizations of different
echelon levels. During the
exercise, they practice the
relocation and operation
of a command post as
well as the procedures
of command and staff
activities under various
scenarios while maintaining
communications. They
also learn operational
plans and the application
of standards operating
procedures (SOPs).


**Enhancing Wartime Operations** North Korea continues to improve its con
**Execution Capabilities** ventional force qualitatively and maintains

a posture capable of launching surprise

attacks and engaging in blitzkrieg with minimal repositioning in contingencies by

deploying the bulk of its key forces in the forward area south of the Pyongyang–

Wonsan line.

In preparation for the North Korea’s threat of a provocation for a full-scale war,

the ROK Armed Forces continues to enhance ROK–US bilateral operational plans,

certifies and refines them through annual ROK–US theater-level combined command

post exercises (CPX)[13)].


-----

[Chart 3-6] Area of Responsibility by the ROK Armed Forces


Yeonpyeong unit coast guard

Dokdo maneuver

security operation

Patrol activities around the

Marado island


*[ Map source: National Geographic Information Institute]


-----

In particular, in preparation for wartime OPCON transition, the ROK Armed

Forces maintains a robust combined readiness posture by conducting combined

certification assessment[14)] during ROK–US combined exercises and has established

a readiness posture against a full-scale war by improving its capabilities to conduct

operations and lead combined exercises.

In addition, the ROK government’s Ulchi exercise was integrated with the Taegeuk

exercise, a ROK-only exercise of the ROK Armed Forces, thereby launching the

Ulchi Taegeuk exercise[15)].

Combined field maneuver training exercises (FTX)[16)] fully utilize the advanced

weapons systems and operational management system of the ROK–US combined

forces under the principle of "ensuring a balanced combined readiness posture

throughout the year". Various additional training methods are applied to enhance the

capability to conduct combined operations.

The ROK Armed Forces is developing concepts to conduct operations in

preparation of a full-scale war aimed at achieving a complete victory "with minimum

damages within the shortest period of time". The ROK Armed Forces will maintain

steadfast combined operational capabilities through ROK–US combined exercises

and trainings. In case of contingencies, it will employ combined and joint forces to

end the war at an early stage by achieving decisive victories in all domains including

ground, air, sea, space, and cyber.


**Strengthening the ROK–US** The ROK Armed Forces is maintaining and

**Combined Defense Posture** enhancing the combined defense posture

based on a robust ROK–US alliance capable of

firmly responding to North Korea’s provocation for a full-scale war. With the robust

combined defense posture and military readiness posture, the ROK Armed Forces’

efforts are underway to pursue wartime OPCON transition systematically and

proactively under close consultation with the US.

The Armed Forces of the ROK and the US will coordinate closely and exert efforts

to maintain a much stronger combined defense posture even after wartime OPCON

transition.

Moving forward, the two counties will continue to strengthen their combined

defense posture by stably managing alliance issues through various defense

consultative bodies.


**14)**
It is conducted to verify
and assess the mission
execution capability of the
future ROK–US Combined
Forces Command (CFC)
which is led by the ROK
Armed Forces.

**15)**
It is an exercise to improve
national emergency
preparedness capability
and military readiness
posture in the concept of
comprehensive security
through crisis response
training for large-scale
complex disasters and
wartime preparation
exercises at the level of
national-scale war.

**16)**
Field Training Exercise


**Reinforcing War**

**Sustainability**


In order to reinforce sustainment capabilities, the ROK

Armed Forces is acquiring and maintaining forces, equip

-----

ment, and supplies necessary to conduct war in accordance with wartime require
ments and current capabilities while improving procurement, maintenance support,

and logistics systems in an innovative way.

First, to guarantee the operating rate of equipment during wartime and peacetime,

the ROK Armed Forces has been improving core maintenance capabilities and

maintenance environment through smart factories and remote maintenance support

systems using the core technologies of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. The ROK

Armed Forces also has established maintenance support system based on civilian
military cooperation to resolve logistics support issues exceeding the military’s

maintenance capability, and has been pursuing logistics support projects based on

performance-based logistics (PBL).

In order to secure an independent munitions support capability in preparation for

wartime OPCON transition, the ROK Armed Forces has acquired critical munitions

necessary for operations and established and implemented policies on storage

management, performance maintenance, and explosives disposal support.

The ROK Armed Forces will further reinforce its sustainment capabilities by

integrating and utilizing resources available at home and abroad as well as expanding

international logistics cooperation.


-----

## 2 Reinforcing Counter

#### Capabilities Against Nuclear and other WMD Threats

The ROK Armed Forces has been strengthening the ROK–US combined capabilities

and posture as well as its own capabilities and posture to effectively deter and respond

to nuclear and missile threats from North Korea. The ROK Armed Forces will continue to

strengthen its counter capabilities and posture against North Korean nuclear and other

WMD threats until the complete denuclearization and establishment of a permanent

peace regime on the Korean Peninsula. In particular, efforts will be made to build key

forces as early as possible in order to acquire deterrence and response capabilities.

1. Developing Deterrence and Response Capabilities Against

Omnidirectional Nuclear and Missile Threats


**Developing a ROK-US Tailored Deterrence** The ROK and the US have

**Strategy and Facilitating the Implementation of** enhanced their combined

**US Extended Deterrence** deterrence and response

capabilities based on the

bilateral "Tailored Deterrence Strategy (TDS)"[17)] to effectively counter North Korean

nuclear and missile threats.

TDS, which is a ROK–US joint deterrence and response strategy tailored for

the Korean Peninsula in consideration of the characteristics of the North Korean

leadership and North Korea’s nuclear and missile threats has been upgraded from the

concept of general extended deterrence[18)] provided by the US TDS and covers both

military and nonmilitary response measures that can be implemented in all crisis

scenarios, from the stage in which North Korea threatens to use nuclear weapons

to the stage in which nuclear weapons are actually used. TDS is significant in that

it allows for the ROK and the US to maximize the deterrence and response effect

against North Korean nuclear and missile threats by providing a bilateral response

framework that makes most of the deterrence ways and means available to the two

allies.

To develop the TDS and facilitate the implementation of the US extended deterrence

commitment, the ROK and the US operate various policy consultative bodies


**17)**
The ROK Minister of
National Defense and the
US Secretary of Defense
approved the Tailored
Deterrence Strategy at
the 45th SCM held in
October 2013. It is the first
deterrence strategy that
the United States set up
with an individual ally. Its
strategic concept is more
advanced than the general
concept of “extended
deterrence” because it is
optimized for the situation
on the Korean Peninsula.

**18)**
The US commitment to
provide deterrence for its
allies using the full range
of military capabilities,
including nuclear,
conventional, and missile
defense capabilities


-----

including the Deterrence Strategy

Committee (DSC) and the Extended

Deterrence Strategy and Consultation

Group (EDSCG). The DSC–a deputy

ministerial-level regular consultative

body that meets biannually during the

Korea–US Integrated Defense Dialogue

(KIDD)–holds intensive discussions Deterrence Strategy Committee (September 2019)

on various and substantial measures

to deter and respond to North Korean nuclear and missile threats. In particular, the

DSC has conducted a ROK–US Extended Deterrence Joint Study from 2018 to 2019

to derive substantial measures to strengthen the capabilities to deter and respond

to nuclear and missile threats. The joint study was approved by the 9th DSC held

in September 2019 and was reported to the 51st SCM in November 2019. The ROK

Minister of National Defense and the US Secretary of Defense assessed that the

ROK–US Extended Deterrence Joint Study contributed to strengthening extended

deterrence, and pledged to continue to explore jointly measures to enhance implement

the TDS while considering the effects of changes in the security environment on the

Korean Peninsula.

Also, in accordance with the DSC, the ROK and the US conduct an annual tabletop

exercise (TTX)[19)] regarding the use of extended deterrence means. In the 6th TTX

held in February 2019, measures to increase the execution capability of the TDS

were discussed, focusing on six areas: planning, threat evaluation, regional security

cooperation, capability enhancement, strategic communications, and joint exercises.

Meanwhile, the EDSCG is a regular consultative mechanism jointly run by the two

countries’ defense and foreign affairs authorities. In principle, the high-level meeting

of the EDSCG, attended by vice-ministerial-level officials, is held on a biennial

basis, and its plenary session involving director general-level officials is organized

every year. Through the EDSCG, the ROK and the US ensure that the means of

extended deterrence are not limited to military (M) elements only, but are expanded

to encompass diplomatic, informational, and economic (DIE) elements, thereby

amplifying their deterrence and response effects.

A key example of close policy coordination between the ROK and the US is the 2018

Nuclear Posture Review (NPR)[20)] published in early February 2018. From the early

stages of drafting the NPR, the MND presented the ROK’s opinions and discussed the

direction of the writing through multiple consultations with the US. As a result, the

US laid out clear objectives for North Korea’s denuclearization in the 2018 NPR and


**19)**
A discussion-based
exercise to discuss ways
for deploying means of
US extended deterrence
in a particular simulated
scenario (Table Top
Exercise)

**20)**
The 2018 NPR is the fourth
edition, and the previous
editions were published
in 1994, 2001, and 2010.
The NPR contains the US
president’s guidance on
the administration’s nuclear
policies and strategies as
well as the nuclear force
and posture.


-----

clearly stated that any nuclear attacks by North Korea will not be tolerated.

Going forward, the ROK Armed Forces will continue to facilitate the imple
mentation of the US extended deterrence commitment based on the TDS and bolster

the ROK–US combined deterrence and response capabilities.


**Developing the Alliance’s** Based on the TDS, the ROK and the US are

**Counter-Missile Strategy** continuously developing the "ROK–US Alliance

Comprehensive Counter-Missile Strategy", also

known as the "4D Strategy", to prepare for North Korea’s ballistic missile threats.

The two countries reached an agreement on the "4D Operational Concept"[21)]

at the 46th SCM in 2014, and approved the implementation guidance on the 4D

Operational Concept at the 47th SCM in 2015. The guidance includes concrete

instructions based on the 4D Operational Concept. Since 2016, the ROK and the US

have been developing ways to implement, based on the guidance, the concept in five

fields including the alliance’s decision-making, planning, command and control,

exercise and training, and capability development.


**21)**
Refers to the ROK–US
Alliance Comprehensive
Counter-Missile Strategy,
with "comprehensive"
referring to the
improvement of overall
capabilities in all areas
including detecting,
disrupting, destroying, and
defending (4D) to prepare
for ballistic missile threats.
The concepts of each area
are as follows:

-  Detect: Support efforts

to disrupt, destroy, and
defend using intelligence,
surveillance, and
reconnaissance (ISR)
assets;

-  Disrupt: Strike

North Korea’s fixed
infrastructure that
support missile
operations;

-  Destroy: Directly strike

North Korean ballistic
missiles as well as
transporter erector
launchers (TELs); and

-  Defend: Intercept North

Korean ballistic missiles
launched toward the
ROK.

**22)**
It is the ROK–US joint
operation stage to
effectively counter North
Korean ballistic missile
threats; it consists of
Detect, Decide, Defeat, and
Defend.



[Chart 3-7] TDS and 4D Strategy

ROK

ROK Capabilities Counter-missile Capabilities

ROK Capabilities (M elements) US 4D Strategy

(DIE elements) US Capabilities Counter-missile Capabilities

US Capabilities (M elements)

(DIE elements) TDS


 DIE: Diplomacy, Information, Economy
 M: Military


In the 9th DSC held in 2019, the ROK and the US established the "4D Operational

Execution Concept[22)]" for the practical implementation of the 4D Operational

Concept. The two concepts were integrated and is referred to as the 4D Strategy.

Fundamentally, the alliance is sharing concepts of conducting operations and

developing specific operational procedures to prepare for North Korean ballistic

missile threats.

The ROK Armed Forces will continue to enhance the alliance’s comprehensive

counter-missile capabilities and posture in order to effectively respond to various

ballistic missile threats from North Korea.


-----

**Building Key Forces to Deter and** While implementing the 4D Stra
**Respond to Nuclear and Missile Threats** tegy, the ROK Armed Forces has

built a "WMD Response System"

consisting of a "strategic strike system" and the "Korean Air and Missile Defense

(KAMD)" to secure autonomous deterrence and response capabilities against

omnidirectional security threats. Efforts are being made to build the key forces of the

"WMD Response System" as early as possible.

The "strategic strike system"[23)] realizes deterrence by both denial[24)] and puni
shment[25)] to deter and counter a full range of asymmetric threats from all sides.

For this, the ROK Armed Forces is building forces equipped with long-distance

surveillance capabilities and precision strike capabilities.

The KAMD is comprised of systems for detection, command and control, and

interception. It detects and intercepts missiles launched toward the ROK at the

early stage and disseminates warnings to minimize damage. The ROK Armed

Forces continues to acquire multi-layered defense[26)] capabilities optimized for the

battlefield environment of the Korean Peninsula by expanding the defensible areas

and improving its detection and interception capabilities in preparation against

omnidirectional missile threats. In particular, the ROK Armed Forces will further

enhance its own missile defense capabilities by securing additional missile defense

systems developed with domestic technology. At the same time, the ROK Armed

Forces will continue to develop the alliance’s response capabilities by bolstering its

interoperability with USFK’s missile defense system.

Through the early establishment of the WMD Response System, the ROK Armed

Forces will steadfastly secure deterrence and response capabilities to prepare for

omnidirectional security threats.


**23)**
The concept that covers
the existing kill chain
system and the Korea
Massive Punishment and
Retaliation (KMPR) system

**24)**
The concept in which
a country acquires
capabilities to deny the
enemy’s attainment of
a particular strategic
objective and, therefore,
make the enemy give up
its plan to attack upon
recognition that the level
of damages and risks from
an act of aggression would
exceed potential gains

**25)**
The concept in which one
threatens to retaliate to
make his enemy refrain
from taking action upon
recognition that the costs
of the action would be
greater than the expected
gains

**26)**
A defense system,
composed of
multiple interceptor
systems, is capable of
counterattacking the
enemy’s missiles in more
than one engagement


**Supporting the Policies for the** The ROK Armed Forces supports the go
**Denuclearization of the Korean** vernment’s efforts to fundamentally and

**Peninsula** peacefully resolve the North Korean nuclear

issue as well as strengthening its capacity to

deter and respond to the North Korean nuclear and missile threats.

The MND supports the government’s efforts to achieve complete denuclearization

and establish a permanent peace regime on the Korean peninsula by utilizing

various defense-diplomacy channels and defense consultative mechanisms while

seeking ways to effectively utilize the ROK Armed Forces’ support capabilities such

as intelligence and logistics support, language interpretation, and verification. The

MND also continues its efforts to manage military specialists that can be utilized


-----

during the verification of denuclearization and devise concrete support measures.

However, until North Korea’s threats are substantively reduced, the MND will

maintain its military readiness posture to counter nuclear and missile threats

from North Korea and will continue the force buildup as planned. If a complete

denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula is achieved and a permanent peace regime

is established following a substantial reduction of North Korea’s threats, the MND

will readjust the ROK Armed Forces’ readiness posture and force requirements to

actively respond to various nuclear and missile threats at that point of time.

2. Development of Capabilities Against Chemical and Biological Threats


**Development of CBRN** The ROK Armed Forces actively seeks various mea
**Readiness Posture** sures to not only respond to North Korea’s chemical,

biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) threats

but also transnational and nonmilitary threats such as CBRN related accidents

terrorism and infectious diseases.

Having established a close ROK–US combined defense system, the ROK Armed

Forces continues to monitor North Korea’s CBRN-related activities using combined

intelligence assets and maintains a readiness posture that can detect early signs of

attack and neutralize them in contingencies. Also, CBRN units and medical units are

organized at each echelon to establish CBRN reconnaissance, decontamination, and

treatment system. The ROK Armed Forces has acquired protective equipment and

materials, such as gas masks, protective gears, decontamination agents, and related

medicine, and has built CBRN protection facilities to further improve its protection

capabilities. In particular, the ROK Armed Forces is strengthening its CBRN

protection, detection and identification capabilities by field deploying new CBRN

equipment that has applied cutting-edge science technology.

Meanwhile, the ROK Armed Forces employs expanded regional CBRN Rapid

Response Teams (CRRTs) and national special task force units for CBRN terrorism

to promptly respond to CBRN-related accidents and terrorism, and continues to

develop military support measures such as establishing a CBRN response system

centered on the ROK CBRN Defense Command.


**Government-wide Integrated Response and**

**Strengthening Cooperation with**

**Relevant Agencies**


The ROK Armed Forces main
tains a government-wide in
tegrated response posture to


-----

counter CBRN threats, CBRN related accidents and terrorism as well as infectious

diseases, and a close cooperation system with the relevant agencies.

In response to situations such as African Swine Flu (ASF), hazardous chemical

spills, and COVID-19[27)], the ROK Armed Forces will immediately deploy available

forces including CBRN units to protect the safety and property of the people and will

make every effort to support early damage recovery.

[Chart 3-8] Support from CBRN Units

As of November 2020 (unit: cases)

|Year|Total|ASF|Avian Influenza|Foot-and-Mouth Disease|Chemical Accidents|Other (Forest Fire, Water Supply)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|2018|2,129|None|802|120|13|1,194|
|2019|4,434|2,103|394|376|71|1,490|
|2020|2,854|2,263|246|None|82|263|



In addition, the ROK Armed Forces

continues to conduct civilian–govern–

ment–military–police integrated exe
rcises in conjunction with the Safe

Korea Exercise and the Hwarang Exer
cise to improve the ability to respond to

CBRN at the pangovernment level. At

the same time, the ROK Armed Forces Quarantine support in response to COVID-19 (March

2020)

actively participates in bioterrorism

response training events and evaluation conferences organized by the Korea Disease

Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA) and in the joint training for national

radiological disaster prevention organized by the Nuclear Safety and Security

Commission (NSSC) to enhance civilian–governmen–military–police integrated

response capabilities.

The ROK Armed Forces will thoroughly maintain its military readiness posture

against North Korea’s CBRN threats and will further strengthen the cooperation

system with relevant agencies to respond to transnational and nonmilitary threats

that may hinder the safety of the people.


**27)**
Quarantine support in
response to COVID-19
(February 24 – November
30, 2020): 3,351 times
(31,611 people, 24,062
units of decontamination
equipment)


**Strengthening ROK–US Alliance and** The ROK Armed Forces continues

**International Cooperation** to enhance the ability to respond to

CBRN threats through cooperation

with allies. Since 1997, the ROK MND and the US Department of Defense (DoD)


-----

have been operating the Counter
Proliferation Working Group (CPWG),

an annual director general-level con
sultative body with participation from

the relevant agencies of both coun
tries, to block the spread of WMD and

develop joint response capabilities. The

group was renamed as the Countering ROK–US CWMDC (October 2019)

Weapons of Mass Destruction Com
mittee (CWMDC) in 2017, and their policy consultations have been strengthened

since. In the CWMDC meeting held in October 2019, the two countries discussed

various policies and military measures on removing the North Korean WMD threat

and preventing the spread of North Korean WMD and developing ROK–US joint

response capabilities, and agreed to continue strengthening cooperation between the

ROK and the US.

Moreover, the ROK and the US have been conducting Able Response (AR), a

ROK–US bio-defense exercise since 2011 to improve combined response capabilities

against bio-threats, and Adaptive Shield, a ROK–US CBRN exercise which include

all areas of CBRN since 2017.

With the participation of relevant agencies from both countries, Adaptive Shield

overhauls the crisis response system against possible CBRN crisis on the Peninsula,

holds discussions on joint response options to enhance nation-wide response

capabilities, and examines cooperation and response system between relevant

agencies in preparation for large-scale damages.

Furthermore, the ROK is a state party to both the Chemical Weapons Convention

(CWC) and the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), and the ROK Armed Forces

carries out various activities to implement these conventions. Korea Arms Control

Verification Agency, in particular, performs as the national escort body during the

periodical inspection by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons

(OPCW) that verifies the state parties’ implementation of the CWC thereby enhancing

the credibility and transparency of observing and implementing international

conventions. Meanwhile, since 2005, the ROK CBRN Defense Command has been

annually conducting the OPCW’s international anti-chemical weapons training course

for Asian state parties including the Philippines, India, and Bangladesh.

The ROK Armed Forces will continue to strengthen coordination between the

ROK and the US while expanding cooperation with international organizations

including the United Nations and OPCW.


-----

## 3 Establishing a Response

#### System for Transnational and Nonmilitary Security Threats

The MND is building a response system for not only traditional security threats but also

transnational and nonmilitary security threats such as cyber attacks, terrorism, disasters,

and space threats to protect the safety and lives of the people. The MND is strengthening

its cybersecurity and space defense capabilities to respond to threats in cyberspace

and space and is pursuing the establishment of a terrorism prevention and response

system in preparation for threats of terrorism at home and abroad. In addition, the MND

is safeguarding the lives and safety of service members and the people by promptly

providing manpower and equipment support based on a preemptive disaster readiness

posture for both military and national disasters. In the event of overseas disasters, the

MND actively takes part in international cooperation activities, thereby strengthening the

international cooperation system to respond to overseas disasters.

1. Bolstering National Defense Cybersecurity Capabilities


**Developing Defense Cybersecurity** Means and techniques of threats

**Policies and Strategies, and** in cyberspace have become di
**Cyberwarfare Mission Execution System** versified and more intelligent

with the development of ICT

and infrastructure, and all military tasks and operations are highly dependent on

cyberspace. Accordingly, the ROK Armed Forces is strengthening their defense

cybersecurity capabilities to create, maintain, and protect a defense cyberspace that

is accurate and safe and to secure an edge in cyberspace.

For the first time in 2019, under the supervision of the Office of National Security,

the ROK government announced the National Cybersecurity Strategy, the top

guideline of the national cybersecurity policy. To materialize the strategy, related

agencies such as the MND, the MSIT, and the Ministry of Interior and Safety (MOIS)

participated in formulating the National Cybersecurity Basic Plan and Action Plan.

The MND set up the vision and goals of defense cybersecurity in connection with

the strategy and devised the National Defense Cybersecurity Policy in October 2019,

which presented mid- to long-term development goals and plans. The policy specifies

the defense policy directions of the National Defense Policy and the Basic Plan for


-----

Defense Reform 2.0 in terms of cybersecurity and incorporates policy tasks such

as developing a cybersecurity mission execution system, fostering specialized and

elite cyberwarfare professionals, advancing cyber-attack response capabilities, and

strengthening international cybersecurity cooperation.

In order to strengthen cyber-operation posture and effectively respond to

cybersecurity threats, the MND, in 2019, established a cyber-operation execution

system centered on the JCS and an organic cyber-operation control and reporting

system among the JCS, the Cyber Operations Command and each service. In

February of the same year, "the ROK Cyber Command" was reorganized to the

"Cyber-Operations Command" and was designated as a joint force to ensure the

command conditions of the Chairman of the JCS. Meanwhile, the MND reorganized

the "Cyber-Protection Center" of each service into "Cyber-Operations Center" and

reinforced its manpower thereby transforming the center into an organizational

structure suitable for conducting cyber-operations.


**Developing Cybersecurity** Cyber-operation is a field where opera
**Organizations and Training and** tional capability is more dependent on the

**Cultivating Cyber-Specialists** expertise of the specialists than in other

battlefields. To enhance the expertise of

cyber-specialists, the MND is developing a comprehensive specialist management

system where "acquisition-training-appointment-promotion" is linked.

Having established a cyber-specialty for officers and noncommissioned officers

(NCOs) in 2019 and cyber-positions for the civilian military employees in 2020,

the MND has built a foundation for the stable acquisition and management of

cyber-specialists. By identifying the knowledge, skills, and literacy necessary for

cyber-task performance of the ROK Armed Forces, the MND will incorporate the

necessary competencies for each position into the "Defense Cyber-Task System"

and, based on this, plans to improve the qualification standards, career paths, and

education and training systems of national defense cyber-specialists.

Meanwhile, the education and training system to cultivate cyber-specialists was

also reorganized in line with the creation of cyber-specialties and positions. In 2020,

the MND reorganized the education system to gradually improve the operational

capabilities of cyber-specialists according to the type of cyber-operations and

the level of mission competency, and established an Officer Advanced Course in

addition to the Officer Basic Course–the mandatory remedial training course for

officers working in the cyber-field that has been in operation since 2016. The MND

will continue to develop substantial education and training programs in order


-----

to demonstrate the ROK Armed Forces’ capabilities in various cyber-operation

situations.


**Expanding Cyber-Forces and** The ROK Armed Forces is expanding

**Advancing Response Capabilities** various cyber-forces to ensure the safety

of cyberspace from cyber-attacks that are

on the rise and getting more sophisticated every day. A cyber-operation system that

integrates and visualizes various kinds of information necessary for cyber operations

was established, enabling prompt decision making and command and control by

commanders, and cyber-forces are being built focusing on detection and analysis

systems that identify abnormal behaviors on the network such as malicious codes.

In line with the rapidly changing cyber-environment, the MND plans to enhance

its capability to effectively respond to unstructured cyber-attacks with the help of

the latest technologies including AI and to continuously reinforce the functions and

performance of the cyber-operation system.

The ROK Armed Forces is advancing their response capabilities to enable rapid

and systematic measures in a cyber-crisis situation by periodically conducting cyber
simulation training and expanding mutual cooperation with civilian and government

agencies.


**Strengthening International** As hostile acts inside cyberspace, where the

**Cooperation in Cybersecurity** whole world is connected, are transnational

threats that are difficult for a single country to

solve, trust and cooperation among countries are essential for effective response. For

this reason, the ROK Armed Forces is strengthening their international cooperation

in the cybersecurity domain through various bilateral and multilateral consultation

channels.

The most active country in cybersecurity is the US Based on the traditional

ROK–US alliance, the ROK MND and the US DoD have been operating the Cyber

Cooperation Working Group since 2014 and through the group, the two countries

have shared cyber-threat information and discussed on cooperation and exchange

plans in the fields of technology, human resources, and organizations. The ROK

and the US aim to maintain close partnerships by specifying and substantializing

cooperation matters.

As a multilateral cooperation channel, both countries have been operating

the Cyber Working Group since 2014 in the Seoul Defense Dialogue, an annual

multilateral security consultative body at the vice-ministerial-level hosted by the


-----

MND. Around 20 to 30 countries participate in the Cyber Working Group every

year to share the status of cyber-threats and also to maintain active exchanges, such

as introducing cybersecurity policies and systems of each country. The MND will

continue to develop the Cyber Working Group into a major multilateral consultative

body in the field of defense cyber-cooperation, strengthening the cyber-capabilities

of the participating countries and building trust among them. Moreover, since 2018,

the MND has participated in the Experts’ Working Group on Cyber Security in the

ADMM-Plus, which consists of 10 ASEAN countries plus 8 countries including

the ROK and the US and has been conducting tabletop exercises (TTX) to share

national cybersecurity policies and strengthen crisis management skills in the event

of cyber-threats. From 2020 to 2023, the ROK will undertake the task of co-chairing

the Expert Working Group on Cyber Security with Malaysia to identify cooperation

tasks of developing cybersecurity-related policy capacity and technological

capability of member states and to generate outcomes that will strengthen

international partnerships with the ASEAN and the ASEAN Plus countries.

2. Establishing a Posture to Prevent and Counter Domestic and

Overseas Terrorism


**Threats of Domestic and** Recently, the total number of terrorism incidents

**Overseas Terrorism** has decreased due to the US military’s Operation

Inherent Resolve and the impact of COVID-19.

However, the threats of terrorism around the world–including the unrest in the

Middle East due to the US–Iran conflict and retaliatory acts of terror by ISIS and Al
Qaeda related to the conflict between France and Islam–are expected to continue.

Until now, there has been no direct attacks by international terrorist organizations

in Korea, yet crimes similar to acts of terror have occurred, such as constructing

improvised explosive devices and terror threats using drones are also increasing.


**Developing Policies, Institutions,** To effectively counter the growing threat

**and Systems Against Terrorism** of terrorism, the ROK Armed Forces is

striving to enhance their counterterrorism

system and operational capabilities of counterterrorism operations units. Through the

revision of the "MND Directive on Counterterrorism Activities" in 2019 and 2020,

the ROK Armed Forces has developed a counterterrorism safety activities system

for handling major national and military events. More dedicated organizations such


-----

as the Military Counterterrorism Information Council and the Military Terrorism

Investigation Headquarters were designated, thereby supplementing the ROK

Armed Forces’ missions and roles. In addition, the "military working-level crisis

response manual for terrorism" and the "integrated operations manual" have been

refined to determine at an early stage suspicions or possibilities of terrorism, and a

system has been established that enables the military, police, and fire department to

jointly respond in an integrated manner when conducting initial on-site actions.


**Reinforcement of Professional** The ROK Armed Forces has reinforced the

**Competencies in Military** formation of military counterterrorism op
**Counterterrorism Operations** erations units such as the 707th Special

Mission Group and established the "stan
dards for deploying counterterrorism equipment and materials" which can be

commonly applied for each type of counterterrorism operation. Based on this, the

"comprehensive development plan for counterterrorism equipment and materials"

was devised and is being systematically implemented to provide the units with

professional competencies.

Considering the fact that most of the state-designated counterterrorism op
erations units are concentrated in the capital area and the western region, more

"counterterrorism special mission units" and "anti-CBRN terrorism special

mission units" were additional designated by region thereby establishing a rapid

counterterrorism operations system that can carry out counterterrorism operations

within the golden hour.


**Promoting Comprehensive** As seen in the drone attacks on Saudi Arabian

**Countermeasures Against** oil facilities and unidentified drones flying

**Drone Terrorism** over Hanbit and Kori nuclear power plants,

drone terrorism on key national infrastructure

has become a realistic threat not only on foreign soil but also on the Korean

Peninsula. Accordingly, the ROK government is pursuing a government-wide

"comprehensive countermeasures plan against drone terrorism" led by the National

Counter Terrorism Center (NCTC). In preparation for the threat of drone terrorism,

the MND provided military aircraft radars to six nuclear power plants and oil

reserve bases, and is conducting R&D activities through the Agency for Defense

Development to secure anti-drone capabilities such as anti-aircraft laser weapons.

In addition, measures to counter drone attacks were improved by supplementing

the military working-level crisis response manual for terrorism and the integrated


-----

defense guidelines related to the protection of important national facilities, and these

measures are currently being applied and implemented in the field.


**Support for Major** In preparation for major international events hosted by the

**National Events** government, the ROK Armed Forces made improvements

in their counterterrorism activities and safety measures

by deploying more than 20,300 service members and 1,307 types of equipment.

This resulted in a series of successful events in 2019, including the World Aquatics

Championships in Gwangju, the ASEAN-ROK Commemorative Summit in Busan,

the Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD), the Seoul International Aerospace & Defense

Exhibition (ADEX), the International Maritime Defense Industry Exhibition

(MADEX), as well as the Defense & Security Expo Korea (DX-Korea) in 2020.


Counterterrorism training during the Gwangju World
Aquatics Championships (June 2019)


Comprehensive national counterterrorism training
(November 2020)


**Establishing a Counterterrorism** The ROK Armed Forces is maintaining

**Cooperation System at** a solid pangovernment response system

**Home and Abroad** against domestic terrorism threats. By

participating in a comprehensive national

antiterrorism training conducted by the NCTC in November 2020, the ROK

Armed Forces established a system for sharing information and disseminating the

situation among related agencies, and at the same time, enhanced the capability of

government–military–police integrated response to complex terrorism threats. In

order to effectively respond to international terrorism threats, the ROK is striving to

strengthen its counterterrorism capabilities by establishing an information sharing

and cooperation system through international counterterrorism cooperation, and

to achieve this, the MND participates in ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Group on

Counter Terrorism and combined terrorism response trainings.

The ROK Armed Forces will strive to enhance their civilian–government–


-----

military–police integrated operational system and capabilities against terrorism

threats at home and abroad and will continue to collaborate and cooperate

on counterterrorism with friendly nations and members of the international

community.

3. Establishing a Proactive and Preemptive Support System to

Overcome National Disasters


**Strengthening Disaster Prevention** In a situation where the public’s in
**Activities in the Military** terest and demand for military safety

is increasing, the MND is enhancing

its disaster prevention activities in military facilities to protect the lives and safety

of service members and sending them back to their families in good health. In

particular, the MND is operating a site-centered preemptive disaster prevention

system considering that many units are deployed in mountainous areas and old

facilities are scattered nationwide.


Ulchi Taegeuk exercise in response to high-speed
train derailment accidents (May 2019)


Safe Korea Exercise (September 2019)


The MND has been reinforcing daily safety inspections and periodic safety tests on

aging military facilities and vulnerable areas exposed to risks of accidents. In order to

preemptively remove the risk factors through a nationwide safety diagnosis, the MND

carried out a comprehensive national safety diagnosis in 2020 which led to safety

inspections of 55,994 sites. And by inviting civilian experts in each field during the

entire process of the national security diagnosis, its credibility was further enhanced.

In addition, the ROK Armed Forces has been bolstering their disaster response

capabilities through education and training as well as the establishment of a

civilian-government-military coordination system that enables systematic disaster


-----

management throughout all phases including disaster prevention, preparation, and

recovery. With the "working-level crisis response manual for different types of

disasters" updated, the MND continues to use the manual in actual safety exercises

and refines it by actively participating in the Safe Korea Exercise conducted annually

under the supervision of the MOIS. During the Ulchi Taegeuk exercise in June 2019,

the civilian–government–military integrated response system was solidified after

conducting training in response to high-speed train derailment accidents with the

Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, and Transport (MOLIT).

To provide prompt support not only in disasters within the military but also in

situations requiring military assistance, the MND operates a disaster control center

in Army, Navy, and Air Force units at every echelon–approximately 400 centers

in total–and maintains emergency response systems and organic cooperation

with relevant agencies, including municipal governments and local fire stations.

Furthermore, the MND organizes annual military-wide conferences for disaster
related officers and conducts specialized trainings which help improve the disaster

response capabilities of disaster-related officers in units of every echelon.


**Support for National Disasters** With the increase in the level of damages

caused by recent disasters such as earth
quakes, forest fires, droughts, and torrential rains, protecting the lives and property of

the people and supporting the public in overcoming disasters have become one of the

major missions of the ROK Armed Forces. For the past five years, the ROK Armed

Forces has been fulfilling missions at the forefront of disaster sites to protect the lives

and property of the people. Around 980,000 troops and 77,000 pieces of equipment

for disaster relief and damage restoration activities were deployed during this period.

Details on the support status are as shown in [Chart 3-9].

Due to an increase in forest fires in early April 2019, the ROK Armed Forces

deployed five military helicopters to combat forest fires in the Gangwon-do area.

8,180 troops and 546 pieces of equipment, including 35 firefighting helicopters,

were deployed when a large forest fire occurred in Goseong, Gangwon-do, thereby

minimizing damages to the military. Moreover, support was immediately provided

for civilian damage recovery, assisting the local residents to safely return to their

homes without delay. In the case of the Hungarian cruise ship sinking in May 2019,

seven members of a ROK naval rescue team, consisting of rescuers with experience

in the Sewol Ferry rescue, were dispatched to the on-site rescue operation and

devotedly carried out operations to rescue Korean civilians even under adverse field

conditions in Hungary.


The ROK Armed
Forces protecting
the daily lives of
people


-----

[Chart 3-9] The Military’s Aid to Civilians in the Past Five Years

As of November 30, 2020

|Year|Activities|No. of Support Personnel|No. of Equipment Pieces|
|---|---|---|---|
|Total||978,348|76,963|
|2016|Forest fire and fire|5,180|180|
||Foot-and-mouth disease, avian influenza (AI) and pine wilt disease control|5,658|577|
||Drought, heavy rainfall, Typhoon Chaba, and earthquake damage support|55,227|594|
||Heavy snowfall damage restoration, building collapse aid, and marine pollution damages restoration|5,573|47|
||Missing civilians’ search and rescue|2,111|95|
||Railroad and cargo labor union strike control|35,410|400|
|2017|Forest fire and fire|23,707|169|
||Drought, heavy rainfall, and typhoon damage support|39,003|1,736|
||Missing civilians’ search and rescue|2,473|152|
||Foot-and-mouth disease and AI control|33,042|3,279|
||Heavy snowfall and earthquake damage support|17,474|659|
|2018|Forest fire support|8,970|186|
||Drought, heavy rainfall, and typhoon damage support|16,125|8,168|
||Missing civilians’ search and rescue|1,165|219|
||Foot-and-mouth disease and AI control|10,452|1,246|
||Heavy snowfall and earthquake damage support|7,848|13|
|2019|Forest fire and fire|22,442|526|
||Heatwave, drought, typhoon, heavy rainfall, and heavy snowfall|64,745|2,319|
||Missing civilians’ search and rescue|4,208|748 (15 military dogs)|
||Blocking the spread of AI and ASF|108,985|7,490|
||Railroad and cargo labor union strike control|3,900|-|
||Marine pollution, Incheon red water, etc.|908|401|
|2020|Forest fire and fire|1,984|89|
||Heatwave, drought, typhoon, heavy rainfall, and heavy snowfall|128,699|17,063|
||Missing civilians’ search and rescue|5,604|778|
||Blocking the spread of AI and ASF|60,161|6,108|
||Public support for COVID-19|307,294|24,469|



On November 9 of the same year, a helicopter crashed after being dispatched from

the Forest Service to evacuate injured seamen from a fishing boat working in the

Dokdo area. In response, the ROK Armed Forces provided advanced equipment

such as military ships capable of underwater navigation including the ROKS

Cheonghaejin and aircraft lighting for SAR at night. As a result, three among the

missing persons were rescued and the fuselage and the flight recorder of the crashed

helicopter were recovered. Even in succeeding disasters such as the sinking of a

civilian fishing boat due to a fire near Jeju Island, the ROK Armed Forces conducted

maritime accident rescue activities utilizing advanced military assets for rescuing

missing persons and searching and recovering fishing boat, which contributed to


-----

Cheonghaejin Ferry lifting the fuselage of a firefighting
helicopter that crashed near the Dokdo Island
(November 2019)


Troops deployed to a forest fire in Goseong,
Gangwon (April 2019)


solidifying the people’s trust in the military.

During the spread of ASF in China, Mongolia, Vietnam, and etc in August 2018,

the ROK government strengthened its response to block the inflow, but on September

16, 2019, the first case of ASF was confirmed in the ROK at a pig farm in Paju,

Gyeonggi-do. Accordingly, the ROK Armed Forces, in cooperation with related

agencies and local governments, have greatly contributed to the prevention and

blocking of the spread of ASF in the border areas[28)] by supporting the capture of wild

boars and search of carcasses, disinfection efforts at farm posts and mobile control

posts, and aerial disinfection activities.

The longest rainy season (54 days), which occurred from June to August in 2020,

and typhoons[29)] that passed by the Korean Peninsula three times in a row after

the rainy season caused massive damage[30)] to the people and properties across the

country. With 31 cities (si), counties (gun), and districts (gu) declared as special

disaster zones, the MND dispatched military cooperative officers to 66 provincial

offices, cities, and counties to check the need for recovery support for preemptive

recovery. For five cities and counties (Jecheon and Chungju of Chungcheongbuk
do, Icheon of Gyeonggi-do, Namwon and Gurye of Jeollanam-do) where the demand

exceeded the support capacities of

regional defense divisions, the MND

deployed available units including

seven Special Warfare Command units

and the 1st Marine Division for early

damage recovery. In particular, military

bridge equipment (Medium Girder

Bridge) was installed for the residents

to use in place of the damaged bridge

Cheonma unit under the ROK Army Special Warfare

in Inje-gun, Gangwon-do and around Command


**28)**
As of November 30, 2020,
the ROK Armed Forces
deployed 166,236 troops
and 12,734 pieces of
equipment to block and
prevent the spread of ASF.

**29)**
No. 8 Typhoon Bavi
(August 26), No. 9 Typhoon
Maysak (September 3),
No. 10 Typhoon Haishen
(September 7)

**30)**
Casualties: 53 (50 deaths,
3 missing), Property
damage: KRW 1.26 trillion


-----

128,000 man-days and 17,000 pieces of equipment were deployed to support a series

of operations such as the search for missing people of the ship that was capsized

near the Uiam Dam and the search for lost mines in flooded areas. These activities

contributed to overcoming national disasters and stabilizing the people’s lives.


**COVID-19 Response and the National** The outbreak of COVID-19, a new

**Defense Rapid Support Group** infectious disease that broke out in

2019, has resulted in cumulative total

of 34,201 confirmed cases and 526 deaths (as of November 30) after the first infection

case was confirmed in the ROK on January 20, 2020. Five cities and counties in Daegu
Gyeongbuk region were declared as special disaster zones for the first time in the

country. COVID-19 posed a serious threat to national health and economic activities.

The MND worked closely with the Central Disaster Management Headquarters

to convert military hospitals in Daejeon, Daegu, and Goyang into infectious disease

hospitals and accommodate confirmed civilian patients. In addition, the MND

dispatched medical and operating personnel to more than 100 residential treatment

centers and temporary housing facilities for overseas Koreans and medical and

special quarantine personnel to airport and port quarantine stations. Around 306,000

man-days and 24,000 equipment including decontamination cars were deployed to

acquire and distribute masks and quarantine supplies that were urgently required for

public safety and carry out road and facility quarantine and disinfection activities.

In March 2020, the MND launched the National Defense Rapid Support Group

led by the Director General of Logistics Management Bureau to effectively respond

to support requirements unlike ordinary natural disaster support requirements

which include quarantine and transportation requirements exceeding the scope of

cooperation between the responsible units in the region and local governments on

COVID-19 response and requests for support from central government agencies

such as the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Ministry of Food and Drug

Safety. The Defense Rapid Support Group provided various types of support such

as distribution of masks, emergency transport of quarantine supplies, nationwide

quarantine and disinfection, and welfare support for vulnerable groups. Moreover,

the group provided prompt support through dedicated teams for each region

including Seoul, Gyeonggi-do, Daegu and Gyeongsangbuk-do, and Chungcheong
do area by operating rapid support cooperation officers in cities and provinces which

enabled the group to preemptively confirm the support requirements of the local

governments before they made requests for support. Through these efforts, the group

greatly contributes to the national-level response effort to overcome COVID-19.


-----

The ROK Armed Forces’ public support activities are greatly contributing to the

effort of assisting those people in difficult situations to be able to go back to work

as early as possible. The MND will continue to protect the lives and properties of

the people by promptly and actively deploying troops and equipment in the event of

national disasters in the future.


**Establishing a Military-Wide Integrated** With disasters occurring frequently

**Disaster Management System** due to the ongoing climate change,

there is a growing demand to est
ablish a comprehensive management system for all four stages of disaster

management (prevention-preparation-response-recovery), including a disaster

prediction system, which will strengthen the ROK Armed Forces’ disaster response

capabilities. Accordingly, in order to integrate the disaster management information

system operated by each service, the MND laid out an overall roadmap of a system

that will be operated in an integrate manner by carrying out an Information

Strategy Planning (ISP) project in 2019 to build a military-wide integrated disaster

management information system.

Based on this, response measures will be promptly disseminated through real time

information sharing between the MND and each service branch, and the MND plans

to establish an efficient civilian-government-military support system by sharing the

military’s emergency rescue support capabilities for national disasters in connection

with the systems of related organizations such as the MOIS National Disaster

Management System (NDMS).


**Strengthening the Capacity**

**of Emergency Rescue Support**

**Agencies**

In May 2019, the MND signed a me
morandum of understanding (MOU)

with the National Fire Agency to est
ablish an effective disaster response MOU on the establishment of disaster response

cooperation system between the MND and the

cooperation system and to protect the National Fire Agency (May 2019)

lives and property of the people. To

take prompt safety and recovery measures, the two agencies continue to develop

their disaster preparedness capabilities to cooperate with each other on matters

related to sharing of information, mutual support in the form of human resources,


-----

supplies, and equipment, strengthening of emergency patient transport systems, and

joint responses to disasters with multiple casualties.

4. Establishing an International Cooperation System for Overseas

Disaster Reliefs


**Overseas Disaster Relief** Large scale disasters in several countries recently

**Support** have proven to be difficult for the affected coun
tries to carry out recovery activities on their own

thus it has become necessary for the international community to take joint action

in the perspective of humanitarian assistance. In response to such needs, the MND

is promoting international disaster response cooperation activities by providing

support in the form of deploying the "Korea Disaster Relief Team" and transporting

relief supplies and equipment in case of a massive overseas disaster.

Overseas disaster relief activities carried out by the MND over the past 10 years

are summarized in [Chart 3-10].

[Chart 3-10] Overseas Disaster Relief Support in the Past 10 Years

|Date|Region (Type of Disaster)|Activities|
|---|---|---|
|March 2011|East Japan (earthquake and tsunami)|· 10 transport aircraft (C-130) (4 times ), 58.8 t of relief supplies; transported 102 rescue personnel|
|October 2011|Turkey (earthquake)|· 100 military tents|
|November 2013|Philippines (typhoon)|· 9 transport aircraft (C-130) (4 times), 329 t of relief supplies; transported 2,022 personnel including a rescue team|
|April 2016|Kumamoto Prefecture, Japan (earthquake)|· 2 transport aircraft (C-130), relief supplies worth USD 110,000 (tents, blankets, instant rice, and drinking water)|
|July 2018|Laos (dam collapse)|· 5 transport aircraft (C-130) (3 times), 23 t of relief supplies; transported 20 medical personnel|
|October 2018|Indonesia (earthquake)|· 3 transport aircraft (C-130) (between October 8 and November 30), 170 tents, 456 t of international relief supplies|
|July 2020|East Timor / Philippines (COVID-19)|· 1 transport aircraft (C-130), 200,000 and 400,000 quarantine masks (6t) for each country|


**Establishing an Overseas Disaster and** In 2019, the MND participated in

**International Cooperation System** six international conferences and

drills–including the ADMM-Plus

Experts’ Working Group on Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (ADMM
Plus EWG on HADR) and its combined exercise, and the Regional Consultative


-----

Combined exercise of ADMM-Plus EWG on HADR
(July 2019)


5th Session of RCG on Humanitarian Civil–Military
Coordination for Asia and the Pacific (December 2019)


Group (RCG) on Humanitarian Civil-Military Coordination for Asia and the

Pacific–to provide prompt, efficient humanitarian assistance and to solidify the

international cooperation system for disaster relief in the event of various types

of disasters. Following the earthquake and tsunami in Sumatra, Indonesia, the

combined exercise of the ADMM-Plus EWG on HA/DR[31)] was held in Malaysia

in July to discuss the following procedures in the event of a disaster: dispatching

disaster relief troops, obtaining related information before and after the dispatch,

and conducting cooperation measures. The participating countries also carried out

discussion on ways to cooperate with international organizations.

Furthermore, the MND participated in the 5th Session of the RCG on Humani
tarian Civil-Military Coordination for Asia and the Pacific[32)] for the first time to

solidify the overseas disaster relief system through in-depth discussions on various

topics such as information sharing between humanitarian assistance and disaster

relief operations and development plans for civilian–military cooperation systems

related to logistics support.

5. Development of Defense Space Power


**31)**
ADMM-Plus Experts’
Working Group on
Humanitarian Assistance
and Disaster Relief

**32)**
A meeting held for the
purpose of discussing
current issues throughout
disaster response,
including humanitarian
civil-military cooperation
in the Asia-Pacific region
and use of foreign military
assets. The 5th session
took place in Chiang Mai,
Thailand.

**33)**
In 1967, the UN led the
signing of the "Treaty on
Principles Governing the
Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of
Outer Space, including
the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies (Outer
Space Treaty)". The Outer
Space Treaty prohibits
the arrangement of
surrounding tracks around
the Earth with any kind of
WMD.


**Strengthening the Foundation** While complying with international

**for the Development of** norms on the peaceful use of space[33)], the

**Defense Space Power** MND is making various efforts such as

supplementing laws and systems and

reinforcing organi-zations and human resources to develop the defense space power

of the ROK Armed Forces.

In 2018, the MND participated in the revision of the "Basic Plan for the Pro
motion of Space Development", which establishes the mid- to long-term goals of


-----

governance and the basic directions

for national space development. The

revised Basic Plan provides the basis

for the development of military re
connaissance satellites and space

threat surveillance systems. In the fo
llowing year, the "Basic Plan for the

Development of Defense Space power" Establishment ceremony of the ROK Air Force

Satellite Surveillance Control Unit (September 2019)

was revised, reflecting the changes

in the space security environment. In accordance with the mid- to long-term

development goals for defense space power, the revised plan presents four key areas–

establishment of a policy framework, development of an operating system, buildup

of space capabilities, and expansion of internal and external cooperation–and

detailed implementation tasks for each field.

To establish a policy framework for the development of defense space power, the

MND has legislated and revised the relevant laws and is carrying out R&D activities

for space technology. While bolstering the organizations in charge of space-related

affairs at the JCS and each service branch, the MND is fostering space specialists by

offering educational opportunities at home and abroad. With an aim to secure space

surveillance capabilities over the Korean Peninsula, the MND launched the ROK Air

Force Satellite Surveillance Control Unit–the ROK’s first space unit–in 2019. The

unit was renamed as the "ROK Air Force Space Operations Unit" the following year.

Also in 2020, the ROK’s indigenous military communications satellite was launched,

making the ROK the 10th country in the world to acquire a military satellite. The

MND plans to continue to acquire various space assets such as surveillance and

reconnaissance satellites and early warning satellites in order to fully strengthen

its space capabilities. Efforts will be made to strengthen civilian-military space

technology cooperation for the development of defense space power and to further

expand cooperation with friendly nations including the United States and France in

the space domain.

Moreover, the MND will endeavor to enhance its defense space power while

maintaining a close cooperation system with related ministries and agencies

considering the changes in the space security environment.


**Development of Defense Space Power**

**Based on the ROK-US Alliance**


Based on the ROK–US alliance,

the ROK and the US are exploring

various areas of cooperation in the


Launch of
ANASIS-II


-----

domain of space as well. In particular,

the two nations hold the "Space Co
operation Working Group" every year,

and share information on space situ
ational awareness (SSA) **[34)] to jointly**

respond to space threats.

In 2012, the two countries signed the

"Terms of Reference for the ROK–US Exercise related to international space situational

measures (September 2019)

Space Cooperation Working Group

(SCWG)" at the 44th ROK–US SCM. The Space Cooperation Working Group

held 15 meetings since the signing and achieved various cooperation outcomes

including the sharing of pending defense space policy issues, training, fostering, and

exchanges of space workforce, cooperation in SSA, and participation in exercises

related to international space situational measures. In 2019 in particular, the ROK

and the US discussed ways to expand SSA information sharing and activate space

workforce exchanges for joint responses against space threats. And in 2020, the two

nations confirmed the joint objective of shaping the conditions for an even closer

collaboration on developing the alliance’s space policy.

In September 2014, to jointly respond to space threats, the two countries signed the

"MOU on SSA Service and Information Sharing", and based on the agreement, the

ROK Armed Forces is receiving SSA information from the US Space Command.

Since the installation of the Air Force Space Intelligence Center (later named as

Korea Space Operations Center) in July 2015, the ROK has been carrying out several

tasks such as analyzing space threats based on the SSA information provided by

the United States and conducting exercises related to space situational measures

in preparation for events such as satellite collisions. The Korea Space Operations

Center(KSpOC), in particular, maintained close communication with the US by

sharing satellite orbit information with the US Combined Space Operations Center

during the launch of Cheollian 2B (February 2020). The center also participated in

settling the satellite in the target orbit through cooperation with related agencies.

At the 52nd ROK–US SCM held in October 2020, the two countries agreed

to further explore measures for cooperation to strengthen space capabilities as

an alliance. At the same time, they have agreed to further expand bilateral and

multilateral joint exercises to improve the alliance’s space operational capabilities

and continue to seek opportunities to foster space specialists.


**34)**
A concept of providing
information (prediction
and warning) to users by
collecting and analyzing
data from both ground and
space systems to prepare
for space hazards such
as falling and collision of
space objects.


-----

## 4 Establishing an Integrated

#### Civilian–Government–Military– Police Defense Posture

To effectively respond to a variety of security threats that continue to grow, the ROK

Armed Forces continues to enhance the integrated civilian–government–military–police

defense posture by organically integrating all national defense elements and building a

cooperative system with relevant agencies and municipal governments.

1. Operation of Integrated Defense Organizations


**Integrated Defense Organization** To foster defense elements and firmly

establish an integrated defense posture,

the ROK government operates integrated defense organizations such as the Central

Integrated Defense Committee, the Integrated Defense Headquarters, the Regional

Integrated Defense Committees, and the Integrated Defense Support Headquarters.

Each command is committed to hold stable and seamless defense operations, and the

cooperation structure for each organization is as shown in [Chart 3-11].



[Chart 3-11] Integrated Defense Command and Cooperation System

President Command (Control)


Command (Control)

Cooperation



Other Government

Ministries


|National Ministry of se and Sa Korean|Interior Ministry o|
|---|---|
||fety and Fis National|
|s of Staff Police e Headquarters’ ganization) ilitary|Korea Co Agency|


Integrated Defense Central Integrated

Headquarters Defense Committee

Ministry of National Ministry of Interior

Defense and Safety

Korean National

Joint Chiefs of Staff

Police Agency

(Integrated Defense Headquarters’

Working Organization)

Regional Integrated

Defense Committees

Local Military

Local Police Agencies

Commands


-----

The Central Integrated Defense Committee is the highest decision-making body in

matters related to integrated defense, reporting to the Prime Minister. The committee

deliberates and decides upon the following: national-level integrated defense

policies, integrated defense operations and training guidelines, declaration or lifting

of an integrated defense situation, coordination of tasks related to integrated defense

between government ministries and related organizations, and cost of mobilizing

national defense elements according to integrated defense operations.[35) ]


**35)**
According to Article 4 of
the United Defense Act,
the Prime Minister serves
as the chairperson of
the Central Integrated
Defense Committee, and
its committee members
are the ministers of
government departments
including the Minister of
Economy and Finance,
the Minister of the Office
for Government Policy
Coordination, the Minister
of Patriots and Veterans
Affairs, the Minister of
Government Legislation,
the Minister of Food and
Drug Safety, the director
of the National Intelligence
Service, the director of
the Integrated Defense
Headquarters (Chairman
of the JCS), and other
persons prescribed by the
Presidential Decree.

**36)**
In accordance with the
Presidential Decree
No. 398 and Article 8
of the United Defense
Guidelines, the committee
is composed of the
working-level directors of
government departments
including the MND and
the JCS, and all military
headquarters and
Operations Commands.

**37)**
In accordance with
Article 5 of the United
Defense Act, among
the Regional Integrated
Defense Committees,
only the committees of
metropolitan and special
self-governing cities
and provinces including
the Seoul Metropolitan
City can declare and lift
an integrated defense
situation.


**Integrated Defense** The Integrated Defense Headquarters is responsible for

**Headquaters** integrated defense operations. With the chairman of the

JCS serving as its director, the organization establishes

and coordinates integrated defense policies, evaluates and supervises the integrated

defense posture, conducts a comprehensive analysis of the status of integrated

defense operations, and devises response measures. It also develops the Integrated

Defense Operations and Training Guidelines and related plans, and conducts

various tasks associated with their implementation including adjustment and

control, cooperation with relevant organizations in the integrated defense system,

and consultations and adjustments on matters related to project execution. It also

supervises a working committee on integrated defense[36)] for coordination within the

government and for an uninterrupted execution of integrated defense works.


**Regional Integrated Defense** The Regional Integrated Defense Committees

**Committees** are set up in 17 metropolitan and special self
governing cities and provinces including the

Seoul Metropolitan City and 228 cities, counties, and districts. They are chaired by

metropolitan city mayors, provincial governors, city mayors, county governors, and

district office heads. Each Regional Integrated Defense Committee deliberates and

decides upon matters including declaring or lifting an integrated defense situation

at a local level[37)], establishing support measures for integrated defense operations,

designating vulnerable areas or repealing the designation thereof, and effectively

fostering and operating national defense elements and support measures.


**Integrated Defense** The Integrated Defense Support Headquarters,

**Support Headquarters** established at the level of a Metropolitan City,

province, city, county, district, town (eup), township

(myeon), and neighborhood (dong), develops and implements plans for supporting

integrated defense operations and training. They also set up and operate an


-----

integrated defense all-source situation room while fostering and supporting national

defense elements and establish resident report systems in vulnerable areas in

integrated defense. They provide support for mobilization tasks related to integrated

defense operations and for the establishment of a regional joint press center, and

implementation of matters reviewed and resolved by the Regional Integrated Defense

Committees.

2. Improvement and Development of an Integrated Defense

Execution System Centering on the Heads of Local Governments

As the scope of security has gradually expanded to nonmilitary threats such as

natural and social disasters, infectious diseases, and safety accidents that were not

previously recognized as threats, the ROK government is striving to improve and

develop the integrated defense execution system to respond to various elements

posing threats to the safety of the people.


**Strengthening the Integrated** The 52nd (2019) and 53rd (2020) Central

**Defense Capabilities** Integrated Defense Committee evaluated

military readiness posture and integrated

defense posture against military threats as well as nonmilitary threats such as new

terrorism using drones, disasters and infectious diseases, and safety accidents, and

devised government-wide preparedness measures through in-depth discussions

between government ministries and local governments. As a result, in 2019, a

total of 14 follow-up tasks in four areas were derived and promoted, including the

reinforcement of integrated defense capabilities centered on the heads of local

governments. In particular, Presidential Directive No. 398 on Integrated Defense

Guidelines was revised[38)] for the first time in 9 years since its enforcement in 2010. In

2020, the committee drew up 10 key tasks in four areas, including the performance

enhancement of integrated defense training to establish an overall response

posture at the pan-government level in response to various security threats and the

establishment of a response posture in preparation for new types of terrorism using

drones. The integrated defense working-level committee quarterly analyzes the

implementation outcomes of each government ministries, related agencies, and local

governments and carries out close communication and collaboration with the related

departments and organizations to improve the performance of integrated defense.


**38)**
As of March 1, 2019, the
Presidential Directive
No. 28 was revised to
Presidential Directive No.
398 after supplementing
23 areas, including
the amendment of the
United Defense Act and
its Enforcement Decree
after 2010 and the setup
of control zones when the
alert posture is issued.


-----

**Enhancing the Performance of** The Integrated Defense Headquarters

**Integrated Defense Training** ensures the safety of people from various

threats such as nonmilitary threats that

may occur during wartime and peacetime. 17 metropolitan cities and provinces

across the country are divided into 11 zones to conduct a comprehensive rear-area

training (Hwarang Training) where all national defense elements participate to

diagnose, supplement, and develop the integrated defense operation system for each

region. In particular, the Integrated Defense Headquarters expanded and reorganized

an integrated government evaluation team[39)] that has been in effect since 2018, and

subject matter experts in related fields conducted exclusive evaluations of related

organizations focusing on site-oriented actions to strengthen the integrated defense

capability centered on the heads of local governments. The level of integrated

defense posture was also further improved at the regional level. For uninterrupted

integrated defense operations during contingencies, the Headquarters derived

legal and institutional supplementation elements and promoted the amendment of

the United Defense Act (1 case) and its Enforcement Decree (3 cases), the United

Defense Guidelines (Presidential Directive No. 398) (3 cases), and the detailed

enforcement guidelines of integrated defense (9 cases). The amendment was

performed according to the amendment procedure of laws and regulations.


**39)**
The team is composed
of the Integrated Defense
Headquarters, the MOIS,
the National Intelligence
Service, the Korean
National Police Agency,
the Korea Coast Guard,
the National Fire Agency,
and about 30 to 40
personnel working at the
departments in charge of
key national infrastructure.
It evaluates the integrated
defense posture of
local governments in 17
metropolitan cities and
provinces, regional police
agencies, maritime police
agencies, fire and disaster
headquarters as well as key
national infrastructure.

**40)**
An intelligent, hyperconnected society of all
objects in both the real
world and the actual field
using advanced ICT:
Internet of Things (loT),
Cloud, Big data, Artificial
Intelligence (AI), Mobile,
as well as 3D printing,
biotechnology, and cyberphysical system.


3. Establishing an Integrated Defense Information Sharing System

and Strengthening Cooperation

In 2011, the ROK government integrated the control functions of CCTVs installed

for various purposes such as ensuring the safety of residents and preventing crimes,

and has been promoting the establishment of an integrated CCTV control center to

enable the joint response of the related organizations to various situations occurring

in each region. As a result, in 2019, integrated control centers were built in all

228 local governments. Furthermore, the center is being developed into a social

infrastructure system united with the intelligent information society (ICBAM)[40)].

As a result of the 52nd Central Integrated Defense Committee Meeting in

2019, the ROK government has implemented a development plan to conduct

integrated operation of CCTV control centers and the Integrated Defense Support

Headquarters. Integrated operations enable the heads of local governments to judge

the situation and take countermeasures in a timely manner while monitoring the

site in real time at the Integrated Defense Support Headquarters during integrated


-----

defense operations and events of

terrorism and disaster. The ROK

government also built a system to

enable the sharing of footages recorded

at the integrated CCTV control centers

with the Integrated Defense Support

Headquarters. As of December 2020,

the system is installed in 207 locations Integrated CCTV Control Center

across 228 cities, counties, and dis
tricts, and installation for 48 other sites is underway.

Furthermore, with the cooperation of local governments, the ROK government

is establishing a video information sharing system between the integrated CCTV

control centers and the command post of responsible local military units. The system

will enable the sharing of real-time information with the responsible units in the

event of a disaster, including counterterrorism and counter-infiltration operations

on a regional basis, quick response at the early stage, and increase the efficiency of

civilian-government-military-police-firefighting integrated operations. In 2020,

the system was successfully installed in 101 areas across 228 cities, counties, and

districts. The ROK government will continue to build the system in the following

year, regarding it as a core task among the integrated defense tasks.


-----

## 5 Education and Training

#### Focused on Combat Missions and Strengthening the Spiritual and Mental Force

With a goal of "fostering strong combatants and combat troops that are capable of

fighting and defeating the enemy", the ROK Armed Forces is carrying out various

activities such as enhancing the school education systems, reinforcing realistic unit

trainings and enhancing the spiritual and mental force of servicemembers. The ROK

Armed Forces seeks to acquire competent personnel to foster competent cadres and

offers a variety of educational programs to nurture creative military professionals.

1. Acquiring Competent Personnel and Fostering Military Professionals


**Acquiring Competent** With the implementation of Defense Reform 2.0, the

**Personnel** ROK Armed Forces is being reorganized into an elite

force centered on officers and adopting advanced

weapons systems, increasing the demand for competent cadres. Meanwhile, it is

estimated that acquiring capable cadres will become increasingly challenging as the

number of people wanting to serve as officers or NCOs decreases as the population

eligible for military service continues to decrease and the youth employment rate

increases.

To acquire talents, the ROK Armed Forces has reinforced the professionalism of

servicemembers and are expanding the candidates for long-term service officers so

that more personnel can stably serve in the military. The overall quota of cadres will

be adjusted in a way that reduces the recruitment of new appointees by cutting down

the number of staff sergeants as well as first and second lieutenants while increasing

the number of cadres serving a long-term career as soldiers. By doing so, the ROK

Armed Forces plans to gradually enhance their workforce management system

into a "small-scale acquisition and long-term utilization" system. The system will

lead to the acquisition of competent personnel and the long-term utilization of an

experienced workforce, and will contribute to the enhancement of the ROK Armed

Forces’ combat power.

Additional efforts to acquire competent personnel include the short-term service


-----

grant to better compensate officers and NCOs intending to serve a short term. The

MND is also providing benefits such as grants for additional military service[41)]. The

grant is given in the form of tuitions to university and vocational college students

hoping to serve for a medium term so that they have the opportunity to receive higher

education in connection with military service as a cadre. With these measures, the

ROK Armed Forces will gain stable access to outstanding mid- and short-term service

officers in preparation for a situation wherein it becomes difficult to acquire manpower.


**Fostering Creative Military Specialists** The MND offers two programs–

Specialized Degree Education and

Overseas Military Education–to foster creative military specialists capable of

actively responding to the changes in future battlefield environments, such as

changes brought by the Fourth Industrial Revolution, and leading innovations in the

defense field.

Specialized Degree Education is aimed at fostering military professors,

researchers, and experts in special technology fields. Outstanding domestic and

international educational institutions offer master’s and doctoral degree programs,

and around 300 trainees are selected as candidates every year for programs mainly

in advanced science and technology fields, including AI and robotics–the leading

technologies of the Fourth Industrial Revolution and for smart defense.

Overseas Military Education is aimed at fostering regional experts and training

students to acquire advanced military knowledge, operate weapons systems, and

master combat techniques. Around 320 candidates are sent every year to study in

various types of educational institutions including defense graduate schools, command

and general staff colleges, and military occupation schools in some 40 countries. To

foster expert personnel in preparation for the wartime OPCON transition and regional

experts to support the military domain of the New Southern and New Northern

policies, Overseas Military Education destinations are diversifying to include countries

in Southeast Asia, Eurasia, Middle East, South America, and Africa.

2. Development of the School Education System


**41)**
A grant given to university
and technical college
students under the
condition that they serve
an additional period, in
addition to their mandatory
service period, when
appointed as officers or
NCOs. The amount of the
grant is similar to college
and university tuitions.


**Objectives** The MND and each military services are enhancing the school

education system with a focus on improving development

training and education to foster elite servicemembers and refresher training to

meet the demands in the battlefield. The lecture-based education method has been


-----

transformed into a student-led participation-based education and problem-solving

education. Meanwhile, the MND continues to review educational requirements to

meet the changes in the defense environment such as the introduction of cutting-edge

weapons systems and advancements in science and technology, and is reflecting

these requirements into education curriculums. The MND has been improving

the education systems of military academies to foster elite officers, operating

the Reserve Noncommissioned Officers’ Training Corps (RNTC) for the stable

recruitment and fostering of excellent NCOs, enhancing the training system for

newly enlisted soldiers to improve the skill level of servicemembers, and vitalizing

online defense education programs. It is also enhancing the personnel training

system and the joint and combined operations training system in connection with

Defense Reform 2.0. The overview of the school education is shown in [Chart 3-12].

[Chart 3-12] An Overview of Courses Offered by the Educational Institutions of the

Three Branches and Units Directly Controlled by the MND and Joint Units


|Category|Total|Army|Navy|Air Force|Marine Corps|Units Directly Controlled by the MND and Joint Units|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Development Training and Education|35|14|7|8|5|1|
|Refresher Training and Education|2,344|776|908|434|28|198|


As of 2020 (unit: number of courses)


**Improving Education Systems at** To foster creative and proactive elite offi
**Military Academies** cers, the educational systems at military

academies have been enhanced. To en
sure cadets’ autonomy, military academies have created an environment for self
directed learning and strengthened "participation-based education" that involves

projects, as well as classes, that focus on discussions and presentations led by cadets.

Moreover, to ensure realistic military training that reflects battlefield demands,

military academies have established cadet training objectives linked to the officer

basic course program and conducted training tailored to those objectives. The MND

conducts two-to-three week field-oriented joint education for every freshmen,

sophomore, and junior cadets to enhance their understanding on and recognition of

the importance of joint operations. The first-year cadets learned about the Army by

experiencing scientific combat training as well as through daytime and nighttime

guard duties at GOP units. The second-year cadets boarded naval vessels–such as

amphibious assault ships and destroyers–to form a sound perspective toward their


-----

nation and broaden their understanding of the Navy. They visited the neighboring

countries of the Korean Peninsula as well as the major domestic islands (Ulleungdo,

Dokdo, and coastal waters of Ieodo, etc.) and conducted the "joint cruising training

for cadets of the three military academies" to experience various kinds of maritime

training and life aboard naval vessels. For third-year cadets, they have undergone

courses to understand the Air Force through field trips to Air Force operations units

and air navigation training. Since 2019, the joint cruising training for cadets of the

three military academies was further expanded to include the Korea Armed Forces

Nursing Academy (KAFNA). Education on jointness is also conducted at the Korea

Army Academy at Yeongcheon (KAAY).


**Official Operation of the Reserve** Since 2015, the MND has

**Noncommissioned Officers’ Training Corps** piloted the RNTC program

in six junior colleges to gain

stable access to and foster outstanding NCO candidates, and in 2019, the plan to

officially operate and expand the RNTC was finalized. As a result, the Navy and the

Air Force have been officially operating the RNTC program since January 1, 2020

while the Army and the Marine Corps started the program on April 1, 2020. From

2017 to 2020, a total of 643 NCOs were appointed and are performing their duties.

The 5th and the 6th RNTC are enrolled in the military academies at present.


**Improving the New** The MND has improved the training system for

**Enlistee Training System** newly enlisted soldiers to prevent the decline of

soldiers’ proficiency, which may occur due to

the shortening of the service period based on Defense Reform 2.0. Reflecting the

opinions from the field units, the MND improved the curriculum to focus on core

subjects such as personal firearm shooting, combat fitness test, and spiritual and

mental force enhancement that meet the mission and roles of the unit. Specialized

training of each service was also enhanced which include the Army’s outdoor

comprehensive training for 4 days and 3 nights including an all-night march, the

Navy’s maritime training, the Air Force’s survival skills training, and the Marine

Corps’ abandon-ship drills and combat swimming.


**Vitalizing Online Defense** The ROK Armed Forces has been expanding their

**Education** online education offerings so that field units can

minimize off-duty hours due to attendance of on
site education courses. Online education also ensures the prompt provision of quality


-----

education to a large number of trainees. Those who are eligible for education take

online orientation programs before attending the on-site education course, while field

units can take the various lectures provided by each educational institution without

temporal and spatial constraints. As of 2020, a total of 52 Military-Massive Open

Online Course (M-MOOC)[42)] programs are offered in 19 institutions, including the

Joint Forces Military University (JFMU), KAFNA, Defense Agency for Spiritual

and Mental Force Enhancement, and Army Infantry School. The MND plans to

expand Internet-based online education to guarantee necessary military education to

servicemembers without restraints.


**Improving the Training System** The overall training system for the civilian

**for Civilian Military Employees** military employees is also being improved

as per the expansion of the number and

roles of civilian military employees in accordance with Defense Reform 2.0. The

MND plans to improve the training system for newly employed civilians, which

has been implemented separately by each service, to a more systematic form of

integrated training for the entire military starting in 2023. With regards to refresher

training for grade 6 and below, the curriculum was reviewed and supplemented

focusing on cultivating the competencies and knowledge required for each position.

Furthermore, the MND aims to strengthen knowledge and leadership training by

newly establishing a long-term training course for grade 4 and grade 5 managers.

Improvements are expected in the personnel policy for the civilian military

employees in order to conduct specialized degree education in the domains of

defense administration, technology, and research in the medium and long terms.


**Establishing Joint and Combined** In preparation for future warfare and

**Operations Training System** wartime OPCON transition, the MND

is establishing a training system for

each rank of officers to foster military specialists with the capability to conduct

joint and combined operations. The joint training of the military academies has

been expanded in the officer training course, while basic literacy courses related

to joint education were newly established in the ROTC and Officer Candidate

School curriculum. For the refresher curriculum for company-grade officers, the

MND has added courses for understanding the basic concepts of the organization

and formation of other military forces and the execution of joint and combined

operations. Moreover, in order to provide a number of personnel with specialized

education in joint and combined operations–which was conducted only for a small


**42)**
A military education
system without maximum
enrollment limits and that is
open to all and offers webbased courses. Military

-  Massive Open Online

Course )


-----

number of selected people from major and lieutenant colonel officers–the MND is

planning to offer distance education and short-term courses targeted for 2021. Joint

and combined policy manager courses are also offered to colonels working in policy

departments and joint units. Courses related to joint and combined operations were

further expanded and reflected in the education courses for high-level policymakers

for those who are to be promoted to brigadier generals.

The MND has reinforced the role of the JCS in joint and combined operations

training. Furthermore, the MND maintains its efforts to improve the conditions and

environment of military education, such as reinforcing the qualification requirements

for joint staff universities to acquire excellent instructors.

3. Reinforcing Realistic Unit Training


**Objectives** The ROK Armed Forces reinforces realistic unit training by

actively responding to changes in the educational and training

environment including changes in the security environment, shortening of the

service period, increased urbanization, and conflict with the public.

To foster the ability to conduct joint and combined operations, the MND has

further expanded joint training activities at home and abroad and formed joint

units incorporating the army, navy, and air force, providing more opportunities for

personnel to receive training.

Moreover, to improve the unit combat performance capabilities and overcome

training restrictions, the ROK Armed Forces is expanding its scientific training

system by applying advanced technologies of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.


**Key Training and Exercises of the Army,** The Army is reinforcing its indivi
**Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps** dual combatant and unit training,

expanding the LVCG (Live, Vir
tual, Constructive, Gaming) training, and conducting various joint exercises for

combat-oriented realistic training and exercises.

In order to strengthen individual combat capabilities, which are the basis of the

Army’s combat capabilities, the Army is fostering the ability to overcome the

battlefield situation through physical training focused on combat missions. Every

year, the best 300 warriors in individual and team units are selected and rewarded,

creating an atmosphere where combat experts are given preferential treatment. To

realize a "mission-based training and exercise", training is carried out according


ROK Army’s KCTC
training


-----

Combat flight simulator (October 2020) ROK–US Special Operation Training (April 2020)

to the Mission-Essential Task List (METL), which selects tasks that should be

conducted by each unit.

To overcome various restrictions on education and training such as the shortened

service period, extreme weather, and civil complaints, the Army is also committed

to strengthening the LVCG using advanced science technology. Moreover, after

developing and improving the existing battalion-level Korea Combat Training

Center (KCTC) training system for 7 years, it has been operated as a brigade-level

training system since 2018. The Army has also activated bilateral battle training of

small units in the post or arbitrary areas through the expansion and deployment of

the Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement System (MILES)[43)] to field units.

In addition, the Army is improving its ability to respond to various contingencies

by using a simulator, which involves firing, controlling, and tactical simulation in a

virtual battlefield environment. The Battle Command Training Program (BCTP),

which uses computer simulation techniques, is also used to enhance the combat

command capabilities and integrated combat force management capabilities of

commanders and staff. In the future, the Army plans to build a synthetic training

environment that integrates actual training (live), simulator training (virtual), BCTP

using computer simulation techniques (constructive), and war-gaming (gaming) into

a scientific training system.

In order to develop combined operations execution capabilities and enhance

interoperability, the Army is conducting various combined exercises such as ROK–

US special operations, irregular warfare, cooperative training, air assault training,

and high-altitude low opening training. In particular, the Army is strengthening

its combined small units scientific training at the US 8th Army’s Vandal Training

Center and its combined small unit training at the National Training Center in the

United States. Joint exercises carried out by the Army for the past three years are

summarized in [Chart 3-13].


**43)**
Education and training
equipment using advanced
science technology such
as laser launcher and
detector


-----

[Chart 3-13] The Army’s Joint Exercises During the Past Three Years

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|(Unit: times)|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Year|Total|Domestic|||Overseas|||
|||Subtotal|ROK–US|Multilateral|Subtotal|ROK–US|Multilateral|
|2018|33|31|31|-|2|-|2|
|2019|91|89|89|-|2|1|1|
|2020|30|29|29|-|1|1|-|



 In 2020, joint exercises were adjusted under the ROK–US agreement due to COVID-19


(Unit: times)


The Navy conducts realistic cooperative[44)] and joint exercises consistent with the

battlefield environment in the East Sea, West Sea, and South Sea, and enhances

its operational capabilities through ROK–US bilateral and multilateral combined

exercises. The Navy conducts cruise training every year to cultivate mission

execution capabilities of cadets and promote national interest.

The joint forces on the ground, air, and sea participate in cooperative and joint

exercises consisting of various types of operations including anti-surface, anti
submarine, and anti-air operations. Major cooperative and joint exercises include

maritime maneuvers, northwestern island defense, joint response exercise against

local provocations near the NLL, joint amphibious training, and East Sea territory

defense training. During these training activities, the Navy verifies the performance

of precision-guided weapons and maximizes its operational capability through live
fire training.

To establish a combined defense posture and strengthen the ROK–US alliance,

the Navy is strengthening multilateral combined exercises, including the ROK–US

combined exercise, that promote humanitarian aid and military cooperation. ROK–

US combined exercises are carried out in various forms to enhance the operational

execution capabilities of the combined forces and increase interoperability between

the two countries’ forces. They include ROK–US passing exercises (PASSEX),

combined theater anti-submarine warfare training, mine warfare training, rescue

warfare training, and special warfare

training. Examples of multilateral

combined training and exercises

include Cobra Gold, Western Pacific

Mine Countermeasure Exercise

(WPMCMEX), Rim of the Pacific

Exercise (RIMPAC), (KOMODO)[45)]

which is a multilateral rescue exercise,

the joint field training exercise (FTX)

FTX conducted with ADMM-Plus maritime security

of ADMM-Plus maritime security division(May 2019)


ROK Navy’s
cruise training

**44)**
Cooperation of two or more
units that do not have a
command relationship to
achieve a certain common
purpose

**45)**
Komodo is an island on an
archipelago of the Lesser
Sunda Islands in Indonesia.


-----

division, and the Search-and-Rescue Exercise (SAREX) conducted with neighboring

nations including Japan and Russia. In recent years, the ROK has expanded the

PASSEX with neighboring and partner countries including Australia, Canada, and

New Zealand. The combined exercises carried out by the Navy for the past three

years are summarized in [Chart 3-14].

[Chart 3-14] The Navy’s Joint Exercises During the Past Three Years


|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|(Unit: times)|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Year|Total|Domestic|||Overseas|||
|||Subtotal|ROK–US|Multilateral|Subtotal|ROK–US|Multilateral|
|2018|66|58|51|7|8|-|8|
|2019|81|68|61|7|13|1|12|
|2020|88|75|70|5|13|4|9|


Cruise training[46)] is conducted for about 100 to 140 days by dividing the world

into four routes by region. The routes are changed every year. Since the first cruise

training in 1954, the Navy conducted the longest training for 141 days in 12 countries

in 2019. In the following year, amid the difficulties brought about by COVID-19,

the Navy visited two countries for 60 days and conducted ocean navigation training

in order to cultivate practical adaptability. Moreover, the Navy contributes to

raising the ROK’s stature through military exchanges and cooperation with visiting

countries during cruise training and by holding events to show appreciation toward

the countries that participated in the Korean War and consolatory events for overseas

Korean residents, and carrying out defense industrial cooperation.

The Air Force conducts independent and joint exercises of various scales as well as

domestic and overseas joint exercises to build omnidirectional military preparedness

and improve the ability to conduct aerospace operations with initiative.

Independent exercises include Soaring Eagle, a large scale training covering

the entire airspace of Korea, strike package training, air-to-air shooting and air
to-ground bombing training, defensive counter-air comprehensive training, and

surveillance and reconnaissance training. Meanwhile, joint exercises include joint

air defense training, emergency air interdiction training, counter-fire warfare, close

air support, international water joint training in the northwest region, and large-scale

maritime refugee SAR training.

Combined exercises conducted domestically include the Korea Flying Training

aimed at improving the performance of large-scale combined air operations,

Combined Flying Training Event (CFTE) and Combined Special Operations Training

(Teak Knife) for improving wartime operational capability, and Combat Search And


The ROK Air
Force’s joint
maritime refugee
SAR training

**46)**
Ocean navigation training
for fourth-year cadets of
the Naval Academy


-----

Rescue Training Event (CSAR-TE).

In 2019, to further expand combined

exercise opportunities, the Air Force

newly established the medium-sized

Combined Forces Exercise (CFE), Bu
ddy Wing Bravo exercise conducted

on a small scale between the ROK–US

combat squadrons, and combined close Combined Forces Training (November 2019)

air support training.

The Air Force has regularly parti-cipated in overseas combined exercises

including multinational combined theater-level air training (Red Flag-Alaska) and

humanitarian assistance and disaster relief cooperation training among countries in

the Pacific Rim (Cope North), while the combined war damage repair training (Silver

Flag) is improving the Air Force’s wartime damage recovery capabilities. The Air

Force has also been participating in the US advanced airborne tactical training since

2018 to improve its ability to perform special operations such as infiltration and drop

tactics. The Air Force currently seeks participation in various overseas combined

exercises to improve its ability to conduct combined operations with various

countries, secure interoperability, and exchange tactics. The combined exercises

carried out by the Air Force for the past three years are summarized in [Chart 3-15].

[Chart 3-15] The Air Force’s Joint Exercises During the Past Three Years

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|(Unit: times)|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Year|Total|Domestic|||Overseas|||
|||Subtotal|ROK–US|Multilateral|Subtotal|ROK–US|Multilateral|
|2018|21|18|17|1|3|-|3|
|2019|22|18|17|1|4|1|3|
|2020|68|66|66|-|2|-|2|



In tandem with the various types of training and exercises, the Air Force continues

to improve its SSA capability and its ability to conduct combined space operations

through scientific training using ground simulators, Air Combat Maneuvering

Instrumentation (GPS-ACMI), and Electronic Warfare Training System (EWTS)

and Global Sentinel, an international combined exercise for safe space operations

and enhancement of space cooperation.

The Marine Corps regularly conducts amphibious training at least twice a year

to develop capabilities to execute forcible entry operations. It maintains the highest

level of operational readiness posture through a variety of training and exercises


-----

including rapid task force training,

combined and joint exercises, and the

tactical training of different echelons.

Am-phibious trainings cultivate the

Marine Corps’ combined and joint

forcible entry operations, while the

capabilities of the rapid task forces are

being reinforced through defensive Joint amphibious exercise (April 2020)

operations, stabilization operations,

and nonmilitary operations on the northwestern islands. In addition, the Marine

Corps conducts northwest islands augmentation training as well as field training in

Ulleungdo and Jejudo Islands.

The Marine Corps conducts and participates in a variety of combined exercises. The

ROK and US Marine Corps conduct the Korea Marine Exercise Program (KMEP)[47)]–

a combined tactical echelon-level exercise–at least 20 times a year to develop the

capabilities of each specialty branch and enhance combined operational capabilities.

The ROK Marine Corps also participates in Cobra Gold, Khaan Quest, RIMPAC,

and other combined overseas exercises. Also, by observing overseas exercises such as

the Talisman Saber training in Australia and Kamandag training in the Philippines,

the Marine Corps is working on expanding its participation in overseas multilateral

combined exercises starting in 2021. The combined exercises carried out by the Marine

Corps for the past three years are summarized in [Chart 3-16].

[Chart 3-16] The Marine Corps’ Joint Exercises During the Past Three Years


|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|(Unit: times)|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Year|Total|Domestic|||Overseas|||
|||Subtotal|ROK–US|Multilateral|Subtotal|ROK–US|Multilateral|
|2018|15|12|12|-|3|-|3|
|2019|25|24|24|-|1|-|1|
|2020|8|7|7|-|1|-|1|


Tactical training for different echelons are aimed at attaining completeness in

the Marine Corps’ execution of operations to lead and manage isolated battlefields.

Moreover, the Marine Corps is actively carrying out tactical training linked to

unit-specific airborne training, amphibious raid training, and guerrilla training. In

addition, the Marine Corps is enhancing realistic training into engagement training

that utilizes scientific training while conducting amphibious operation PASSEX at

battalion–or lower–level and regular amphibious ship loading training.


**47)**
An ROK–US combined
exercise for tactical
marine units conducted
in the ROK with the
objective of enhancing
combined operation
execution capabilities and
interoperability between
the two countries’ Marine
Corps through a systemic
approach


-----

**Joint Exercises and Training** In preparation for the rapidly changing se
curity situation, the ROK Armed Forces is re
inforcing joint[48)] exercises[49)] to enhance joint operational capabilities and maintain a

firm military readiness posture.

The Ulchi Taegeuk Exercise–a ROK Armed Forces’ independent exercise

that integrates the ROK government’s Ulchi Exercise and Taegeuk Exercise,–is

conducted to strengthen the national crisis management capabilities and maintain

the military readiness posture through wartime transition exercises. The exercise is

carried out in two parts. The National Crisis Response Exercise (Part 1) is conducted

to master the integrated situation management and response procedures centered on

the MND, JCS, and each service headquarters in cooperation with central and local

administrative agencies, while the Wartime Preparation Exercise (Part 2)–the ROK

Armed Forces’ independent CPX–is participated by all combat staff in operation

command-level units and above to master pre- wartime transition procedures and

initial response procedures including the declaration of integrated defense due to

local provocations and the raising of defense readiness posture under the support of a

computer simulation model.

Hoguk Training[50)] is a defensive field maneuvering training conducted annually

under the supervision of the JCS in order to cultivate joint warfare capabilities,

integrated combat capability management, and operational support capabilities. It

reinforces the coordination of all armed forces and operation commands by creating

an integrated situation under the JCS’s control and maximizes the integrated

response capabilities and existing force operations.

The Hwarang Training is a rear-area training participated by all operational

elements of the civilian, government, military, and police forces, and conducted

under the supervision of the Integrated Defense Headquarters. The goal of this

training is to achieve proficiency with the implementation and support procedures

on wartime and peacetime integrated defense operational plans. The training is

also aimed at establishing an integrated defense posture centering on the local

governments, embedding security awareness in residents, and promoting a mutual

understanding of the importance of security. In particular, with the rising demand

of active response at the level of integrated defense against transnational and

nonmilitary security threats such as disasters and terrorism, the ROK Armed Forces

conducts Hwarang training to assess the practical response system of all national

defense elements and cultivate integrated response capabilities.


**48)**
Activities, operations, and
organizations involving
more than one branch of a
country’s armed forces for
a common goal

**49)**
Exercise aimed at
improving proficiency
with operational plan
execution procedures, and
conducted as close as
possible to the real combat
considering the operational
plans, doctrines, and
battlefield environments

**50)**
Practical activities carried
out by individuals and units
to gain military knowledge
and combat skills through
action to effectively execute
their assigned missions


-----

**Combined Exercises and Training** To maintain military readiness posture

under the combined defense system

and to enhance the warfighting capabilities of combined forces, the ROK and the

US have been reinforcing combined[51)] exercises and training with an emphasis on

upgrading the combat readiness posture and capabilities to execute and sustain

combined operations. Since 2019 considering the changing security situations, the

ROK and the US are conducting a new combined command post training (CCPT)

biannually (first and second half of the year) which replacing the Key Resolve (KR)

exercise and the Ulchi Freedom Guardian (UFG) exercise. The CCPT is a ROK–

US combined theater-level CPX conducted to assess the combined defense posture

and gain proficiency in implementing warfighting procedures through a computer
simulated battlefield scenario.

In preparation for wartime OPCON transition, the JCS took the lead in 2017 and

2018 in the areas of planning, operation of opposing forces, and after-action review

thereby developing the capabilities to conduct theater-level combined exercises led

by the ROK Armed Forces. In particular, the Initial Operational Capability (IOC)

certification assessment was concurrently conducted during CCPT in the second

half of 2019 thereby practicing the ability to lead combined operations with a future

command structure.

With the CCPTs conducted twice a year, the ROK Armed Forces will firmly

maintain the ROK–US combined defense posture, improve the ROK Armed Forces’

operational capabilities, and conduct certification assessment under the future

command structure to meet the conditions for wartime OPCON transition.

Although the Foal Eagle (FE) training was a key exercise to improve ROK–

US combined operational capabilities, it came to an end in 2019 under the mutual

agreement between the ROK MND and the US DoD, as part of the military’s support

towards the effort to induce North Korea’s denuclearization. Nevertheless, the ROK

Armed forces has conducted separate combined exercises throughout the year,

making every effort to maintain a robust combined defense posture.

Since 2018, the ROK Armed Forces has implemented the Joint Training System

(JTS)[52)]–a theater-level exercise and training system–in the headquarters of each

service, operations commands, and joint units for a systematic management of the

training system. Various war-game models for joint and combined exercises were

also developed and applied to improve the ROK Armed Forces’ ability to conduct

and to continuously develop efficient combined exercises and training measures.


**51)**
Cooperative relationship
between the military
units or government
organizations of two or
more allied nations

**52)**
The JTS was introduced
to the JCS in 2012, the
Operations Command in
2017, and the headquarters
of each service and joint
units in 2018.


-----

4. Strengthening the Spiritual and Mental Force


**Education to Form a Firm** The ROK Armed Forces system-atically

**Perspective Toward the** conducts spiritual and mental force edu
**Homeland and National Security** cation to help servicemembers form a

sound perspective toward their homeland

and national security, and to cultivate a soldierly mindset and an unwavering resolve

to prevail. While maintaining an unwavering perspective toward national security

in the rapidly changing security environment, the ROK Armed Forces continues

to emphasize the importance of the military’s inherent mission and preparedness,

thereby establishing an omnidirectional military readiness posture. To embed a clear

perspective in servicemembers, they are educated that North Korea is the subject of

exchange and cooperation for the establishment of peace on the Korean Peninsula

but is still a realistic military threat, and that they must be prepared and capable of

inflicting decisive punishment in case of North Korean provocations.

With a goal of "Spiritual Armament before Combat Skills Proficiency", the

spiritual and mental force education for newly enlisted soldiers focuses on turning

the new enlistees into soldiers armed with unwavering soldierly mindset. They are

educated with a curriculum focused on the military spirit of unwavering resolve to

prevail and the perspective toward the homeland and national security, while training

programs and barracks life as a whole are used as platforms for spiritual and mental

education.

Spiritual and mental force education for servicemembers is carried out in two

different ways—school-based education and unit-level education. In case of school
based spiritual and mental force education, presentation- and discussion-oriented

education and hands-on instructors’ training have been strengthened to equip the

servicemembers with the necessary capabilities to become instructors. The unit
level spiritual force education is conducted centered on commanding officers and is

offered in a systematic and repetitive manner on a daily, weekly, and half-year basis.


**Acquiring Strong Soldierly Mindset by** To maximize the performance of

**Improving the Teaching and Learning** spiritual and mental force education

**Paradigm** and the servicemembers’ learning

immersion, the ROK Armed Forces

is drastically improving and promoting the "teaching and learning paradigm". By

switching from the existing lecture and discussion-oriented education to a hands
on, self-directed education[53)], the servicemembers themselves are able to establish


**53)**
Education consisting of
lectures integrated with
online lectures, book
concerts, culture and
arts, and soldiers-led
participation programs
such as "I am a master
instructor," wherein
servicemembers become
instructors themselves.


-----

mental preparedness and enhance their inner growth and pride in military service.

The ROK Armed Forces also helps the servicemembers acquire a strong soldierly

mindset by letting them naturally understand war history and indirectly access

historical sites through mission-oriented educational content[54)], "soldierly mindset

in movies" program, and the pilot development of digital textbooks[55)] combined with

advanced science and technology.

**Expansion of History Education**

**Program to Boost Patriotism**

**and Pride**


More courses are added to the history

curriculum to help the servicemembers

raise their awareness of history, patriot
ism, and pride. The history education Visit to the Independence Hall of Korea as part of the

experiential learning activities of the history education

on the Greater Korea Independence program

Army and the Korea Independence

Army are reflected in the annual plan for the servicemembers’ spiritual and

mental force education, and collaboration programs are being carried out with the

Independence Hall of Korea.

In addition, special efforts are made to encourage servicemembers to develop the

right perception of history and to boost their patriotism and comradeship by offering

education programs according to major occasions and producing and broadcasting

special documentary[56)] films. The ROK Armed Forces will continue to foster an

unwavering soldierly mindset and maintain strong mental preparedness through

innovation in educational techniques and substantial education.


**54)**
Production of contents
in connection with the
servicemembers’ missions
in each military unit (e.g.,
territorial airspace intrusion
response, GOP complete
operation, territorial sea
defense mission)

**55)**
An educational technique
that provides experiences
without going to the field
using technologies such
as virtual reality (VR) and
augmented reality (AR),
which are highly immersive
and realistic

**56)**
A documentary film
commemorating the
100th anniversary of
establishment of the
Provisional Government
(2019) and a documentary
film commemorating the
70th anniversary of the
Korean War (2020)


**Operation of the Defense Agency** The Defense Agency for Spiritual and

**for Spiritual and Mental Force** Mental Force Enhancement is an edu
**Enhancement** cational institution that specializes in

military spiritual and mental force. Its

primary tasks are to conduct education to instill military spirit in servicemembers

and help them establish perspectives toward the homeland and national security,

research combat development concerning spiritual and mental force and related

doctrines, and develop contents for spiritual and mental force education for

servicemembers.

As the only agency that offers military spirit-specialized curriculum in the military,


-----

it also offers a variety of specialized courses, such as mandatory refresher courses

for public affairs officers and NCOs, culture and arts, unification and security. It has

also developed and supplied advanced contents on the spiritual and mental force of

servicemembers. Other tasks of the agency include hosting seminars to promote the

development of spiritual and mental force and calling for research papers.


**Character Education for** To foster outstanding servicemembers who are

**Servicemembers** positive and responsible citizens of a democratic

society, the ROK Armed Forces is also enhancing

the character education system for servicemembers, with an emphasis on seven

fundamental values–creativity, courage, responsibility, respect, cooperation, loyalty,

and justice. Intensive character education by civilian experts is coupled with video
based education in everyday life.


-----

-----

##### Chapter
# 4

## Building an Innovative Force by Promoting Strong Defense Reform

Section 1 Reorganizing the Elite Unit Structure Using Advanced Technology
Section 2 Reorganizing Defense Manpower Structure Focused on Operation

and Combat and Priming the Reserved Forces into an Elite Force

Section 3 Force Enhancement Based on Jointness
Section 4 Creation of a "Strong, Digital Military and Smart National Defense"

Based on the Fourth Industrial Revolution Technology


-----

-----

## 1 Reorganizing the Elite Unit

#### Structure Using Advanced Technology

In order to respond to omnidirectional security threats, the MND is in the process of

reorganizing the current troop-intensive unit structure of the ROK Armed Forces into an

elite structure using advanced science and technology.

1. Reorganizing the Unit Structure of Each Service


**Army** The unit structure of the Army is being reorganized in a way that it

becomes capable of conducting rapid decisive operations. By 2022, the

Army will reduce the number of standing troops by 118,000-from 483,000 to 365,000.

In conjunction with the reduction of standing troops, the number of field army

commands has been reduced from 3 to 2, corps from 8 to 6, and divisions from 39 to 33.

On January 1, 2019, the Ground Operations Command was created by integrating

the First ROK Army (FROKA) and the Third ROK Army (TROKA) in order to

enable the Army to lead combined and joint ground operations. Regional corps have

been reorganized to execute independent operations by axis by establishing a corps
centered operation execution system, and the maneuver corps has been reorganized

to enable rapid decisive operations by significantly improving mobility and fire

support capabilities. The Second Operations Command is continuously enhancing

its operational execution capabilities in the vast rear area by reorganizing the existing

homeland reserve divisions into local defense divisions to enable integrated defense

[Chart 4-1] Army Unit Structure Reorganization Plan




Army HQ Army HQ

First Third Second Capital Special Army Ground Second Capital Special

ROKA ROKA Operations Defense Warfare Operations Aviation Operations Operations Defense Warfare CommandAviation

Army Army Command Command Command Command Command Command Command Command

Mobilization Mobilization

Regional Regional Maneuver Missile Regional Maneuver Missile

Force Force

Corps (3) Corps (4) Corps Command Corps (5) Corps Command

Command Command


-----

operations and its sustainment capabilities. The Army unit structure reorganization

plan is shown in [Chart 4-1].


**Navy** The Navy is being reorganized into a unit structure capable of carrying

out multidimensional maritime operations above surface, underwater,

and in the air. The Maritime Task Flotilla will be reorganized and operate as the Task

Fleet Command to conduct independent operations of maneuver units in remote and

offshore seas in conjunction with the enhancement of destroyer forces. To ensure the

integrity of maritime air operations in the vast sea, the air wing will be reorganized

to operate as an aviation command in connection with various force enhancements

including maritime patrol aircraft and maritime operational helicopters. The Navy

unit structure reorganization plan is shown in [Chart 4-2].



[Chart 4-2] Navy Unit Structure Reorganization Plan

Before


After




|Navy HQ Naval Training Direct Operations Doa cn td rin e CL oo mgi mst aic ns d Reporting Command Command Units|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|et Maritime Submarine Component mand Task Air Wing Command Flotilla ) Flotilla Special Navy|||
||cial N|avy|


Warfare

Flotilla


Navy

Intelligence

Group


|Navy HQ Naval Training Direct Operations Doa cn td rin e CL oo mgi mst aic ns d Reporting Command Command Units|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|et Submarine Component Task Fleet Aviation mand Command Flotilla Command Command Special Navy|||
||cial N|avy|


Warfare

Flotilla


Navy

Intelligence

Group


**Marine Corps** The Marine Corps is restructuring its forces as a marine
air-ground task force capable of executing various types of

missions such as defending strategic islands and carrying out multidimensional,

high-speed amphibious operations and rapid response operations. The Headquarters

Marine Corps will organize an intelligence battalion, a special search battalion,

and an aviation group to enable operation command and joint operations such

as amphibious operations and command operations. The infantry regiments

subordinate to divisions will be reorganized as brigade-level units with reinforced

intelligence, maneuver, and fire capabilities, and the artillery regiments as artillery

brigades with counter-artillery detection and long-range precision strike capabilities.

The Marine Corps force restructure plan is shown in [Chart 4-3].


-----

[Chart 4-3] Marine Corps Unit Structure Reorganization Plan



Marine Corps HQ Marine Corps HQ

/ Northwest Islands / Northwest Islands
Defense Command Defense Command

Division1st Division2nd pyeong YeonUnit Brigade6th Brigade9th and Training Education Group Division1st Division2nd pyeong YeonUnit Brigade6th Brigade9th Education Training Groupand

Infantry Infantry Logistics Intelli Special Marine Marine Logistics Intelligence

Regiment Regiment Support gence Search Brigade Brigade Support Battalion

Artillery Artillery Group Cell Squadron Artillery Artillery Group

Regiment Regiment Brigade Brigade

Special

Aviation

Search

Group

Squadron


**Air Force** The Air Force is under restructuring of its forces to enable strategic

deterrence and aerospace operations. A space operations squadron

was launched to provide surveillance capabilities for satellite activities over the

Korean Peninsula. In addition, a reconnaissance wing was established to efficiently

integrate and operate existing reconnaissance assets and medium and high-altitude

reconnaissance UAV that will strengthen the Air Force̓s surveillance and recon
naissance capabilities. For the medium–and long-term plan, the Air Force will

establish a surveillance control group and an electronic warfare group in connection

with the fielding of joint moving target surveillance control aircraft and electronic

[Chart 4-4] Air Force Unit Restructure Plan


Before

|Air Force HQ Air Force Training and Direct Logistics Operations Doctrine Reporting Command Command Command Units|Col2|
|---|---|
|Air Fo Opera Comm||
|||
|n Air Def ds and Mi Comm|ense Air Defense Air Support A ssile and Control Operations Inte and Command Wing|


Function

Commands

(2)


-  Hawk Battery

-  Cheongung Battery

-  Ballistic Missile Surveillance

Squadron


Air Force HQ

Air Force Training and Direct

Logistics

Operations Doctrine Reporting

Command

Command Command Units

Air

Aerial Function Air Defense Air Defense Aerial

Support

Intelligence Commands and Missile and Control Intelligence

Operations

Wing (2) Command Command Wing

Wing

- Reconnaissance - Cheongung Space

Wing Battery Operations

- Surveillance - Ballistic Missile Squadron

Control Group Surveillance

Battalion

-  L-SAM Battalion


Control Group

-  Electronic

Warfare Group


-----

warfare aircraft. In addition, the Hawk Battery will be reorganized and operated as

the Cheongung Battery for complex and wide area multi-layer defense, and the Air

Defense and Missile Command will be reorganized with the establishment of a

ballistic missile surveillance battalion and a long-range surface-to-air missile

(L-SAM) battalion. The Air Force unit restructure plan is shown in [Chart 4-4].

2. Reorganizing the Joint Units and Units Under Direct Control of the MND


The restructuring of the joint units and units under the direct control of the MND

focuses on improving the expertise of the respective services and the balance

among them, expanding the civilian workforce, ensuring organizational efficacy,

strengthening jointness, and ensuring proper command range in consideration of the

effective execution of unit missions and the implication of dismantling joint units and

units directly controlled by the MND.

To achieve this, the Defense Security Support Command has reconfigured its

organization and functions to meet its missions, which include military security,

counterintelligence, and defense security support. The command relationship of the

defense posture inspection team was adjusted from the MND to the JCS in order

to strengthen the inspection function of the Chairman of the JCS and to ensure

the Chairman’s command and oversight over operational units. The Joint Forces

Military University (JFMU) was placed under the command of the Korea National

Defense University (KNDU) while maintaining its jointness education. The Army,

Navy, and Air Force colleges under the JFMU were placed under the command of

each service to cultivate the expertise required by each service. The ROK Cyber

Command was transitioned from a unit directly controlled by the MND to the Cyber

Operations Command, a joint unit, to reinforce its operational capabilities in the

cyber-battlefield.

In addition, the manpower structure has been reorganized in ways to improve

combat power and expertise by transferring active duty servicemembers working

in administrative and support units to combat units and filling these positions with

civilian workforce who are able to make longer commitments in the roles. To further

improve the expertise and specialties of each service, some units under direct control

of the MND will either be consolidated, or their functions will be transferred to each

service.


-----

## 2 Reorganizing Defense

#### Manpower Structure Focused on Operation and Combat and Priming the Reserved Forces into an Elite Force

The MND will gradually reduce the number of standing troops to 500,000 by 2022 in line

with the future strategic environment, military strategy, and unit reorganization plans.

To prevent the loss of combat power due to fewer troops, active duty noncombatant

positions will be transferred to combat units, and those noncombatant positions will be

filled with the civilian workforce, further accelerating the reorganization of the military

manpower structure centered around operations and combats. Efforts are also being

made in priming the reserve forces into an elite force by applying advanced technologies

to the reserved forces training system and promoting the introduction of a peacetime

service program for reserve forces.

1. Reducing the Number of Standing Troops to 500,000


Considering the projected supply and demand for military service resources, the

MND plans to gradually reduce the number of standing troops to 500,000 by 2022

in connection with the future strategic environment, military strategy, and unit

reorganization plans. The number of troops in the Army will be reduced to around

365,000, while the Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force will remain unchanged.

[Chart 4-5] Standing Troops Reduction and Civilian Workforce Expansion Plan


2020

Approx. 602,000


2022

Approx. 558,000


Approx. 555,000

Approx. 420,000

Approx. 70,000

(Approx. 29,000)

Approx. 65,000

Approx. 47,000

(7.8%)


Approx. 500,000

Approx. 365,000

Approx. 70,000

(Approx. 29,000)

Approx. 65,000

Approx. 58,000

(10.4%)

|Category|Col2|2017|
|---|---|---|
|Defense Workforce (Standing troops + Civilian workforce)||Approx. 650,000|
|Standing Troops|Total|Approx. 618,000|
||Army|Approx. 483,000|
||Navy (Marine Corps)|Approx. 70,000 (Approx. 29,000)|
||Air Force|Approx. 65,000|
|Civilian Workforce (Proportion compared to defense workforce)||Approx. 32,000 (5%)|


-----

The number of standing troops was 618,000 in 2017; as of 2020, however, it has

been reduced to 555,000 through deactivation of various units and organizational

streamlining. The total number is expected to be reduced to 500,000 by the end

of 2022, and the reduction plan is shown in [Chart 4-5]. Moreover, the military

structure has been converted from a troop-intensive type to an advanced weapons
based technology-intensive type, and the combat power will in fact be strengthened

as a result despite the reduction of the standing troops by priming the manpower

structure into an elite force centered around seasoned officers instead of soldiers.

2. Reorganizing the Defense Manpower Structure Focused on

Operation and Combat


**Redesigning the Defense** Since the promotion of Defense Reform in 2006,

**Manpower Structure** the ROK Armed Forces has reduced the number

of standing troops and augmented officers, mainly

NCOs, in positions that require proficiency and expertise.[1)] Recruiting military

officers, however, is expected to face challenges in the future because of the

forecasted decline in young adult population and unemployment rate in the mid-to

long-term. Also, a countermeasure needs to be in place to prevent the loss of combat

power caused by the reduction of standing troops and the shorter period of

mandatory military service. Accordingly, the MND has refined the existing

manpower restructuring plan that focused on increasing the number of officers and

designed a defense manpower concept that incorporates all servicemembers–civilian

military employees, and other types of civilian workers–and formulated the

"Defense Manpower Structure Reorganization Plan" that would efficiently reposition

the defense manpower.

Based on this, first, the manpower quota will be redesigned by service, status,

and rank in line with the unit structure and size of troops according to the Defense

Reform 2.0; second, noncombatant areas will be managed by the civilian workforce,

such as civilian military employees, while servicemembers will be mainly assigned

to operations and combat positions; and third, the rank structure of officers and

NCOs will be transformed from the inefficient pyramid shape of "large-scale

acquisition and short-term utilization of officers" to a pot shape of "small-scale

acquisition and long-term utilization of officers", taking into consideration the future

prospect of recruiting junior officers, employment of high-tech weapons, and the

necessity to secure proficient combat power.


**1)**
Compared to 682,000
at the end of 2005, the
number of standing troops
was reduced by 127,000 to
555,000 at the end of 2020,
while the number of NCOs
was increased by 32,000
from 97,000 to 129,000


-----

The MND is enhancing the feasibility of such defense manpower restructuring

plan by reflecting this plan into mid-term and annual unit plans, and through these

efforts, the ROK Armed Forces is anticipated to evolve into a strong elite military

centered around skilled officers.


**Expanding the Civilian Workforce in** To prevent the potential loss of combat

**Noncombatant Fields** power due to the reduction in standing

troops and to enhance the expertise

and continuity of defense administration, the MND is expanding its civilian

workforce in noncombatant areas. Under the goal of expanding the proportion of

civilian workforce[2)] to approximately 10% of the total defense manpower by 2022

(5% in 2017), approximately 6,000 civilians were added to the civilian workforce in

2019 and about 4,000 in 2020, which raised the proportion of civilian workforce to

approximately 7.8% as of 2020.

Civilians are replacing active duty personnel in noncombatant positions,

except for combat and command and control positions that must be performed by

servicemembers. Within the civilian workforce, civilian military employees will

mainly replace positions that require expertise and continuity, particularly those in

maintenance and budgeting. Civilian workers, on the other hand, will take over areas

where civilian expertise can be readily utilized, such as computation, facilities and

installations management, and languages.


**Reinforcing the Manpower of** In order to maintain round-the-clock combat

**Current Operation Units** readiness despite the reduction of standing

troops, the MND is reinforcing the man
power of current operation units, which conduct 24-hour operational missions, such

as GOP and coast guard operations, air defense surveillance and reconnaissance, and

initial response measures. GOP and the coast guard troops have been reinforced as

the top priority in 2019, while the air defense surveillance and reconnaissance troops

were reinforced in 2020. Also, the MND will continue to reinforce counterterrorism

units and post guard personnel.


**Adjusting the Quota of General** In 2018, the MND selected the reduction

**Officers and Rationalizing Ranks** in the number of general officers as a

core task of Defense Reform 2.0 and

established the "General Officer Quota Adjustment Plan" to reduce the number of

general officers from 436 at the end of 2017 to 360 by 2022. As of 2020, the number


**2)**
Civilian workforce is
divided into "civilian military
employees" and "civilian
workers"


-----

was reduced by 46 after the adjustment plan came into force; the final goal is

expected to be achieved by 2022.

3. Priming the Reserve Forces into an Elite Force


**Establishing Mobilization** In order to secure deterrence capabilities and

**Readiness Posture** strengthen war sustainability, the MND continues

to develop the defense mobilization system to

support military operations by efficiently mobilizing all human and material

resources available during wartime or national emergencies.

In terms of troop mobilization, the MND is organizing and managing reserve

forces based on a focus strategy that maintains the overall size of reserve forces

but adjusts the number of trainees per year, considering the changes in the defense

environment, such as the restructuring of the military and the decline in reserve

resources. The efficiency of resource management is also being enhanced under

the cooperation with the Military Manpower Administration (MMA), including

improvements in the mobilization designation method, such as designating

outstanding resources mostly from major combat units at the beginning of war.

To enhance the efficacy of the mobilization execution plan, the MND is considering

the wartime mobilization capabilities, such as the availability of resources and the

production capacity of companies, from the initial stage of each service filing its

requirements. The MND is optimizing the mobilization requirements by verifying

the submitted requirements through a joint requirements review with relevant

ministries.

In particular, the mission execution system of the ROK Army’s Mobilization

Force Command, which was activated in 2018, is making contributions to exercising

combat power at the level of standing forces. Force enhancement requirements of

mobilization-oriented units[3)] are incorporated in the defense planning documents[4)]

and the budget for combat-critical materials is being obtained so that these units can

perform their missions immediately during contingencies. In addition, the mission

execution capabilities of the mobilization force are being reinforced through the

designation of mobilization centered on elite resources, part-time service system of

reserve officers, and more realistic training.


Reserve forces
protecting the
security of the ROK

**3)**
It refers to the mobilization
division, mobilization
support group (mobilization
supplement battalion),
and mobilization resource
convoy group, which
are subordinate units of
the Mobilization Force
Command with peacetime
organization rate of less
than 10%.


**4)**
The Joint Military Strategy
(JMS) and the Joint
Strategic Objective Plan
(JSOP)


**Reserve Forces Organization**

**and Resource Management**


Reserve forces are organized and managed

to prepare for wartime and national emer

-----

gencies that are tantamount to the former. They conduct mobilization training and

prepare for regional defense and disasters during peacetime, and conduct missions

such as expansion and activation of active duty units, replenishment of troops, and

civilian–government–military integrated defense operations during contingencies

such as wartime. In accordance with the Reserve Forces Act and the Military

Personnel Management Act, reserve officers serve in the reserve forces until the

retirement age of each active duty rank, with servicemembers serving in the reserve

forces for eight years after discharge. As of December 2020, the size of the reserve

force is roughly 2.75 million, of which roughly 6,000 are female reserve forces and

special reserve forces organized as volunteer reservists[5)]. Reserve forces consist of

3,194 regional reserve units established in administrative districts and 823 workplace

reserve units installed in the workplaces. Reserve forces are managed and operated

by each delegated military unit. To reinforce the role of reserve forces in the event of

natural and social disasters such as COVID-19, the MND has pushed ahead with

system improvements such as the revision of the Directive on National Defense

Mobilization Service.


**Developing the Reserve Forces** The MND plans to manage training sites,

**Training System** improve efficiency in managing budgets,

and improve the capabilities of the reserve

forces in executing their missions through realistic training. Accordingly, 208

reserve forces training centers scattered across the country will be integrated into 40

scientific reserve forces training centers by 2024. The scientific reserve forces

training center includes urban combat training centers where squad-level training is

possible by utilizing a video simulation shooting range capable of zeroing,

qualification and squad combat shooting, as well as an automated indoor shooting

range to prevent noise in the vicinity and several battle training equipment.[6)]

Improvements are also being made in training performance through a smart reserve

**5)** forces training management system,
Those selected among
ROK citizens aged 18 years which manages the entire training
or older who volunteered
to the reserve forces in courses in real time from admission
accordance with Article 3 of the Reserve Forces Act. and training evaluation to discharge.

As of 2020, a total of 12 scientific

**6)**
All of the two-way battle reserve forces training centers have
training equipment
consisting of laser firearms, been built and an additional system of
detectors, training control
and analysis system, virtual reality (VR)-based video
electronic display board,
etc. simulation system has been adopted. Virtual reality (VR) simulated shooting


-----

In collaboration with the local governments, the training centers will be open on

weekends when there is no training to make the space available to local residents,

such as security field trips.

[Chart 4-6] Smart Reserve Forces Training and Management System




1. Registration and discharge management

Body temperature Breathalyzer ID card reader
sensor

Training control room Registration


2. Real-time evaluation management

CCTV Indoor AP

Outdoor AP BLE scanner

Tablet

DID Wearable computer Training control room

device for for instructors

reserve forces




system receives results


menu preference, and meal status


4. Big data management of training results

Training control room:
real-time settlement

<Enter training results>

-  Excellent personnel,

early discharge, etc.

-  Management by type

and reason

National mobilization information


3. Comprehensive control and management of

training centers

-  Facilities

-  Training

materials

-  Training aids Indoor shooting range

-  Training (environmental sensor)

ammunition

-  Budget

managemen

Meal evaluation, Training control room


To modernize the facilities in the mobilization training centers, the MND plans

to complete the construction or renovation of 116 facilities including mobilization

dormitories, dining facilities for reserve forces, and security education centers by

[Chart 4-7] Changes in Scientific Reserve Forces Training Centers and Monetary

Compensation for Mobilization Training




Scientific reserve forces training centers 112,000


Compensation for mobilization training (unit: KRW)

91,000 40

won

24

42,000

won

12

16,000

5 won


2018 2020 2022 2024


-----

2025. As of 2019, a total of 56 facilities have been newly built or renovated, with

seven additional facilities in 2020.

In order to enhance the mission execution capabilities of the reserve forces, the

training system will be enhanced to a wartime mission-oriented training system

by improving training subjects and period and establishing a training model, in

connection with the reorganization of reserve forces. To boost morale of the reserve

forces and encourage their participation in training, the MND plans to increase

compensation for mobilization training to the level of a sergeant’s salary[7)] by

2022, and to improve the system so that compensation is also provided for regional

reserve forces training, where only actual expenses such as transportation and lunch

expenses are currently paid for.


**7)**
By 2022, the MND plans
to raise the sergeant’s
salary by 50% of the
minimum wage in 2017
(KRW 6,470) and to raise
the compensation for
mobilization training to
KRW 91,000, the same
level.

**8)**
It is a system that
calls up and trains
cadres designated for
mobilization-captains and
lower level cadres-in the
battalion level or lower in
mobilization-oriented units
such as the Mobilization
Division within 30 days.
Starting with 79 officers
in the Army in 2014, there
are currently 1,769 officers
(1,749 in the Army, 20 in the
Navy) as of 2020. Starting
2021, the MND plans to
promote the operation in
all forces including the Air
Force and Marine Corps.

**9)**
Analysis results submitted
by the Army analysis
and evaluation group
(September 2018 - January
2019): Combat preparation
time reduced by 16 hours
(75 hours → 59 hours),
combat force improved by
13%.

**10)**
① Formation of peacetime

service reserve forces
and establishment
of grounds for the
operation.

② Extension of period

of the call for training
for mobilization of
peacetime service
reserve forces selected
according to the job
value, from the current
30 days a year to more
than 30 days.

③ Promotion of partial

amendment of the
Military Service Act and
the Reserve Forces Act
in order to allow veterans
to be incorporated into
reserve forces when
applying for the service.


**Introduction of Peacetime Service** Since 2014, the MND has implemented

**Program for Reserve Forces** the "part-time service system for reserve

force officers"[8)] to prepare for a decline

in combat power due to the reduction in active duty servicemembers and to achieve a

higher level of mobilization readiness posture. The MND verified that the system

resulted in shorter battle preparation time and improved unit combat power.[9)] In

2020, the MND implemented the "Peacetime Service Program for Reserve Forces",

which extends the assembly and training period of the current system, while adding

retired veterans to the roster to expand the scope of the system.

To that end, the MND has established a theoretical background and a process of

introducing the Peacetime Service Program for Reserve Forces, and is planning to

legislate[10)] the program through a amendment of the Military Service Act and the

Reserve Forces Act. The MND also intends to build a consensus on the introduction

of the program by holding and further expanding the related discussion sessions.

When legal grounds are set in the future, the system will be applied to the Army and

gradually expanded to all services.


-----

## 3 Force Enhancement Based on

#### Jointness

In order to establish a strong defense posture against omnidirectional security threats,

the ROK Armed Forces is promoting force enhancement based on jointness. In

particular, their core forces are being expanded to respond to omnidirectional threats,

including North Korean nuclear and WMD threats. The ROK Armed Forces is also

supporting force enhancement through the defense force enhancement project.

1. Basic Direction of Force Enhancement and Major Force

Enhancement Projects


**Basic Direction of Force** In order to build forces that can effectively respond

**Enhancement** to omnidirectional security threats, the MND is

reinforcing its key military capabilities, focusing on

crucial military capabilities including strategic deterrence, operational response, and

comprehensive response capabilities. First and foremost, in preparation for potential

threats especially those from North Korea, the MND will prioritize building base

forces including surveillance and reconnaissance, command and control (C2) and

communication systems led by the ROK Armed Forces; establishing strategic

deterrence capabilities including counter-nuclear and WMD forces; and acquiring

operational response capabilities to repel external military provocations at an early

stage and achieve complete victory during contingencies by reinforcing essential

forces for each battlefield function required for military restructuring. The ROK

Armed Forces’ ability to respond to nonmilitary threats such as cyber and space

threats, terrorism, and disasters will be further enhanced and the ability to protect

national interests, including protection for overseas Korean nationals, will be

secured.

At the level of battlefield functions, the battlefield recognition forces will gradually

acquire military reconnaissance satellites, multipurpose satellites, medium-altitude

reconnaissance UAV, and multi-source video convergence systems to reinforce

the surveillance capabilities over the Korean peninsula and areas of interest.


-----

Furthermore, the MND will acquire UAV for reconnaissance, thermal observation

devices (TOD-III), and multi-functional observation devices to improve battlefield

visualization and day and night surveillance capabilities of each unit.

For command and control (C2) and communication forces, the MND will ensure

theater and joint command and control capabilities through improving the C4I[11)]

systems of the joint forces and each service while facilitating the battlefield situation

awareness down to the tactical units by establishing a C4I system for battalions and

below. Also, the MND will continue to secure high-speed, high-volume information

distribution capabilities and enhance interoperability during combined and joint

operations through upgrading joint tactical data links, air-to-ground communications

radios, and Link-16[12)].

For the ground forces, the MND will strive for an early expansion of highly

powerful and ultra-precision ground-to-ground missile forces and counterfire

warfare capabilities and will reinforce armored and mechanized warfare and aviation

forces for conducting high-speed, deep maneuver warfare in preparation for North

Korean threats of nuclear weapons, missiles, and long-range artillery. Furthermore,

ground and air maneuverability will be reinforced to improve rapid response and

decisive operational execution, and the MND will establish a manned and unmanned

hybrid combat system to ensure the survival of combatants.

For the naval forces, the MND will acquire destroyers (KDX-III), frigates

(FFX), submarines (KSS-III), maritime patrol aircraft-II, and maritime operations

helicopters to prepare for potential threats from North Korea and maintain maritime

dominance around the Korean Peninsula, further enhancing the MND’s ability to

protect maritime rights and interests.

For the air forces, the MND will establish covert penetration and long-range

precision strike capabilities to be able to take the initiative in deterring and

responding to omnidirectional threats. To achieve air superiority in the operation

area, the MND will also continue to acquire next-generation fighters (FX-II), ROK’s

indigenous fighters (KF-X), KF-16 upgrade, large transport aircraft, and all-weather

precision guided weapons.

For the defense forces, the MND will acquire multi-layered defense capabilities

such as ballistic and aircraft defense capabilities and long-range artillery interception

capabilities, and gradually improve its Electro-Magnetic Pulse (EMP) and CBRN

protection capabilities. Moreover, protective capabilities of individuals, facilities,

and equipment will be reinforced to ensure survivability in the early stage of war.


**11)**
Command, Control,
Communication, and
Computer Intelligence

**12)**
Digital tactical data links
used between the ROK and
US Combined Forces


-----

**2019 Force Enhancement Projects** The 2019 defense budget amounted to

KRW 46.7 trillion, of which KRW 15.4

trillion was allocated to force enhancements, representing a 13.7% increase from

2018. The major force enhancement projects for 2019 are shown in [Chart 4-8].

[Chart 4-8] Major Force Enhancement Projects in 2019

|Weapons Systems|Ongoing Projects|New Projects|
|---|---|---|
|Battlefield Awareness / Command·Control, and Communication|· Military reconnaissance satellite · Tactical Information Communication Network (TICN) · High-altitude reconnaissance UAV (HUAV)|· Multi-source video convergence system · Performance enhancement of ballistic missile operation and control station · Korean Variable Message Format (KVMF)|
|Maneuver / Fires|· K2 tank, wheeled combat vehicle · 230 mm MLRS · Light tactical vehicle|· Combat engineer vehicle (CEV) · Armored amphibious assault bridge · Laser-based anti-aircraft weapon (Block I)|
|Maritime Assets|· Gwanggaeto III-class destroyer (Batch ll) · Jangbogo III-class submarine (Batch I/ll) · Ulsan-class (Batch II)|· Autonomous underwater vehicle for mine reconnaissance|
|Air Assets|· Performance improvement of F-35A and KF-16 · Aerial refueling tanker · ROK’s indigenous fighter (KF-X)|· Lead-in Fighter Trainer II · T-50 simulator|


**2020 Force Enhancement Projects** The 2020 defense budget amounted to

KRW 50.2 trillion, of which KRW 16.7

trillion was allocated to force enhancements, representing a 8.5% increase from

2019. The major force enhancement projects for 2020 are shown in [Chart 4-9].

[Chart 4-9] Major Force Enhancement Projects in 2020

|Weapons Systems|Ongoing Projects|New Projects|
|---|---|---|
|Battlefield Awareness / Command, Control, and Communication|· Military reconnaissance satellite · Medium-altitude reconnaissance UAV (MUAV) · Tactical Information Communication Network (TICN)|· ROK’s Joint Tactical Data Link System (JTDLS) Completion Type · Mobile long-range surveillance radar|
|Maneuver / Fires|· K2 tank, wheeled combat vehicle · 230 mm MLRS|· Individual combat system · 120 mm self-propelled mortar · Light machine gun II|
|Maritime Assets|· Gwanggaeto III-class destroyer (Batch II) · Jangbogo III-class submarine (Batch I/II) · Maritime patrol aircraft II|· Destroyer (KDDX) · Gumdoksuri-B Batch II|
|Air Assets|· Performance improvement of F-35A and KF-16 · ROK’s indigenous fighters (KF-X)|· G PS guided bomb (2000 lbs-class) VI|


-----

2. 2021~2025 Mid-Term Defense Force Enhancement Plan

The MND plans to invest KRW 100.1 trillion from 2021 to 2025 to accelerate

Defense Reform 2.0 and establish a strong defense posture against omnidirectional

security threats. The MND’s core forces will be enhanced to be able to respond to

various nuclear and WMD threats, and military reorganization will be centered

on advanced forces. Moreover, the MND will actively respond to nonmilitary

threats such as cyber-threats, terrorism, and disasters, and guarantee conditions for

strengthening defense R&D capabilities related to the Fourth Industrial Revolution

and revitalizing the domestic defense industry. Efforts will also be made to protect

national interests such as maintaining international peace and protecting overseas

Korean nationals.

First, to respond to nuclear and WMD threats, the MND will secure advanced

and wide-range long-distance surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities by field

deploying military reconnaissance satellites and medium-altitude reconnaissance

UAV. The command and control system will also be intelligent and improved

so that it can be linked with the real-time strike system; the surveillance and

reconnaissance information will be integrated and transmitted via the Military

Satellite Communications System II, Tactical Information Communication Network

(TICN), and Joint Fire Operating System Korea (JFOS-K). The MND will secure

missile power capable of long-range precision strike, F-35A capable of stealth strike,

and Jangbogo-III submarines. Furthermore, KAMD capabilities will further be

improved through the development of long-range ground-to-air guided weapons

and medium-range ground-to-air weapons (Patriot) performance upgrades to enable

multi-layered defense against enemy’s ballistic missile attacks.

The following force buildup plans are intended for the military restructuring

centered on cutting-edge forces. The ground forces will obtain reconnaissance

UAV, counter-battery radar II, 230 mm MLRS, and tactical ground-to-ground

guided weapons II to expand surveillance and striking ranges. The fielding of new

equipment, including 81 mm mortar-II, 120 mm self-propelled mortar, and medium

tactical vehicles will help maximize the force’s survivability, mobility, and combat

capabilities, thereby reducing operating troops. Maritime and amphibious forces are

expected to enhance surface, underwater, and anti-aircraft operations capabilities

through the fielding of Korean destroyers and frigates, logistics support ship II, and

ship-to-ship, anti-aircraft and anti-submarine guided missiles. Multidimensional,

high-speed amphibious operation capabilities are also expected to be enhanced with

the acquisition of utility helicopters and high-speed landing craft. The air forces will


-----

gain air superiority through the fielding of F-35A stealth aircraft, ROK’s indigenous

fighters (KF-X), and air controllers, while securing electronic strike capabilities and

enhancing air transportation capabilities with the deployment of electronic warfare

aircraft and large transport aircraft.

In preparation for nonmilitary threats such as cyber and space threats, terrorism,

and disasters, the MND will lay the foundation for strengthening effective space

capabilities and is planning to expand its capabilities to respond promptly to acts of

terror and its transportation and rescue capabilities for disasters by field deploying

micro-satellite system, space weather forecast and warning system, anti-aircraft laser

weapons, and large-scale transport ships. Furthermore, the MND will contribute to

the development of defense industry and revitalization of the economy by expanding

its investment in the defense R&D field and investing in 8 major national defense

strategy technologies[13)] such as ultra-high-speed and high-power precision strikes,

the manned and unmanned hybrid combat execution, and in cutting-edge defense

science technology of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.

3. Efficient Pursuit of Defense Force Enhancement Projects


**Modification of Laws and**

**Regulations regarding**

**Defense Acquisition**


The MND has been revising laws and regula
tions relevant to defense acquisition projects to

enhance the transparency, expertise, and effici
ency of defense force enhancement projects and


to revitalize the defense industry.

First, in relation to defense acquisition projects, the MND has structured the

existing single defense acquisition project law system into three decentralized

systems by creating individual laws for the defense industry promotion field and

the defense science and technology field. In 2020, the Act on the Development

and Support of the Defense Industry was enacted to systematically support the

development of the defense industry. Through the enactment, the MND designated

projects that are large-scale or high-risk as national policy projects for the defense

industry and established a basis for guaranteeing benefits such as reductions in

penalties for delay. In the field of R&D, the MND introduced an agreement-based

method to defense R&D, which had been promoted only through contract-based

methods, by enacting the Act on the Promotion of Innovation in Defense Science and

Technology, and introduced challenging and innovative R&D support measures such

as expanding the sincere performance recognition program, which has been applied


**13)**
8 National Defense
Strategy Technologies
① Autonomous and AI
based surveillance and
reconnaissance

② Super-connected

intelligent command and
control

③ Super high-speed and

high-power precision
strike

④ Future-oriented

promotion and stealthbased platform

⑤ Manned and unmanned

mixed force warfighting

⑥ Cutting-edge

technology-based
individual combat
system

⑦ Cyber-active response

and future protection

⑧ Future cutting-edge new

technology


-----

only to technology development, to the R&D of select weapons systems. The MND

plans to enact subordinate statutes containing detailed operational plans for the

system that are included in the two laws enacted in 2020 and enforce them in 2021

while continuing to make system improvements for the smooth promotion of future

defense projects.

In 2019, among the four subcommittees of the Defense Acquisition Program

Promotion Committee, the MND integrated three subcommittees that were operated

based on defense acquisition project promotion stages (project planning, project

management, and follow-up management such as logistics procurement) into one

committee under the jurisdiction of the Defense Acquisition Program Administration

(DAPA) to streamline the decision making process. Major issues–from the project

planning stage to execution and contract management–were reviewed in one

subcommittee so that decisions could be made from a comprehensive perspective

on the overall project. As a result, the subcommittees of the Defense Acquisition

Program Promotion Committee have been reorganized into two subcommittees: the

Subcommittee on Military Force Policy under the jurisdiction of the MND and the

Subcommittee on Defense Project Planning and Management under the jurisdiction

of the DAPA.

System improvements have also been made to induce defense companies to reduce

costs. Since the existing defense cost was a way to compensate companies for the

actual costs incurred, no incentives were given to companies for cost reduction.

Accordingly, the MND laid the foundation for enhancing the transparency and

efficiency of defense acquisition projects by introducing the concept of standard

cost[14)] in the defense industry field for the first time in 45 years since the introduction

of the defense cost standard in 1974 which improved the cost structure in its entirety

so that the cost reduction efforts of the company could be compensated with profits.

In addition, various policies were promoted at the same time, such as compensating

appropriate costs for related activities, to simplify the complex defense cost profit

structure and to encourage the export and R&D of defense companies.

In 2018, the MND expanded the application of the cap on the maximum amount

of liquidated damages for delay[15)] from existing prototype production contracts to

first mass production contracts. Considering the fact that a number of unexpected

risk factors may arise even in the initial mass production stage due to the nature of

defense projects, which require high precision, the MND reduced the burden on

companies participating in the defense industry by applying this cap mass production

contracts.


**14)**
It refers to the cost
calculated by the quantity
and price standard by
scientific research for a
certain operation; even if
a company performs the
operation at a lower cost
than the standard cost,
the cost is calculated as
standard cost, so the
savings can be regarded as
the profit of the company.

**15)**
To ensure that the
liquidated damages for
delay system-which
imposes a certain
percentage of liquidated
damages for delay on
the contract amount as
a means of securing the
contractual performance
of the contract partnerdoes not act as an
excessive burden on
the contract partner, the
MND has set the total
amount of liquidated
damages for delay at 10%
of the contract amount
(Paragraph 4, Article 61 of
the Enforcement Decree
of the Defense Acquisition
Program Act).


-----

**Requirement Review and** The MND is implementing a requirement review

**Analysis and Evaluation** program that verifies the appropriateness of the

weapons system requirements determined by the

JCS, considering the national finances and conditions for acquiring the defense

budget.

Having reviewed 34 requirement cases between 2019 and 2020, the MND recom
mended requirements revision and identified various potential risks that may occur

during projects at an early stage. Moreover, the relevant procedures were improved

to reflect the results of the necessary follow-up measures after requirement reviews

into the mid-term defense plan starting from 2019.

The MND also conducted 572 analysis and evaluations between 2019 and 2020

to support rational decision making for promoting projects. The improvement

requirements derived from the analysis and evaluation of the MND led to actual

system improvement such as introduction of the field operation test system,

contributing to the implementation of efficient defense improvement projects. In

2019 in particular, efforts were made to achieve jointness, such as supporting the

budget for research on analysis tasks required by the JCS.


**Execution of Tests and** Tests and evaluations are conducted to determine

**Evaluations** whether a weapons system or a core technology that

is due to be acquired through purchase or R&D

meets the military̓s performance standards and criteria.

From 2019 to 2020, the MND has conducted tests and evaluations for a total of

181 projects, since taking over the responsibility of testing and evaluating from the

DAPA in 2014.

To eliminate redundancy of tests and evaluations performed between the MND

and the JCS, the MND plans to transfer the authority of devising and determining

test and evaluation plans to the JCS and promote the signing of the Test and

Evaluation Program (TEP)[16)] for cooperation in tests and evaluations and mutual

use of test facilities between the ROK and the US By doing so, the MND expects to

streamline test and evaluation processes, develop test and evaluation technologies,

and overcome the limitations of domestic tests and evaluations.


**16)**
Test and Evaluation
Program


-----

## 4 Creation of a Strong, Digital

#### Military and Smart National Defense Based on the Fourth Industrial Revolution Technology

In 2019, through defense innovation that applies the science and technologies of the

Fourth Industrial Revolution to all fields of defense, the MND formed the "Fourth Industrial

Revolution Smart Defense Innovation Task Force" to create a "strong, digital force, smart

national defense" and is carrying out various efforts with each service. The MND plans to

select tasks and projects and reflect the required budget thereof related to three major

innovation fields which are technology and infrastructure innovation to create a super
connected, super-intelligent, and super-converged defense infrastructure, defense

operation innovation to implement transparent, efficient defense operations, and force

system innovation to prepare for future warfare through intelligence and advancement of

weapon systems, and achieve tangible results through systematic project management.


1. Establishment of Defense Infrastructure for Future Social Changes


**Applying Cutting-Edge** The MND is promoting "smart defense inno
**ICT to the Defense Domain** vation" by applying cutting-edge ICT[17)] of the

Fourth Industrial Revolution to the defense

domain, taking advantage of the world’s best ICT infrastructure and public

consensus as opportunity factors.

First, the MND is creating a super-connected, super-converged defense infra
structure that connects defense resources with infrastructure similar to neural

networks. Advancement projects are being carried out in network infrastructure

environments such as building next-generation military broadband convergence

network and forming defense mobile and cloud environment. In order to ensure the

security and flexibility of wireless data communications in line with the creation of a

super-connected defense environment, various development measures are also being

promoted to improve the wireless encryption policy.

Moreover, the MND plans to transform all fields of defense operations to become

intelligent-based by applying advanced technologies such as AI and big data. By


Smart defense
innovation

**17)**
Information and
Communication
Technologies


-----

establishing an "intelligent situation sharing and integrated surveillance system"

centered on the command posts, the MND will analyze and share information

collected from various sensors to provide battlefield information in real time and

establish an "AI-based decision support system" to acquire AI-based command and

control capabilities. To block cyber-threats and ensure stable operation of cutting
edge weapon systems, the MND will further advance the AI-based "cyber-defense

system" and newly build a "cyber-operation situation visualization system".


**Super-Connected, Super-Intelligent** The MND plans to build a super
**Network-Based Advancements** connected broadband convergence

network and expand common

intelli-gent services that can be used anytime, anywhere by collecting and

converging data based on cloud in order to proactively prepare for the changing

security environment and the development trend of ICT.

First, the MND is promoting a future-oriented, next-generation military broadband

convergence network project in order to build a super-connected battlefield

environment. The military broadband convergence network, built as Build Transfer

Lease (BTL) in 2011, has significantly improved the information infrastructure of

field units by accommodating 8,000 lines. However, it is facing limitations such

as aging equipment and increasing demand for large-capacity video services. As a

result, in order to be able to respond to changes in the future battlefield environment,

a next-generation military broadband convergence network is being built that enables

a flexible and intelligent network configuration, and is capable of operation analysis

and super-speed, high-capacity information transmission. The MND also plans to

build a defense mobile environment that enables unclassified and classified work

and transmissions by introducing wireless networks and terminals with enhanced

mobility, security, and survivability, and plans to drastically improve the mobile

communications environment to enable smart operation of military power.

An integrated foundation for the defense information system service will be

established to store and utilize the data collected through the super-connected

network on cloud. To this end, the MND will establish a defense cloud proliferation

strategy and a defense integrated data center advancement and information strategy

plan to replace aging infrastructure and information resources and provide the best

services by managing and operating them efficiently.

Moreover, a development plan is being established to apply AI–a key technology

of the Fourth Industrial Revolution–to national defense in a systematic and strategic

way. The development plan will include development strategies in all related fields,


-----

such as creation of an ecosystem and AI ethics and culture, to introduce AI to the

defense domain. The MND also plans to improve the defense data management

system, which is the basis for utilizing AI, and to cultivate more specialists. Conti
nuous efforts will be made to develop ROK’s defense AI through the introduction of

AI and its efficient use in the defense domain.


**Strengthening** In future wars, interoperability between systems is critical

**Interoperability** as surveillance, command and control, and strike systems

and information systems need to be connected through a

network to share information and synchronize battlefield situations in real time

based on military science and technology developments. Accordingly, the ROK

Armed Forces has secured their own "tactical data link[18)] standard conformance

testing" certification ability for surveillance, command and control, and strike

systems, and they plan to integrate the established interoperability system into a

single system for each resource management and information system for the

efficiency of interoperability and the standardization of interoperability between the

weapons system and the force support system. The MND is striving to improve the

level of interoperability by updating the defense informatization standards[19)]

according to the development trend of ICT and the defense and security environment

and verifying whether the latest standards are being applied.


**18)**
Real-time digital
communications network
for information exchange
between information
systems for weapons
systems and operation of
weapons systems

**19)**
Information technology
standards applied to
secure compatibility and
interoperability between
systems when developing
information systems

**20)**
A scientific technique
that predicts and verifies
the experimental results
through simulation in an
environment that models
characteristics and
functions similar to the
battlefield

**21)**
A state-of-the-art practical
training system capable
of integrated operation by
composing Live (actualmaneuver simulation
training), Virtual (virtual
simulation training), and
Constructive (wargame
simulation training)
systems into one synthetic
environment


**Implementing Smart** In order to create new values of defense work and to

**Information Services** implement smart information services that can support

big data-based decision making, the MND is advan
cing information systems in major fields such as personnel, military, and finance.

The MND also plans to improve the accessibility and compatibility of defense

informatization services so that everyone, including civilians, can utilize quality

services. Meanwhile, open software is being introduced and improvements are made

in education for fostering talented personnel for defense software. The software

operation capability of servicemembers are being maximized through AI-software

convergence education.

A variety of simulation systems are also utilized to enhance combined exercises

and training led by the ROK Armed Forces and their analysis capabilities. The MND

is developing a defense modeling and simulation (M&S)[20)] system by establishing

a simulation analysis pilot system that applies advanced technologies such as AI

and big data and by developing a live, virtual, constructive training system (LVC)[21)]

combined with cutting-edge communication technologies.


-----

2. Realizing ICT-Based, High-Efficiency, Advanced Defense Operations


**Cultivating JLVC Training-Based Real** In order to actively respond to dy
**Combat Warriors and Units** namics in various war aspects and

overcome limitations in training

that stems from social and environmental changes such as urbanization, the ROK

Armed Forces is expanding the use of scientific training system that applies the

technologies of 4th Industrial Revolution.

All service components are working on the establishment of scientific combat

training centers where maneuvering and live-fire of personnel and equipment are

integrated with scientific systems. MILES equipments are also being developed

and distributed, enabling simulated shooting similar to real settings with the use of

laser beam. The ROK ensures realistic training environment through expanding the

application of simulated training with the use of VR and AR. The MND also plans

to establish a synthetic training environment that will integrate and link various

scientific education and training systems in the future.


**Improving the Quality of** The MND is improving the quality of life for

**Life for Servicemembers** servicemembers by supporting safe and healthy

**Using Big Data** barracks life utilizing big data [22)] in various fields

such as meals, clothing, and medical care.

Regarding meals for servicemembers, the MND has established an optimal

meal demand prediction system using the meal operation data, and improved

servicemembers’ satisfaction by implementing a pilot project of "automated meal

service measurement system".

For clothing, size measurement using "3D scanning" is currently in use as a pilot

project for servicemembers in training centers to provide clothing and personal

equipment suitable for the actual body size of each soldier.

The MND plans to further expand the automated meal service measurement

system and 3D scanning to provide meals that cater to the taste of servicemembers

and clothing and personal equipment optimized for the body shape of each

servicemember.

In the medical field, a mobile remote diagnosis and treatment system is being

established that enables quick response by sharing the information on emergency

patients being transferred with the Medical All-Source Situation Center in real time.

An analysis system that can support the decision making of medical staff with the

use of military medical big data is also being facilitated.


**22)**
Technology that extracts
values and analyzes results
from data that include a
large set of both structured
and unstructured data—
instead of in the form of
database—that are beyond
the capabilities of existing
database management
tools


-----

For the mobile telemedicine system, a pilot project was initiated to build a system

using the LTE-based system for the Armed Forces Medical Command, trauma

centers, and 8 military hospitals. The system was temporarily expanded and operated

in isolation facilities and temporary screening clinics to improve accessibility to

the medical treatment of servicemembers isolated due to COVID-19 and to prevent

infection. The military medical big data analysis system is based on the Defense

Medical Information System (DEMIS)[23)], and the development of analysis system

technologies–such as the chest X-ray diagnosis system and the support system for

drug prescription–is being promoted in cooperation with the Ministry of Science

and ITC. Among these, the X-ray diagnosis system is in progress as a pilot project for

military hospitals.

The MND plans to increase the survival rate of patients by supporting the optimal

decision of doctors through big data of DEMIS and create a military medical

environment that can respond to various emergencies by expanding mobile remote

diagnosis and treatment.

Moreover, it plans to establish a smart talent management system that can

systematically manage the service cycle of servicemembers–from before enlistment

to post-discharge–and use it in various fields such as acquiring and cultivating

optimal talents suitable for military characteristics, appointing qualified personnel,

and supporting employment after discharge.


**Improving Efficiency Through Defense** The MND seeks to improve the

**Resource Life Cycle Management** productivity of defense operations

by utilizing various advanced tech
nologies for the life cycle management of defense resources such as military supplies

and military installations.

In terms of equipment maintenance, the MND is building a parts management

system that can accurately predict the equipment life and demand for spare parts

demand using big data. It is also promoting the establishment of smart factories[24)]

that apply a status-based maintenance system and a remote maintenance support

system utilizing sensor data and advanced ICT.

First, with regard to equipment life and demand for repair parts, a demand predic
tion model was developed and is applied to improve the accuracy in predicting the

demand for repair parts. The MND is building a parts discontinuation management

information system to cope with the increased cost and reduced equipment operation

rate due to parts discontinuation.

Moreover, a status-based maintenance system is being established based on sensor


**23)**
A system that converts
handwritten medical
records into integrated
electronic medical records
and connects them to a
network so that any unit
can access the same
medical records

**24)**
An intelligent production
factory that improves
productivity, quality, and
customer satisfaction by
applying ICT combined
with digital automation
solutions in the production
process from design
and development to
manufacturing and
distribution. It is a futuristic
factory where the facilities
and equipment are installed
with IoT to collect process
data in real time, analyze it,
and enable control by the
factory itself


-----

Fixed dehumidifier Power ventilator

Access control
system

Central
Control Room

Automatic control panel
(Installed with
temperature and
humidity display window)

Temperature and humidity display board


Equipment maintenance using AR


Smart Magazine (igloo type)


data collected by attaching sensors to major equipment of the Army, Navy, and Air

Force and a remote maintenance support system is being promoted using VR and

AR to provide quick support to marine vessels and remote units that are experiencing

difficulty in dispatching specialized maintenance units.

The MND will build a foundation to apply the status-based maintenance system

from the weapon acquisition stage, and enhance the functions of smart factories in

the field of military maintenance by expanding the units and equipment subject to

the remote maintenance system.

When it comes to ammunition management, the MND is establishing a smart

ammunition storage[25)] that automatically controls the temperature and humidity

in the ammunition storage and monitors fire using IoT[26)] to ensure ammunition

performance and safety. A guided munition life cycle management system is also

being created based on big data to improve the accuracy in predicting the demand

for guided munitions. To this end, the MND is establishing standards for applying

smart ammunition storages for ammunition type and is building 7 smart ammunition

storages as a pilot project. It is also promoting the computerization of guided

munition data in the integrated defense logistics information system.

In the future, after analyzing the storage management performance of smart

ammunition storages, the MND plans to supplement the deficiencies and expand the

smart ammunition storage initiative to the entire military starting in 2025. The MND

will continue to improve the accuracy in predicting demands and the operation

rate of guided munitions by developing a demand prediction model for each guided

munition.

In the field of military supply management, big data is utilized to predict and

calculate the appropriate life cycle for timely replacement. The MND seeks to reduce

manpower and streamline logistics operations for efficiency through automated

loading and unloading, screening, and packaging tasks by establishing a smart

logistics center that apply robots and automated devices. Currently, the MND has


**25)**
Ammunition that enables
remote automatic control
from the Central Control
Room by installing
biometric access control
sensors, automatic CCTVs
and surveillance sensors,
temperature and humidity
automation facilities, fire
monitoring sensors, etc

**26)**
Technology that
connects various
objects to the Internet by
embedding sensors and
communication functions
and through wireless
communication


-----

begun a big data prediction model pilot project for 6 items–including personal

equipment, bedding, and general goods–and established a comprehensive plan for

smart logistics centers by implementing a pilot project for on-site management of

military supplies and research service for the operation of a smart logistics center

based on robots and big data. The MND plans to gradually expand life span analysis

items and introduce smart logistics centers.


**Win-Win Development of Civilian–** To effectively introduce advanced tech
**Government–Military in Major** nologies that are developing day by day,

**Technical Fields** it is essential to utilize civilian experts

and technologies, hence providing the

private sector with opportunities to experiment and generate profits.

First, the MND is making efforts for the early introduction of 3D printing[27)]

technology in the defense domain. Currently, the civilian–government–military

are working together to develop defense metal parts manufacturing technology as

part of a research project led by the Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy. The

MND is continuing the education to cultivate defense specialists with 3D printing

manufacturing technology in each service to acquire 3D printing defense manpower.

The MND plans to gain specialized 3D printers tailored to the characteristics of

each service and enhance the efficiency of logistics support by producing defense

parts that are discontinued or are difficult to procure. More robots for operational

sustainability support will be used to solve fatigue problems caused by the reduction

of human resources and heavy weight and repetitive work in the field of operational

sustainability. The ROK Army achieved results

in reducing work hours by conducting test and

evaluation of muscle-assisted robots[28)] in the

ammunition and engineering units of the Army.

Currently, a passive-type wearable robot **[29)]**

pilot project is being promoted. The MND is

planning to promote technology development

as a civilian-military technology cooperation

project, select a test unit, and conduct a wear
able robot pilot project.

Drones, a cutting-edge technology that major

advanced countries are paying attention to,

are also highly utilized in the field of defense.

Upper limb strength support wearable

Accordingly, the MND is promoting the de- robot


**27)**
3D printer refers to
the machine itself that
prints three-dimensional
objects based on a threedimensional design, while
3D printing is the entire
process of printing threedimensional objects with
a 3D printer, by not only
printing three-dimensional
objects but also creating
the desired result through
the process of designing

**28)**
A robot that can
support the muscles by
supplementing human
physical limitations and
strengthen physical
abilities (muscle strength,
endurance, etc.), It
is classified into an
exoskeleton-type system
and a suit-type system
according to the structure
and operation method.

**29)**
A passive robot that does
not use power and a robot
that improves the wearer’s
physical ability through
a drive unit control or a
mechanical mechanism
after measuring signals
from the human body


-----

ployment of transportation drones to provide quick support to remote and isolated

units which are restricted from access during contingencies. Currently, the MND

is conducting preliminary research on drones for transporting military supplies,

evaluating the utilization of excellent commercial drones, and promoting technical

cooperation projects for both civilian and military use. In the future, more drones for

transporting military supplies are expected to be used in the Army Logistics School

and the logistics support brigades, while empirical evaluation and verification will

also be conducted accordingly.

3. Advancement of Military Power that Apply Cutting-Edge Technology


**30)**
As fields of technology that
require strategic R&D to
achieve defense goals, they
include mature private new
technologies applicable to
national defense. The eight
fields are:
① Autonomous and AI
based surveillance and
reconnaissance

② Super-connected

intelligent command and
control

③ Super high-speed and

high-power precision
strike

④ Future-oriented

promotion and stealthbased platform

⑤ Manned and unmanned

combined combat
performance

⑥ Cutting-edge

technology-based
individual combat
system

⑦ Cyber-active response

and future protection

⑧ Future cutting-edge new

technology

**31)**
A document which is
published every three
years by the Defense
Agency for Technology and
Quality in accordance with
Article 32 of the Defense
Acquisition Program Act
and Article 137 of the
Regulations on Defense
Acquisition Program
Management. For the
document to be used for
future weapons system’s
core technology planning
and the survey and analysis
on previous research
conducted, it presents the
level of defense science
and technology, the
development status and
trend of weapons systems
and technologies, and
the directions for R&D
of technologies that are
required in the future.


**Securing a Weapons Systems that** For a country to gain its own indepen
**Apply Fourth Industrial Revolution** dent defense capabilities that can pro
**Technologies** actively respond to changes in the future

security environment, it is nece-ssary to

continue the development of advanced weapons systems and core and original

technologies, including a strategy for promoting defense R&D.

The DAPA presents the direction of each project by establishing a core technology

roadmap for each weapon system every year to secure the core technologies

necessary for the R&D of weapons systems in advance. The DAPA also prepares

the "Core Technology Plan" every year according to the 8 fields of defense strategy

technology[30)] of the "Defense Science and Technology Advancement Policy" for

mid- to long-term core technology planning.

In the "2020-2034 Core Technology Plan", the MND presented 140 core tech
nologies for each defense strategy technology through the analysis of key points and

strategies for securing major technologies for each of the 8 fields of defense strategy

technology. In the "2019 Defense Science and Technology Survey"[31)], the MND

derived requirements for core technology development by utilizing a survey and

analysis technique of work breakdown structure (WBS) on 33 key weapons systems

and strengthened the defense technology planning required to build a weapons

system with advanced technologies by analyzing the connection with the 8 fields of

defense strategy technology.

To utilize civilian R&D capabilities needed for future battlefield innovation in the

defense fields, the MND plans to contribute to national R&D activities in various

ways and extend the scope of application by developing defense technologies and

weapons systems for 10 fields–advanced sensors, AI, VR, AR and mixed reality


-----

(MR), quantum information, cybersecurity, IoT and Internet of Everything (IoE),

energy, new materials, 3D/4D printing, and unmanned robots.

**Promoting Future Challenge** In keeping with the advancement of

**Defense Technology Development** weapons systems and the increasing

**Project[32)]** speed of technological developments,

the MND is creating conditions for task

planning to enable the implementation of challenging and innovative national

defense R&D projects that generate weapons system requirements in contrast to the

existing defense R&D planning system based on requirements of each service, and is

building a system to implement such task.

The DAPA has been piloting the future challenge defense technology development

project since 2018, and is making efforts to improve the efficiency of project which

include the Agency for Defense Development selecting 13 projects through public

participation and holding technical contests.

In 2019, the types of future challenge defense technology development projects

were diversified into PM planning[33)], technology competition, and project

competition to encourage participation by the private industry, academia, and

research experts.

Moreover, the "Act on the Promotion of Innovation in Defense Science and

Technology" was enacted in March 2020 to provide legal grounds for the project,

enabling stable project promotion. By expanding the future challenge defense

technology development project through budget increases and discovery of new

projects, the MND will continue to exert efforts to develop challenging and

innovative technologies and to create requirements for new-concept weapons

systems utilizing these technologies.


**32)**
Innovative and challenging
defense science and
technologies with the
purpose of applying them
to weapons systems
wherein the requirements
are not determined or
are not scheduled under
Article 15 (1) of the Defense
Acquisition Program Act

**33)**
A planning method
wherein a project manager
(PM) directly plans the
detailed technical tasks
of the program and
autonomously performs
entire tasks from
selection to management
and evaluation of the
supervising research
institutes


-----

-----

##### Chapter
# 5

## Establishing a Fair, Transparent,  and Efficient National Defense  Operation System

Section 1 Innovation of an Efficient Defense Manpower Operation System
Section 2 Upholding Civilian Control of the Military and Open Defense

Operation

Section 3 Ensuring a Fair and Transparent National Defense for the

Enhancement of the Benefit of the People

Section 4 Improving Transparency in Defense Acquisition Program and

Securing Competitiveness in the Defense Industry

Section 5 Securing the Appropriate Defense Budget and the Efficiency of

Budget Operation for Steadfast Defense


-----

-----

## 1 Innovation of an Efficient

#### Defense Manpower Operation System

The MND is shortening the military service period to meet the public demand for

easing the burden of military service. In preparation for the expected shortage of

troop resources due to the shortening of the service period, the MND is increasing the

proportion of female servicemembers and improving their working conditions while

implementing military expertise-oriented human resource management to prevent force

deterioration.

1. Shortening the Mandatory Military Service Period


**Implementing the Service** Starting on October 1, 2018, the MND has shor
**Period Reduction Plan** tened the military service period of servicemem
bers to develop the ROK Armed Forces into

technology-intensive, strong elite forces. The service period for the Army and the

Marine Corps was curtailed from 21 to 18 months, the Navy from 23 to 20 months,

and the Air Force from 24 to 22 months with an additional 1 month reduction

following a revision of the Military Service Act. Determined by the time of

enlistment, the service period is gradually shortened by one day on a two-week basis

to prevent any significant differences. In case of the Army, the reduction of the

service period started with those who enlisted on January 3, 2017 and were

discharged on October 1, 2018. The shortened period will reach the full three-month

term with those who will enlist on June 15, 2020 and will get discharged on

December 14, 2021. The discharge date for each enlistment date can be found with

the discharge date calculator available at the Military Manpower Administration

(MMA) website. The shortening of the service period is expected to allow

servicemembers to return to the civilian society earlier and, therefore, contributes to

the efficient use of the country’s human resources.


-----

[Chart 5-1] Changes in the Length of the Military Service Period (applicable to the Army)

(Unit: months)


36



33

30 30

26
24

21

18


1962~1967 1968~1976 1977~1983 1984~1992 1993~2003 2003~2010 2011~2017 2021


**Measures to Prevent** To prevent force deterioration caused by the shortened

**Force Deterioration** service period, cutting-edge defense technologies for

modern warfare will be strengthened, and the man
power structure will be restructured into one centered on officers and NCOs with

positions requiring proficiency to be filled by NCOs. Moreover, the training system

for enlisted personnel will be enhanced, and realistic training will be reinforced to

improve their proficiency as early as possible through scientific training. At the same

time, noncombatant missions will be minimized by increasing civilian military

employees and civilian workers to help servicemembers focus on combat missions

during their service periods. Such reform in the defense manpower operation system

will further bolster the ROK’s military power.


2. Increasing the Proportion of Female Servicemembers and

Providing Favorable Working Conditions


**Acquiring Superior** The necessity to expand female military manpower is

**Female Workforce** increasing as women’s role in society continues to

expand and due to the reform on transforming the

military into a technology-intensive one. To increase the proportion of female

servicemembers, the MND is gradually recruiting female junior cadres (second

lieutenants and staff sergeants) in accordance with the 2018-2022 Plan for Female

Workforce Expansion Plan, which aims to increase the proportion of female

servicemembers to at least 8.8% by 2022.

As of the end of November 2020, the total number of female servicemembers stood

at 13,665, accounting for 7.4% of the total number of cadres (officers and NCOs) as


-----

suggested in the expansion goal in 2020. After expanding the female servicemember

workforce by up to 8.8% at the end of 2022, the MND plans to determine whether to

further expand the female workforce considering the direction of defense reform and

the conditions for acquiring active-duty resources.


**Managing Female** For the efficient utilization of female ser
**Servicemembers According to** vicemembers, the MND has devised the

**Gender Equality** same regulations for female servicemember

positions as those of male servicemembers.

Also, favorable conditions are provided for pregnancy, childbirth, and childcare

while any disadvantages thereof in terms of personnel management are prohibited.

In July 2018, the National Defense Personnel Management Directive was revised to

abolish the restriction on female servicemembers’ assignment to certain units and

positions and apply the same standards for career management regardless of gender.

In May 2019, the MND established standards for adding female positions in policy

departments and combat units, and made it mandatory for the ratio of female

servicemembers working in policy departments–including the MND, the JCS, the

Combined Forces Command (CFC), and each service headquarters–to be higher

than the ratio of female field officers in order to promote their career advancements.

In addition, regulations were put in place for each service to report the status of

commander and staff positions in combat units to the MND every year.


**Assisting the Servicemembers’** To promote work–life balance for both

**Work–Life Balance** genders, the MND has established a system

to improve the conditions of female ser
vicemembers when it comes to pregnancy, childbirth, and childcare. At the end of

2019, in relation to pregnancy and childbirth, leave up to three days for spouse’s mis
carriage or stillbirth and leave up to ten days for pregnancy examination leave were

made available to servicemembers. Also, in order to assist childcare, childcare leave

for families with two or more children was expanded to three days a year from two

days a year.

As of the end of 2020, the MND operates a total of 139 daycare centers and 45

co-parenting centers, and is expanding the number of childcare facilities annually

in consideration of the legal standards and childcare requirements. Since 2019, the

MND has subsidized the labor cost of one nighttime nursery teacher for 89 military

daycare centers with 20 or more personnel, allowing servicemembers to use the

centers when night care is needed during training, watch duty, or other duties.


70 years of the
ROK Female Armed
Forces


-----

Moreover, by introducing a family-friendly certification system[1)] to military units

and gradually expanding the program, the MND is strengthening commanders’

responsibility for creating work-family balance conditions and promoting better

organizational culture.


**Creating a Working Environment** The MND is creating a safe working en
**Safe from Sexual Violence** vironment by conducting sexual violence

prevention activities and reinforcing the

expertise of the officer in charge of handling sexual violence cases and the victim

protection and support system. In order to eradicate sexual violence in the military,

the MND offers gender awareness courses and reflects the completion or non
completion of these courses in HR management to include promotions and

assignments. Cooperation with related organizations and civic groups is also being

carried out. The MND is annually increasing the number of counselors for sexual

grievances and professional investigative personnel–experts in supporting victims–

and holding annual civilian-government-military integrated workshops to eradicate

sexual violence. Furthermore, by strictly applying the "One-Strike Out System", sex

offenders, after receiving criminal punishment, are submitted to a disciplinary

review without exception and a disciplinary determination standard based on severe

disciplinary action is applied during the review.

In 2019, a gender awareness course was added to the curriculum of each military

academy as a regular course. Likewise, through a study of the Military Sexual

Violence Survey conducted in the same year, the MND was able to identify the

pattern of sexual violence in the military and derived the requirements for policy

improvements. The MND designates a special period for sexual violence prevention

throughout the military during summer and at the end and start of a new year and

checks the implementation status of sexual violence prevention activities, and further

enhances the support system for victims of sexual violence. The MND plans to

reflect changes in the patterns of sexual violence incidents occurring in the military,

supplement the system that prevents sexual violence and protects the victims, and

upgrade the education program to improve gender awareness.


**1)**
A system that grants
certification after assessing
public institutions and
private companies that
operate family-friendly
systems in an exemplary
manner (childbirth and
childcare support,
flexible work system etc.)
(Operated by the Ministry
of Gender Equality and
Family)


-----

[Chart 5-2] Integrated Support System for Victims of Sexual Violence

|Category|Consultation / Report|Medical Treatment|Law|
|---|---|---|---|
|Inside the military|• Defense Help Call / Gender Equality Policy Division (MND) • Gender Equality Center in each military • Counselors for sexual grievances (Corps level) • Director for gender equality (Division level)|• Mental Health Promotion Center of the Armed Forces Capital Hospital * Hospital dedicated to provide medical support for victims of sexual violence|• Public defender • Witness Support Officer(accompanied with trusted person)|
|Outside the military|• Sunflower Center (31 centers): Counseling, medical treatment (fees incurred for some treatments), free legal support • Sexual violence counseling centers (168 counseling centers nationwide)|||


**Expansion of Essential** The MND is also expanding the essential facilities

**Facilities for Female** for women (restrooms, shower rooms, etc.) in each

**Servicemembers** service following the increase in the number of

female servicemembers due to the abolition of

limitation of female servicemember deployments to certain units and positions,

increased number of newly commissioned female officers and the expansion in

selection of female servicemembers for long-term service. After identifying the

requirements for expansion through a complete enumeration survey of women̕s

essential facilities and gender impact assessment, MND installed 121 buildings in

the units that were not equipped with essential facilities for women in 2019. A total of

210 independent rooms were also provided for the heads of guard posts in the ROK

Army’s general post (GOP).

By 2021, the MND plans to build essential facilities for women in all military units

that female servicemembers can serve at. (Army and Marine Corps: independent

platoon level and higher; Navy and Air Force: battalion level and higher).

The MND also strives to improve the service conditions for female cadres whose

numbers are gradually increasing through focused efforts on improving the aging

cadre quarters and supplementing the shortage of quarters.


Essential facilities for female

servicemembers (outside)


Essential facilities for female

GOP guard post toilet
servicemembers (inside)


-----

3. HR Management Centered on Military Expertise


**Fostering Balanced Talents by** Forming an organization with per
**Gender, Origin, Branch, and Specialty** sonnel of diverse characteristics

through balanced HR management

that does not discriminate gender, origin, branch, or specialty contributes to

enhancing the future competitiveness of the organization.

Accordingly, the MND is striving to overcome the limitations in performance
oriented HR management and improve the diversity and equity of the organizational

structure.

First, the MND is expanding the selection of outstanding female servicemembers

to achieve gender-balanced HR management. As a result, the number of female

servicemembers promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel and colonel has increased

by 360% from 22 in 2016 to 79 in 2020. Moreover, in 2019 a female officer reached

the rank of major general for the first time, and another female officer became a

brigadier general for the first time in the military intelligence branch.



[Chart 5-3] Female Servicemember Promotions by Rank in the Past Five Years


(Unit: person)

|Category|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Captain → Major|159|146|212|215|236|
|Major → Lieutenant Colonel|20|35|51|63|71|
|Lieutenant Colonel → Colonel|2|6|7|5|8|
|Colonel → Brigadier General|0|3|2|2|1|



To achieve origin-balanced HR management, the MND has expanded the

assigning of non-academy graduate officers to key positions such as policy

departments which were mainly filled by academy graduate officers by improving

the HR management. Also, the promotion rate of non-academy graduate officers

has been gradually increased since 2018. The MND will continue to strengthen the

careers and competencies of all officers regardless of their origin and enhance the

competitiveness of the military organization by conducting promotion assessment

based on free competition that takes into account the individuals’ abilities and

qualities instead of their origins.

To promote balanced HR management by branch and specialty, the MND

encourages the revitalization of military service by promoting excellent personnel

who have served sincerely to the end of their service periods, breaking away from the


-----

previous practice of promoting a servicemember based on his or her specific branch

or specialty. Moreover, the MND is striving to foster balanced talents in various

fields by selecting those with expertise in specific fields and who have the ability to

lead the development of the military.

The MND will further streamline policy directions, implementation systems, and

policy contents related to balanced HR management by conducting policy studies for

balanced HR management suitable for the future security environment.


**Establishing an HR Management** The MND is also making considerable

**System that Fosters Top-Notch** efforts to train top-notch experts in each

**Experts in Each Field** field to prepare for changes of trends

in future wars and the transformation

to a technology-intensive military structure. In connection with Defense Reform

2.0 in particular, the HR management system is being improved with the focus on

enhancing the expertise and utility of cyber-experts, combined and joint experts, and

acquisition experts.

First, the MND re-established the concept of "cyber-experts" in order to develop

the ability to respond to the rapidly increasing cyber-threat and to carry out

cyberwarfare. Accordingly, the opportunity to become a cyber-expert, which was

previously given to officers only, has been expanded to all ranks including NCOs

and civilian military employees. Active duty cyber-experts receive a cyber-specialty

or qualification while a cyber-field was newly established for civilian military

employees through revision of related laws and regulations in March 2020. By 2021,

the MND plans to gradually acquire experts according to the HR acquisition goal

for each status by, and to designate cyber-expert positions in consideration of annual

unit reorganizations and organizational changes and enhance the expertise of cyber
experts by operating the designated positions by rotation.

The "combined and joint training experts" system fosters and utilizes human

resources to lead the process of OPCON transition and subsequent combined

operations. The positions are divided into two classes[2)] depending on the level

of jointness and language proficiency. First, the verification for expert position

appointment was strengthened so to ensure objectivity. The language proficiency

standard, which had been set too high, was eased to adjust to appropriate standards.

In addition, the pool of experts was expanded by granting qualifications to those

who received commissioned education for more than 6 months in English-speaking

countries. The MND plans to activate the rotation of combined and joint training

experts to the JCS, ROK–US Combined Forces Command, joint units, and field


**2)**

-  Group A: Positions that

require high level of
jointness and language
skills (49 positions)

-  Group B: Positions that

require general level of
jointness and language
skills (320 positions)


-----

units, strengthen the position management for them to be assigned first to designated

combined and joint positions, and support the continuous improvement of the

servicemembers’ language skills by offering more opportunities such as short-term

overseas training, various training courses, and individual deployment.

In the case of acquisition experts, the MND intends to foster force experts

with expertise in all stages of the force work system of "proposing requirements
acquisition-operation" by designating acquisition and force positions within the

MND, the JCS, the DAPA, and each service and by improving the job rotation.

First, the acquisition and force positions are designated regularly within the MND,

the JCS, the DAPA, and each service to enhance the military HR management

and maintain work connectivity within the positions. To supplement the DAPA

acquisition experts’ understanding of "proposing requirements" and "operation" and

the relative lack in experience in operating forces in field units, the job rotation was

further enhanced among the DAPA, the MND, the JCS, and each service, and the

maximum job rotation duration (5 years) is strictly managed so that force specialists

in each service can equally experience other project-related positions in the DAPA.

The MND plans to inspect the status of rotation of acquisition experts and force

specialists in each service to ensure that the above-mentioned improvements are

being implemented in a satisfactory manner.


-----

## 2 Upholding Civilian Control of

#### the Military and Open Defense Operation

The MND has established the principle of civilian control where the representatives

elected by the people manage and operate the military in a democratic way and is

promoting the civilian control of the military in national defense and guaranteeing political

neutrality to allow the ROK Armed Forces to concentrate on their inherent missions.

Moreover, the MND is also striving to gain public trust by carrying out active defense

policy PR activities, engaging people to participate in the policymaking processes, and

developing anti-corruption and integrity measures together with the civilian sector,

thereby realizing an open national defense operation.

1. Promoting Civilian Control of the Military[ 3)]


**Civilian Control of** The MND is pursuing civilian control of national defense

**the Military** to establish the principle of civilian control over national

defense policies and guarantee the conditions for the ROK

Armed Forces to devote themselves to their inherent missions.

Civilian control of the military is significant in that it is one of the basic principles of a

democratic nation under the Constitution and other laws, and national defense needs to

be subject to democratic control within the bigger framework of government policies.

Since the inauguration of the Moon administration in 2017, the administration has

emphasized the need to re-establish the roles of the MND and each military service,

and rebuild the ROK Armed Forces as the "Advanced Armed Forces of a Democratic

Nation Trusted by the People" based on the principle of civilian control and political

neutrality.

Accordingly, the MND, while guaranteeing the political neutrality of the ROK

Armed Forces by establishing the principle of civilian control to ensure, is promoting

the execution of national defense tasks that meet the public’s standards, and is

promoting the national defense civilian control promotion plan under the goal of

providing the conditions for the Armed Forces to focus on their inherent missions.

From 2017 to 2020, the MND replaced three deputy minister-level positions

previously held by reserves with regular public officials and converted six director

**3)**
According to this
principle, key national
defense policies need
to be determined by the
president elected through
a popular election; the
Minister of National
Defense, who is a member
of the administrative
cabinet; and civilian expert
groups. In addition, military
power should be used
in accordance with the
political and diplomatic
decisions of the state.


-----

general and director-level positions that require administrative expertise, except

those requiring the expertise of active duty personnel, to regular public official

positions, thereby achieving results in civilian control. Based on such efforts, if

civilian manpower with expertise in the defense and military fields is to be gradually

increased and servicemembers are to be assigned based on positions that require

military expertise, the MND will be able to establish optimal defense policies for

the use of military force, while the ROK Armed Forces will be able to focus on their

inherent missions.

Furthermore, to achieve civilian control in major positions in defense education

and research institutes, which aim to enhance expertise in the field of defense

education and research, in 2017, a civilian was appointed as the president of the

Korea Institute of Defense Analysis (KIDA). The MND is seeking to revise the Act

on the Establishment of the Korea National Defense University to also appoint a

civilian instead of a general officer as the president of the Korea National Defense

University.

Discussions are underway with the relevant ministries to convert some of the

positions for professors from active duty personnel to civilian professors to secure

outstanding faculty so as to strengthen the educational capabilities of the Korea

National Defense University and the military academies.


**Enhancing the Expertise of Public** To create an environment where ci
**Officials in the MND in Security and** vilian officials with expertise in the

**Military Areas** security and military areas and pro
fessional soldiers develop mutually in

accordance with the trend of civilian control, public officials at the headquarters of

the MND need to enhance their military expertise in order to understand and

empathize with the positions of each service.

To this end, the MND operates a customized education system by rank to enhance

the military expertise of its officials. For public officials to advance to higher ranks,

they are required to complete a mandatory training course on military operations

and weapons systems to gain military expertise. The MND intends to strengthen

the decision-making capabilities of public officials in management positions, such as

high-ranking public officials in particular, by offering a curriculum in international

affairs and security strategies.

Going forward, the MND will continue to make efforts to enhance the military

expertise of public officials for the successful implementation of civilian control of

the military.


-----

2. Political Neutrality of the ROK Armed Forces

**Revising the Relevant Laws to** The ROK Armed Forces carries out the

**Eradicate Political Intervention** sacred mission of defending the country

and protecting the lives and property of

the people through national security.

Accordingly, the Constitution and other laws stipulate the Armed Forces’ obli
gation to be politically neutral, ensuring the execution of their inherent missions.

However, considering that military servicemebers are not free of pressure from

superiors due to the military’s vertical rank and command-obey structure, there still

remains a factor that can induce political intervention by servicemembers.

To address this issue, the MND plans to revise the relevant laws and regulations

to eradicate any political involvement caused by political pressure and to enhance

political neutrality.

Until now, there was no basis for severe punishment if an outside public official

instructed servicemembers to intervene in politics. Also, there was no obligation

to report unethical orders to meddle in politics nor legal provisions protecting

whistleblowers. Hence, the MND seeks to revise the Framework Act on Military

Status and Service and the State Public Officials Act to impose greater punishment

when an outside public official instructs a servicemember to engage in unethical

political intervention, to mandate the reporting of political meddling instructions,

and to provide a legal basis for securing the whistleblower’s confidentiality and

rewarding the corresponding whistleblower. In addition, the MND plans to revise

the Military Unit Management Directive by supplementing the "Code of Conduct on

Political Neutrality of the Military" and the "Detailed Standards of Conduct".

The people’s trust in the military is the basis of the military’s combat power, and

such trust is guaranteed only when the military is faithful to its inherent duties.

Therefore, the ROK Armed Forces will continue to improve the legal foundation

for compliance with political neutrality obligations to eradicate possible political

interventions inside and outside the military, offering an environment where

servicemembers can focus on their inherent duties.


**Raising the Awareness of Servicemembers to** The MND has allowed the

**Comply with Political Neutrality** use of mobile phones in

the military as part of the

creation of a barracks culture that guarantees human rights and basic rights of each

servicemember. As servicemembers are able to express their personal opinions


-----

including posting comments on political issues at any time, there are growing

concerns over the possibility of their comments violating political neutrality.

Therefore, it is necessary to raise the awareness of servicemembers to comply with

political neutrality, now more than ever.

To keep pace with such changes in the barracks environment, the MND is striving

to raise the awareness of servicemembers by presenting clear and specific codes of

conduct and conducting regular education on these codes.

First, education materials were provided to servicemembers to help them

understand the laws and the guidelines in an easier way by suggesting examples

for each case. To maintain political neutrality in the existing guidelines on the use

of mobile phones in the military, the MND added essential rules to be observed by

servicemembers when using social media, and made additional efforts to prevent

online violation of political during the by-elections and the 21st legislative elections

which took place after the use of mobile phones were allowed.

Throughout the year, the MND is also raising the awareness of servicemembers

by offering education and giving emphasis on observation of political neutrality.

Education is conducted in consideration of the forgetting curve and the cycle of troop

rotation, and servicemembers are being supervised to practice the guidelines on

the use of mobile phones on a daily basis to recognize and implement the values of

observing political neutrality.

3. Open Management of National Defense


**4)**
Launched in 2015, the
group aims to discover
ideas for promoting
defense policies and to
utilize the talents of experts
in various fields such as
smart and innovation,
culture, medical care,
media, and PR (27
members in 2019 → 31
members in 2020).

**5)**
An online press corps
composed of college
students and general
public interested in the
national defense policies.
Centering on public
communication, the
organization was launched
in 2016 to promote online
PR activities on national
key policies (45 members
in 2019 → 50 members in
2020).


**Promoting Active Policy** To gain public trust, the MND is actively promoting

**PR Activities** its key policies, including Defense Reform 2.0,

through various channels such as the press, digital

media, and on-site communication. In addition, to communicate directly with the

public to gain their understanding and consensus on national defense policies, the

MND continues to carry out PR activities focused on public participation through

the "Communication Experts Group"[4)] composed of experts in various fields such as

smart and innovation, media and culture, and medical care and "Online Supporters

(M-Friends)"[5)] composed of college students.

As the first step of reaching a consensus among the public, the MND is producing

online and mobile promotional contents considering the increasing influence of

these platforms. In 2020, in line with the increase in the dissemination speed of

information via YouTube, the MND produced a new video titled "Real Military


-----

Battle Royale" following the existing "K-Weapon" video to enhance the public’s

understanding of military weapons systems and barracks culture, and continued to

communicate with the public.

In spite of the influence of online media, the MND has also continued to carry out

PR activities through broadcasting[6)], which still has a high ripple effect, providing

an opportunity to advance towards a military trusted by the people. In April 2019,

a special exhibition was held related to the CMA titled "The Path to Peace through

Strong National Defense". More than 35,000 military officials and civilians visited

the exhibition, which ended with positive feedback such as "the exhibition consisted

of high-quality cultural content that was easy for the civilians to understand". In

particular, the MND’s advertisement "Strong Force that Creates Peace", which

reveals the power of the ROK Armed Forces, was also featured in the exhibition, and

won the Special Jury Prize at the 27th Advertising of the Year Award hosted by the

Korea Advertising Society. Furthermore, a program titled "Those Who Cross the

Line: Panmunjom Special" was also broadcast on MBC, which is one of the public

broadcasters of the ROK, to form public consensus on the CMA.

The "Thank you Soldiers" campaign is conducted every year to instill pride in

servicemembers and is promoted as one of the events that encourage communication

with the public. In particular, the MND hosted an online campaign dubbed

"Send Your Warmest Regards, The 1001 Challenge"[7)] to commemorate the 72nd

anniversary of the ROK Armed Forces Day. The campaign was to encourage

servicemembers and citizens amid the pandemic by exchanging messages of support

and gratitude with each other.

Moreover, in collaboration with "Daum Kakao", photos of public support activities

to overcome the pandemic–such as giving support for those placed under quarantine,

carrying out prevention measures, and giving medical treatments–were posted

on "Kakao Gallery", recording more than 500,000 views and embedding in the

public the commitment of the ROK

Armed Forces to protect the people.

In particular, this online exhibition of

showcasing the various COVID-19

sites provided an opportunity to create

public consensus on government

activities in a situation where visiting

each region was difficult due to social

distancing and other limiting factors.

The 1001 Challenge - Letters to encourage the
servicemembers The influence of digital media such


ROK Armed Forces:
Strong Force that
Creates Peace

Launching of the
5th M-Friends

72nd Anniversary of
ROK Armed Forces
Day Challenge

**6)**
"Military Medical System
Reorganization" (SBS)
in June 2019, "Use of
Mobile Phones After
Training" (KBS) in July
2019, "Documentary
Three Days: 72 Hours in
the Korea Armed Forces
Nursing Academy"
(KBS) in April 2020,
"Special Documentary
Commemorating the 70th
Anniversary of the Korean
War" in June 2020 (three
terrestrial TVs), etc.

**7)**
A public participation
campaign hosted to
celebrate the 72nd Armed
Forces Day wherein the
general public and the
servicemembers post
messages of support and
encouragement on the
Challenge website.


-----

as YouTube is expected to expand further as communication via online has increased

worldwide since the outbreak of COVID-19. In line with such changes in society, the

MND will expand its activities of promoting interactive public communication by

establishing a customized strategy for each policy consumer.


**Enhancing Public Participation in** The MND is innovating national defense

**Policymaking Processes** with the public under the goal of "re
storing public status through participa
tion and trust." In addition, to enhance the transparency and effectiveness of defense

policies through "participation and cooperation" which is a government innovation

strategy, the MND is offering more opportunities in public participation and

collecting their opinions in key policymaking processes.

To further improve the transparency and accountability of national defense policies,

the MND has been implementing the "Transparent Policy System", disclosing the

overview of policies with high public interest and major implementation details

to the public. In the past, projects subject to disclosure were unilaterally selected

by the MND; from 2018, however, the "Transparent Policy System with Public

Participation" where some projects are selected based on public participation was

introduced. With the implementation of the system, the MND fulfills the people’s

right to know and enhances the defense policymaking processes together with the

citizens.

Moreover, the MND invites public participation every year to select and operate the

"People’s Participation Group in National Defense Information Disclosure"–which

contributes to the quality improvement of information disclosure by monitoring and

providing opinions on the information disclosed by the ministry. Public services are

also being improved by forming and operating the annual "People’s Design Group"

where the people and service designers participate in the making of defense policies

as policy users.


**Developing Anti-Corruption and Integrity** The MND is working toward

**Measures Based on Civilian-Government** strengthened anticorruption and

**Partnership** integrity measures aimed at im
plementing dignified national

defense by expanding the people’s participation and monitoring of overall national

defense policies and their implementations, and building an anti-corruption system

based on civil-government partnership.

The MND has established and is operating an anti-corruption system where


-----

the public directly participates and performs in policy monitoring. Some of the

anti-corruption programs include the "Integrity Ombudsman" program, where

civilian experts, according to their independent positions, perform functions

such as receiving reports, carrying out audits, and recommending correctives

against corruption in the military, and the "Civil-Public Council for Corruption
Free National Defense," where defense agencies and people from all walks of life

including civic groups cooperate to discuss military anti-corruption policies.

In addition, the MND has carried out various activities such as regular integrity

education for the entire military and a "Defense Integrity Essay" contest to raise the

servicemembers’ awareness of integrity as one of the core values of public officials.

To induce public officials to internalize their own integrity, a whistleblower policy

was also activated under an anonymous reporting system which lifted concerns on

personal information leakage.

Through such efforts, the level of integrity of the MND has improved every year in

the integrity assessment of public organizations conducted by the Anti-Corruption &

Civil Rights Commission. Furthermore, the MND plans to promote more effective

anti-corruption and integrity measures to meet the people̕s expectations consistently.

In order to encourage and protect whistleblowers, the MND is planning to update

the disposition criteria for those who interfere with the whistleblower policy or

violate the duty to protect whistleblowers. The MND is also taking part in the active

promotion of compensation measures for whistleblowers who have contributed to

the development of defense. Furthermore, the MND will implement transparent,

clean, open defense operations by systematically expanding public surveillance and

participation in defense operations as a whole, such as by operating the "Integrity

Ombudsman" program and the "Civil-Public Council for Corruption-Free National

Defense".


-----

## 3 Ensuring a Fair and Transparent

#### National Defense for the Enhancement of the Benefit of the People

The MND is advancing its military service system to foster an environment for a fair

imposition of military duty, and to enhance fairness and aggressiveness in carrying

out military service. In addition, the MND endeavors to eliminate inconveniences and

promote national convenience according to transparent procedures to the extent

that they do not interfere with operations. Accordingly, the MND is relocating military

air bases, building military installations for shared growth with the local communities,

reforming national defense regulations, and carrying out eco-friendly projects.

1. Ensuring Fair Enforcement of Military Service Obligation and

Improving the Military Service Administration


**Separate Management of Military** After introducing a separate mana
**Service Compliance by Public Figures** gement system for military service

of Grade 4 or higher public officials

and their children, athletes, pop culture artists, and high income earners and their

children, the ROK government has monitored their military service process in real

time. With the help of the system, the ROK government detected suspects of

deliberate weight gain and identified unfair cases where some pop culture artists and

athletes delayed their military service by abusing the system. The ROK government

[Chart 5-4] Cases of Improvements in Unfair System

|Category|Before|After|
|---|---|---|
|Short-term overseas travel permit system|• Within the scope of a year at a time, total of 3 years|• Within the scope of 6 months at a time, total of 2 years (maximum of 5 times)|
|Conscription date postponement system|• Postponement without age restriction when taking an examination, such as private qualification examination|• Restrictions on postponement for people aged 28 years or older when taking an examination, such as private qualification examination|
||• Postponement until the end of May of the year following graduation without age restrictions when enrolling at graduate school|• Restrictions on postponement for people aged 28 years and above when scheduled to enroll at graduate school|


-----

also improved the related systems and regulations to detect and correct such

violations.

In addition, the ROK government endeavors to gain public sympathy and trust

in fair military service by improving the culture and awareness of military service

obligation. The government makes sure that the separate management of military

service compliance by public figures is well-explained to the popular culture and

arts-related businesses and the system is publicized through online platforms such as

YouTube to raise awareness on fair military service.


**Prior Disclosure of Military Service** Ever since the introduction of the

**Records For Confirmation Hearings** military service record disclosure sys
tem in 1999, only the public official

candidates[8)] who require the National Assembly’s consent or appointment were

obligated to report their military service records to the National Assembly for

subsequent disclosure. However, based on the need for in-advance verification of

public official candidates such as Cabinet member candidates and the need to satisfy

the people’s right to know, as of May 29, 2018, Cabinet member candidates are now

also required to report and disclose their military service records to the National

Assembly when a confirmation hearing request is submitted to the National

Assembly Starting October 24, 2019, military service units and branches were added

to the disclosure items. This requirement is expected to establish and spread a culture

of voluntary military service compliance.


**Improving the Physical Examination** For a fair and accurate military ser
**for Military Service** vice judgment test, the MND has

adopted the latest medical equipment

and is operating a system which entrusts private hospitals to conduct physical

examinations for the socially disadvantaged, such as recipients of basic livelihood

security, to reduce the burden of medical checkup costs. Since 2017, latent

tuberculosis tests were conducted annually to minimize the incidence of tuberculosis

(TB) patients in military units, and starting in 2019, TB test results were issued free

of charge. Enhancements in psychological testing are also underway by adopting

advanced psychological test tools and conducting a three-step thorough checkup.


Improvement of the
alternative service
program

**8)**

-  Public official candidates

requiring the National
Assembly’s consent:
Candidates for Prime
Minister, Chairman of
Board of Audit and
Inspection, Chief Justice
of Constitutional Court,
Chief Justice of Supreme
Court, and Supreme
Court Justices.

-  Public official candidates

requiring the National
Assembly’s appointment:
Candidates for
Constitutional Court
Justices (3) and National
Election Commission
Members (3).


**Reasonable Improvement**

**of the Alternative**

**Service Program**


The necessity of improving the alternative

service program, which was introduced in 1973

for the purpose of fostering national infrastruc

-----

ture, enhancing national prestige, and effectively utilizing military service surplus–

was raised based on factors such as the sharp reduction in military manpower

resources due to the decrease in fertility rate, the weakening of the initial purpose to

changes in national status, and issues related to fairness vis-à-vis active duty

servicemembers. Accordingly, the ROK government formed a consultative body

between the MND and related ministries in December 2018 and deliberated on and

confirmed the "Measures for improving the alternative service program" during a

government affairs review and coordination meeting in November 2019.

Based on the Measures, the ROK government has selected four promotion tasks

and detailed tasks as shown in [Chart 5-5], and has implemented these tasks smoothly

through system improvements and revision of laws and regulations since 2020.

[Chart 5-5] Major Measures for Improving the Alternative Service Program

|Promotion tasks|Col2|Details|
|---|---|---|
|1|Acquiring military resources|• Reducing the number of people assigned to alternative service • Improving the fairness in terms of service intensity|
|2|Strategic use of national human resources|• Supporting national strategic industries for alternative service personnel • Establishing utilization plans for each competent ministry|
|3|Strengthening service management|• Designating departments in charge of service management, organizing manpower • Reinforcing punishment for insolvent workers, etc.|
|4|Guarantee of human rights and other rights of alternative service personnel|• Payment of remuneration during basic military training, establishing an integrated reporting center • Preventing unfair treatment by an employer, etc.|


**Support for Physically and** Customized services are offered to

**Economically Vulnerable in Fulfilling** encourage those who are physically

**Their Military Service Obligation** or economically vulnerable to parti
cipate in fulfilling their military

service obligation. When an economically vulnerable person liable for military

service needs additional checkup from a private hospital during a physical

examination for military service, the MND is providing support to help fulfill their

obligation by supporting free consignment checkup and giving additional points or

priorities when recruiting them as enlisted or industrial workers, thus helping the

said target group of people to be able to diligently fulfill their service. Through such

benefits, the MND aided a total of 1,894 economically vulnerable persons liable for

military service in 2019. Since 2020, benefits are also being provided to the

physically vulnerable by allowing those with malignant blood diseases such as

leukemia to get a curtailment in their military service period through document

screening only without undergoing any physical examination.


-----

**Military Service Distinguished** The MMA has been promoting the "Military

**Family Enhancement Project** Service Distinguished Family Enhancement

Project" since 2004 to create a social atmos
phere where those who faithfully fulfilled military service feel pride and are

respected from the people. The MMA selects military service distinguished families

who have completed active service for three generations (direct lineal descendant of

the 1st generation to the 3rd generation), with the Korean Independence Army added

in 2013 and independence patriots in 2020. A military service distinguished family

is awarded a certificate and a commendation, and is provided with preferential

benefits such as discounts and waiver of usage fees when using national, public, and

private facilities. The project helps create a culture of voluntary military service with

pride in fulfilling their military service obligation.

[Chart 5-6] Statistics of Military Service Distinguished Families

(Unit: year, families, person)

|Category|Total|2004 -2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Family|6,395|760|302|301|545|497|466|560|492|714|741|1.017|
|Military service completed|32,376|3,431|1,426|1,444|2,642|2,520|2,490|2,932|2,670|3,779|3,820|5,222|



2. Relocating Military Air Bases Through a Fair Procedure

In accordance with the Special Act on the Relocation of Military Air Bases and

Support Therefor enacted in 2013, the MND plans to relocate military air bases in

Daegu, Suwon, and Gwangju to relieve the noise impact of residents living near

military air bases and to contribute to urban development.

In March 2018, the MND selected two regions as candidates for the relocation site

for the Daegu military air base in Gyeongsangbuk-do Province: the area of Ubo
myeon, Gunwi-gun and the area of Bian-myeon, Uiseong-gun and Sobo-myeon,

Gunwi-gun.

In 2019, based on agreements with the local communities, the MND decided and

announced the areas surrounding the relocation sites and reviewed and passed the

criteria and procedure for selecting the relocation site incorporating the results of

deliberative survey on citizens’ opinion. And based on this, after reviewing and

passing a plan to support the areas surrounding the relocation sites that fully reflects

the opinions of the residents gathered by way of holding a public hearing on the


-----

draft support plan, the MND requested the heads of the local governments of the

relocation candidate sites to hold a majority vote in their respective districts.

In January 2020, a referendum on the relocation of the Daegu military air base was

conducted for the Gunwi-gun and Uiseong-gun residents, and the heads of Gunwi
gun and Uiseong-gun in July applied to host the relocation of the Daegu military air

base. As a conclusion, the MND finally selected the joint candidate areas of Bian
myeon, Uiseong-gun and Sobo-myeon, Gunwi-gun as the relocation site during a

selection committee meeting in August. The MND plans to support the Daegu City

Government in devising a basic plan for the construction of a military air base and

sign an MOU on endowment and concession with the city government. With such

efforts, the MND will continue its active support for the Daegu military air base

relocation and construction project.

As for the Suwon military air base, Hwaong District in Hwaseong-si, Gyeonggi
do was selected as a preliminary relocation candidate site in February 2017. The

final selection will be made after forming favorable conditions and consensus on

relocating the air base to Hwaseong.

As for the Gwangju military air base, the feasibility evaluation of the relocation

proposal submitted by the Gwangju City Government was completed in August

2016. The preliminary relocation candidate site will be selected after forming

friendly conditions through communication and consultation with local governments

on areas suitable for military air base relocation in the Jeollanam-do Province.

In the future, the MND will continue to promote the military air base relocation

project in a fair, transparent manner based on communication and dialogue. To this

end, the MND plans to sufficiently collect the opinions of local governments and

local residents through civilian–government–military councils and meetings with

civic groups.

3. Military Installations for Shared Growth with Local Communities


**Removal of Coastal and** The removal of barbed wire fences installed

**Riverside Barbed Wire Fences** in the coastal and riverside areas for military

border operations has been continuously

demanded by local governments as they have been a hindrance to the development

of tourism resources. In the past, when a local government requested for removal, the

barbed wire was removed or replaced with surveillance equipment only in sections

approved by a military operational feasibility review with the local government’s


-----

budget (or government funding of 50% of cost). However, as part of Defense Reform

2.0, the MND is actively responding to the needs of the local community, and is at

the same time promoting the removal project of coastal and riverside barbed wire

fences to convert them into a scientific boundary system using advanced equipment.

Accordingly, the MND conducted operational feasibility reviews of coastal and

riverside barbed wire fences in 2018 and removed 169.6 kilometers of barbed wire

fences, in addition to the section already approved for removal.

[Chart 5-7] Results of the Operability Assessments of Coastal and Riverside Barbed

Wire Fences
(Unit: ㎞)

|Category|Target|Sections Previously Approved for Removal|Operability Assessment Results|Col5|Col6|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||Total|Do Not Remove|Remove Immediately|Remove after Installing Surveillance Equipment|
|Total|413.3|114.62|298.68|129.08|34.67|134.93|
|Ground Operations Command (East)|183.55|92.02|91.53|52.36|0.31|38.86|
|Ground Operations Command (West)|178.52|22.6|155.92|49.84|24.24|81.84|
|Second Operations Command|51.23|-|51.23|26.88|10.12|14.23|



The MND removed a total of 34.67km of barbed wire fence in sections where

immediate removal was required and completed the installation of surveillance

equipment in the removal sections[9)] after reinforcing surveillance equipment in

2020. To enhance citizens’ convenience and vitalize the local economy, the MND

will continue to build military installations and promote shared growth with the local

communities based on their cooperation to the extent that it does not interfere with

military operations.

**Removal of Unused and** To minimize inconveniences among the people

**Abandoned Installations** and ensure shared growth with local residents

through military installation projects, the MND is

currently pursuing the removal or improvement of unused military installations

across the country.

While the ROK Armed Forces has been removing unused or abandoned military

installations, there still exist installations that are no longer used regularly due to

advancements in surveillance equipment and the reduction of military manpower

and installations that have become obsolete following the disbandment or reduction


**9)**
The sections where local
governments plan to
implement the removal of
barbed wire fences and
the restoration of the area
by 2021 following the
installation of surveillance
equipment in the previous
year by the MND and the
ROK Armed Forces


-----

of the relevant units.

In response to such issues, in 2018, the MND conducted on-site inspections and

operational feasibility reviews on all unused installations in and outside military

premises for systematic removal. Based on the findings, the MND plans to carry

out active measures in removing unused installations which fall under the removal

requirements by comprehensively considering multiple factors, such as installations

that impede local governments’ development plans or are likely to cause damage to

the landscape and become a possible crime zone due to long-term neglect, as well as

the urgency, the operability, and the safety of troops.


**Resolution of Private and** After the Korean War, during the process of es
**Public Lands Occupied** tablishment and maintenance of military units,

**Without Permission** the ROK Armed Forces has inevitably occupied

private and public land for reasons such as failure

to conduct boundary surveys, urgent operations, and unknown whereabouts of land

owners. Therefore, in order to guarantee the people’s property rights and to enhance

trust in the military, the MND continues to discover and normalize private and

public lands used by the military without legal compensation.

As of early 2019, out of the total private and public lands of 54,580,000㎡ occupied

and used by the ROK Armed Forces, 21,550,000㎡ of the lands is being occupied

unlawfully. Consequently, the MND purchases the lands that are still used and

needed by the ROK Armed Forces, leases the lands required for temporary use,

and returns the unused lands due to reasons such as relocation of the relevant units

after undergoing land restoration process, including removal of installations and soil

remediation.

Moreover, in 2019, the MND preemptively disclosed facts about unauthorized

occupation and provided guidance on the national reparation procedure to more

than 12,000 land owners which were occupied unlawfully, breaking away from

the existing method of responding only to civil complaints. As a result, national

compensation for unauthorized occupation–which had stood at around KRW 1.5

billion per year–reached a total of KRW 13.6 billion by November 2020, further

guaranteeing the people’s property rights.

By means of increasing the relevant budget and expanding the criteria for return,

the MND will make continuous efforts to enhance public trust in the ROK Armed

Forces and secure the legitimacy of land usage through early resolution of private

and public lands occupied without permission.


-----

**Mitigating Military** To guarantee the residents’ property rights, ease

**Installations Protection** their inconvenience in the surrounding areas of

**Zone Regulations** the military installations, and provide a stable

environment for military presence, the MND has

been implementing a policy to lift the designation of military installations protection

zones or taking mitigation measures such as changing the designation from a

controlled protection zone to a limited protection zone. In line with this policy, with

the exception of areas surrounding military installations that must be protected

for uninterrupted military operations, military installations protection zones are

currently being lifted or mitigated by the MND. In 2018, a total of 351.6㎢ of military

installations protection zones were lifted or mitigated, which is 121 times the area of

Yeouido, and a total of 77.5㎢ were lifted or mitigated in 2019 which is 27 times the

area of Yeouido.



[Chart 5-8] Status of Military Installations Protection Zones

338.4


Unit: ㎢

Lifted


Mitigated

77

50 46.5

5.7 1.6 [6.3] 28 0.8 27 20 4.5 25 0.2 37 0 13.2 0.5


2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Furthermore, military consultations on land development are being consigned by

the MND to local governments for areas where it is difficult to lift the designation of

military installations. Through continuous expansion of the scope of consultations

and consignments, the MND intends to shorten the period of consultations and

promote the administrative convenience of the people.

[Chart 5-9] Status of Consignment Areas

Unit: ㎢

|Year|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Area|55|40|93|47|344|57|8|25|37|64|



The MND has also endeavored to revise related laws and regulations, aiming

to alleviate the inconvenience of residents living near military installations and

to guarantee their property rights. The Enforcement Decree of the Protection of


-----

Military Bases and Installations Act and its Enforcement Rules were revised[10)] to

waive military consultations when changing the purpose of buildings in military

installations protection zones[11)] and to allow the expansion and reconstruction of

small-scale installations inside explosives-related protection zones.[12)]


**Enactment of the Military Noise** Until now, when local residents

**Compensation Act and Implementation** were seriously affected by the no
**of Follow-Up Measures** ise generated during military ope
rations and training, they received

compensation only if a residents’ lawsuit was filed and a court ruled in favor of the

lawsuit. Accordingly, the MND enacted the Act on Noise Prevention and Damage

Compensation for Military Airfields and Military Shooting Ranges (hereinafter the

Military Noise Compensation Act) to establish a legal basis for residents living in

areas requiring countermeasures against noise and help them receive compensation

upon request.

As follow-up measures pursuant to the enactment of the law, the MND is plann
ing to establish a "Basic plan for noise prevention and damage compensation,

etc.", survey the noise impact to design a noise map, install an automatic noise

measurement network to devise noise reduction measures in areas requiring

countermeasures against noise, and establish manuals for the payment of noise

compensation. The MND aims to build a consensus through various processes

of collecting opinions such as briefing sessions for local governments and local

residents and explanations to the National Assembly.

With the enactment of the Military Noise Compensation Act and a series of

follow-up measures, the MND will guarantee a comfortable living environment for

residents and establish a stable foundation for carrying out military activities.


**10)**
Amendment of the
Enforcement Decree of
the Protection of Military
Bases and Installations Act
(June 25, 2019) and the
Enforcement Rules of the
Protection of Military Bases
and Installations Act (July
8, 2019)

**11)**
In accordance with the
Building Act, except for
the three groups of facility
purposes (facilities for
hazardous substances,
power generation
facilities, and facilities
for telecommunications)
out of 29 groups, military
consultation is exempted
when changing the
purpose of a building.


**Continuing Efforts for Co-Existence** In accordance with Defense Re
**between the ROK Armed Forces and** form 2.0, the MND is pushing for a

**Local Governments in the Border Areas** reorganization of the ROK Armed

Forces from the former quanti
tative, troop-oriented structure to a cutting-edge unit structure. Accordingly, the

MND plans to integrate and coordinate units deployed to two or more areas into one

location for each region by 2025. Coordination includes disbanding units, launching

new units, and expanding existing units.


**12)**
Authorized for additional
expansion and
reconstruction of smallscale communal facilities
and facilities for agriculture,
forestry, and fishery
industries with a total floor
area of 660㎡ or less in the
protection zones around
explosives-related facilities


-----

Signing of work agreement for shared development (December 2019)

In the process of reorganizing the

units, the reduction of units and troops

is likely to affect the local economy

in border areas such as Gangwondo

Province, where the military accounts

for a large portion of the local popu
lation and economy. Recognizing that

the border areas have a close relation- Shared Development Council in Gangwon-do

Border Area (January 2020)

ship with the ROK Armed Forces and

that they have shared sacrifices with the military in the field of national security, a

meeting was held in 2019 with the Minister of National Defense together with the

heads of local governments of each metropolitan area to seek ways for cooperation

on co-existence with the residents in the border areas.

To strengthen cooperation with the Gangwon-do border areas (Goseong, Yanggu,

Inje, Cheorwon, and Hwacheon), which are suffering relatively harsher difficulties

due to the reduction of troops and units, a cooperation agreement on shared

development was made with the Minister of National Defense, the governor of

Gangwon-do Province, and heads of the five counties (gun) in the border areas. The

MND also organized the 1st Director General-level Shared Development Council

to resolve practical issues. Along with such efforts, the MND plans to expand and

regularize the Director General-level Shared Development Council to Gyeonggi-do

Province and Incheon to continue with its productive efforts for cooperation on co
existence in the future. These efforts are expected to lay the foundation for the stable

implementation of Defense Reform 2.0 and the vitalization of regional economy in

the border areas.


**Promoting Shared Use of**

**Military Installations**


Due to the lack of public sports and welfare fa
cilities in the local communities, the demand for


-----

opening military installations to the public is increasing. In response, the MND is

seeking ways to use military installations as resident-friendly spaces. In 2018, a

guideline that stipulates the basis for promotion and the specific operation methods

for opening military installations to civilians was enacted, and at the same time a

standard contract that will be applied when the management of open facilities is

entrusted to local governments was also prepared. In addition, through a complete

enumeration survey on military installations, 24 installations were determined as

possible open facilities by the MND, and 16 of them have been opened to the public

as of the end of 2020.

As a result, living conditions in areas that lack sports and welfare facilities have

been improved, easing the welfare infrastructure imbalance among regions and

allowing more efficient use of national resources.

The MND will continue to stay active to discover more military installations

that can be opened to the public and contribute to the welfare of residents and the

foundation for co-existence between civilians and the military.

4. National Defense Regulatory Reforms


**Regulatory Reforms** In line with the "redesigning of regulations for

**in the Domain of Defense** public welfare and innovation", which is one of

the tasks set by the ROK government, the MND

has made efforts to enhance the public’s awareness of regulatory reforms by

improving the regulatory reform method centered on discovering individual tasks.

In 2019, the MND introduced the government liability system on proving the need

for regulations[13)], a new method of promoting regulatory reforms, and, from the

people’s perspective, reviewed once again the tasks that were deemed unacceptable

among the task proposals submitted to the local governments or through the

Regulatory Reform Sinmungo (Open Voice System) after the inauguration of the

current administration. As a result, inconveniences in people’s lives were relieved,

such as easing access control in border areas and regulations on drone flight and

filming in no-fly zones. Also, public officials’ awareness of regulatory reforms was

raised by applying the active interpretation method of laws and regulations[14)] to

support active administration activities, and the people’s rights and interests were

enhanced by reflecting these initiatives when revising laws and regulations in the

defense domain.

In 2020, the MND supported regulatory reforms in new industries, one of the


**13)**
A method of promoting
regulatory reforms
that transferred the
responsibility for the
proving of the need for
regulation; so that the
government proves the
necessity of maintaining
the regulation, instead
of companies or people
proving the non-necessity
of regulations, and—
if it is difficult to prove—
revises and updates the
regulations.

**14)**
It is to interpret and to
apply flexibly "what can be
done if not prohibited by
the law" when interpreting
laws and regulations.
The MND is promoting
such interpretation to
make quick response
to changes in the social
environment such as
technological development
and to support active
administration within
the scope that does not
impede military operations.


-----

government’s key directions for reform, and focused on finding and improving tasks

that can alleviate inconveniences in people’s lives in the domain of defense. The

MND also contributed to vitalizing the drone industry by designating free zones

for drone filming and simplifying approval processes. Also, by expanding the test

location from Seoul only to locations across the nation when holding a written test

to recruit civilian military employees supervised by the MND, inconveniences and

economic burdens of the test takers living in provincial areas due to transportation

have been resolved.

The MND continues to discover and improve tasks that will guarantee public

conveniences and reduce social costs by simplifying the process of converting

military driver’s licenses into civilian licenses and easing regulations on military

installations protection zones.

Based on such measures, the MND is committed to discovering and carrying out

tasks that people are aware of and promoting regulatory improvements; for new

or reinforced regulations, the MND Regulatory Innovation Review Committee[15)]

is committed to strictly appraising the appropriateness of the regulations, thereby

contributing to the improvement of people’s benefits.


**Adjustment of Safety Distance** The MND designates and implements the

**from Ammunition Depots** minimum safe distance from ammunition

depots as military installations protection

zones to protect the lives and property of the residents. However, the designation of

protection zones limits the residents’ exercise of their property rights and the

execution of local development projects, including restrictions on the construction or

expansion of buildings and public roads.

To address the restrictions on the local residents living near ammunition depots, the

MND is promoting modernization by replacing degraded ground-based ammunition

depots (31% of all depots nationwide) with underground-based and igloo-type

ammunition depots as much as possible. In particular, under the recognition that

underground ammunition depots use the land most efficiently and improve the

ammunition depot support capabilities, the MND will endeavor to ensure the safety

of the people and exercise of their property rights by promoting the construction of

new underground ammunition depots considering various factors such as geological

considerations in building new underground depots and actively reflecting these

factors into mid- to long-term policies.


**15)**
A committee established
in accordance with the
Regulatory Task Operation
Directive to determine the
subject, scope, method,
etc. of a regulation and to
review its feasibility in case
of newly establishing or
reinforcing administrative
regulations. It consists of
more than six but less than
15 internal members and
civilian members (legal,
regulatory reform experts,
etc.)


-----

5. Environment-Friendly Management of the ROK Armed Forces


**Expanding and Improving** To prevent water pollution caused by

**Environmental Pollution Control** wastewater and sewage[16)] released

**Facilities within Military Premises** from military installations, the MND

has established and operates a total of

4,422 environmental pollution control facilities within military premises, including

sewage treatment stations, wastewater treatment stations, and local government

pipeline connections, as of November 2020.

To conserve the soil environment, the MND inspects 4,107 facilities subject to

soil contamination control[17)] pursuant to the Soil Environment Conservation Act,

and uses the findings for restoration activities including soil remediation projects.

Furthermore, to prevent soil pollution caused by oil spillage and other accidents,

the MND installed 18,095 soil pollution control facilities out of a total of 20,709 soil

pollution control facility requirements such as drum storage yards[18)] and tank dikes[19)]

that have been identified as of 2020, installed 328 additional soil pollution control

facilities in 2020, and plans to install 2,286 additional facilities in the coming years.


**16)**

-  Sewage: Water

contaminated by a
mixture of liquid or
solid produced by a
community of people or
along economic activities
(Article 2 of the Sewerage
Act)

-  Wastewater: Water

containing liquid or
solid pollutants and
that cannot be used
as is (Article 2 of the
Water Environment
Conservation Act

**17)**
Facilities that are likely
to cause significant soil
contamination (Article 2
of the Soil Environment
Conservation Act), which
include oil tanks with a
capacity of 20,000 or more

**18)**
Areas where the floor
is paved in the oil drum
storage yards of the unit to
prevent soil contamination
caused by oil spillage

**19)**
A bathtub-shaped
structure that blocks oil
spillage from ground oil
tanks


**Implementing Environment-Friendly** The MND is committed to protect

**National Defense Facility Projects** servicemembers from being exposed

to harmful materials including asbestos

and radon. Accordingly, the MND is striving to maintain buildings containing

asbestos, reduce radon emissions, and improve working sites with hazardous

environments.

After conducting a complete enumeration survey on buildings containing asbestos

through an expert agency from March to September 2019, 11,612 buildings in total

were confirmed to contain asbestos. Among them, the management and maintenance

plans for asbestos-containing buildings within military premises were supplemented

for 7,703 buildings–excluding 3,909 buildings that overlap with other projects such

as unit relocation and unused installations demolition–and asbestos-containing

materials were removed in 604 buildings in 2019 and 779 buildings in 2020. The

MND aims to complete the demolition and removal of asbestos-containing buildings

and substances by 2025, thereby promoting the health of servicemembers.

Referring to the results of a survey conducted on barracks dormitories between

2012 and 2015, radon reduction project was completed by 2019 after applying Active

Soil Depressurization and indoor ventilation[20)] to 583 buildings that exceeded the

standards. Pursuant to the Framework Act on Military Status and Service, radon


**20)**

-  Active Soil

Depressurization:
A method of drawing
out air in soil beneath a
building (depressurizing
soil to prevent radon
inflow into indoors)

-  Indoor ventilation:

A method of installing
ventilation systems to
extract indoor air and
bring in outdoor air


-----

measurement is conducted every two years on facilities subject to indoor air quality

management, and radon reduction facilities are to be installed when any facility

exceeds the standards.

To improve the environment in hazardous working sites, the MND identifies

installations exceeding the environmental standards among the 2,500 installations

performing plating and maintenance works for ammunition depots through annual

working environment assessments and working environment surveys conducted

every five years. As for the removal of hazardous materials, local exhaust ventilation

systems, ventilators, and dust collectors[21)] are installed in facilities that exceed

the environmental standards. In addition, if servicemembers take special health

examinations on request and health issues are discovered, the MND provides support

by replacing the work personnel with a substitute and if needed providing support

related to hospitalization.


**Reducing Particulate Matter and** Faced with the increase of high-density

**Implementing a Comprehensive** fine particulate matter, the MND esta
**Management Plan** blished the Comprehensive Fine Particle

Management Plan in 2018 to align its

policies with those of the government and protect the health of servicemembers. At

present, the MND has identified and promoted 13 tasks in two areas–reduction of

particulate matter (PM) emission and unit management–in the military.

As a key measure in the area of unit management, the MND distributed anti-PM

masks in 2020 for 50 days based on the number of days announced as "bad" (PM
2.5) in the annual PM forecast. Since the first installation of air purifiers in ROK

Army training centers in 2018, the MND increased the number of air purifiers with

additional installations at recruitment training centers, in command and control

rooms, barracks dormitories, and hospital wards in each service in 2019. More

purifiers were installed in reserve military dormitories, restaurants, and lecture

rooms at educational institutions the following year.

In 2019, as a key measure in the area of reducing PM emissions in the military, the

MND completed the replacement of old diesel vehicles, such as commercial jeep,

buses, and trucks registered before 2005. To increase the supply of eco-friendly

or green vehicles, the mandatory purchase rate of green vehicles were set at 80%

or higher when purchasing passenger cars. Moreover, by 2028, the MND aims to

acquire hybrid vehicles accounting for 50% of passenger cars in the military and

plans to expand the supply of compressed natural gas (CNG) and electric vehicles

through a pilot project.


**21)**

-  Local exhaust ventilation

system: processes
dusts, gas, and vapors
produced

-  Dust collector: collects

and removes solid or
liquid particles floating in
the air


-----

## 4 Improving Transparency in

#### Defense Acquisition Program and Securing Competitiveness in the Defense Industry

The ROK government is enhancing the transparency in defense acquisition programs by

developing sophisticated measures to prevent corruption in defense acquisition programs

and cultivating an environment for the active promotion of defense projects. It is also

improving the defense acquisition system in an efficient manner by refining the weapons

system acquisition procedures and establishing a system for collaboration. The ROK

government is strengthening R&D capabilities in defense fields by improving defense R&D

execution system and utilizing defense R&D capabilities in defense fields. It is also striving to

build the competitiveness in the defense industry and vitalize defense exports by building a

foundation for growth in the defense industry.

1. Enhancing Transparency in Defense Acquisition Programs


**Developing Sophisticated Measures** The MND and the DAPA are deve
**to Prevent Corruption in Defense** loping sophisticated measures to

**Acquisition Programs** prevent corruption in order to enhance

public trust in defense acquisition pro
gram and transparency in pursuing the programs. In order to eradicate collusive ties

between the military and the business, the MND and the DAPA have the scope of

retired public officials subject to examination for employment by defense

contractors, mandated the reporting of any private contacts, and are pursuing the

introduction of an employment record management system for retired public

officials.

The Agency for Defense Development (ADD) and the Defense Agency for Tech
nology and Quality (DTAQ), which are government-funded defense institutions,

have also bolstered their internal and external monitoring and supervision system

to prevent corruption and established a code of conduct with a standard matching

that of government agencies and implemented an ethical audit program to enhance

the integrity of employees. Additionally, to create a fair and transparent work

environment, clear standards were established for various evaluations, inspections,

and regulatory decision-making conducted under the government-funded institutions


-----

and the participation of external experts were further extended.

In addition, a registration system, which was previously applied to munitions sales

agencies[22)], will be applied to all defense acquisition program brokers[23)] so that all

companies that help in bidding and fulfilling contracts for defense projects will be

operated under legal and institutional management. Accordingly, an institutional

mechanism will be devised to impose fines and penalties on brokers who operate

without undergoing the registration process and to discipline public officials who

make unauthorized contact with the brokers. To crack down on corruption in defense

acquisition programs, considering the characteristics of defense programs, penalty

systems and sanctions are being reinforced such as: (a) extending the scope of the

"punitive surcharge" imposed on companies involved in corruption and irregularity;

(b) introducing the "One-Strike Out System" that cancels the registration and

permanently prohibits registration if a company commits an irregularity once; and (c)

applying an aggravated punishment of 1.5 times the punishment standard defined by

the criminal code for public officials involved in corruption.


**22)**
An agency or a group
that intermediate or act
for a foreign enterprise
throughout the course of
concluding a contract and
executing the contract by
and between the foreign
enterprise and the Minister
of DAPA.

**23)**
All organizations and
groups that act as trade
agents, brokers, or
consultants to assist a
company in the processes
of bidding, contract
signing, and execution of a
defense acquisition project.

**24)**
A system that waives the
sanctions imposed on
companies for so-called
"sincere failures" that fail to
achieve outcomes due to
reasons such as technical
limitations despite the fact
that the officials worked
sincerely on conducting
R&D activities

**25)**
A program that relieves
public officials of
responsibility or reduces
their liability for negative
results when they have
sincerely and voluntarily
performed their duties for
the public interest, unless
there was any intentional
act or gross negligence


**Cultivating an Environment for** The MND and the DAPA are fostering an

**the Active Pursuit of Defense** environment where workers in the defense

**Acquisition Programs** industry can conduct business fairly in

adherence to their own principles and in

active manner. A "diligent performance recognition program"[24)] was introduced to

provide additional opportunities for trials and errors made during the R&D phase.

The MND and the DAPA are also promoting an "exemption program for proactive

administration"[25)] that ensures that public officials are not held responsible for the

outcomes of the projects that they have carried out properly in accordance with

laws and regulations without corruptive or irregular practices. To minimize the

disadvantages that individuals may experience, the MND has bolstered the internal

legal support system for those who have inevitably faced investigations, audits, or

other kinds of investigations while executing programs.

A series of such working environment improvements will contribute to the

acquisition of superior weapons by boosting the pride of workers in the defense

industry and strengthening the sense of responsibility.


-----

2. Improving the Efficiency of the Defense Acquisition System


**Improving the Weapons System Acquisition** The MND and the DAPA are

**Procedures Based on Speed and Efficiency** improving the defense acqui
sition procedure to respond to

the rapidly changing security environment in a flexible manner and promptly apply

the Fourth Industrial Revolution technologies to weapons systems.

The MND and the DAPA have been pursuing the "rapid pilot acquisition program"

since 2020. Under this program, the ROK Armed Forces purchases in minimum

quantity a weapon system that incorporates leading civilian technologies, pilot the

weapon system in the field, and if determined appropriate, promptly field the weapon

system. The MND and the DAPA are exerting continuous efforts to improve the

related laws and regulations to stabilize this program, and are also pursuing the

introduction of a "rapid prototype development (provisional title)" system which

incorporates the elements of R&D and upgrades. Furthermore, a "rapid acquisition

system (provisional title)" will be developed by institutionalizing various acquisition

models so that the relevant programs can be applied according to the characteristics

of each weapons system.

In order to field weapons systems in a timely manner, the MND and the DAPA

are planning to simplify the weapons system acquisition procedures by eliminating

unnecessary administrative procedures during prerequisite procedures such as

requirements verification, project feasibility study, and defense project inspector

verification considering the characteristics of the programs, and integrating

duplicate tasks.


**Establishing a Rational and Efficient** As the defense acquisition environ
**System for Decision-Making and** ment is becoming more complex and

**Collaborations** advanced, the number of defense force

enhancement projects is increasing.

Hence, the necessity for the establishment of a more rational and efficient system for

decision-making and collaborations is also growing.

The MND and the DAPA launched the Defense Acquisition Program Council

in April 2019 with an aim of promptly resolving increasing number of defense

program issues and improving policies and systems in a reasonable manner through

transparent communication and collaboration.

The Defense Acquisition Program Council is co-chaired by the Vice Minister

of National Defense and the DAPA Minister, and is achieving tangible results in


-----

actively resolving thorny issues. Furthermore, by establishing a defense acquisition

information system, the MND and the DAPA plan to enhance the foundation for

conducting collaborations that enables the management and sharing of information

at all stages of acquisition of weapons systems.

The DAPA introduced a "program for public officials in technical service" to

enhance the expertise of public officials in defense programs and reorganized

the existing project/contract management headquarters into Current Capabilities

Program Agency and Advanced Capabilities Program Agency considering the

characteristics of each weapons system. The efficiency and responsibility of

conducting program management were further improved by establishing a practical

integrated project management system. Under the system the director of the program

will carry out both program and contracts at the same time. With the simplification

of the work procedure and transferring of the work related to general goods to the

Public Procurement Service through the integration of programs and contracts, the

capabilities of the DAPA are expected to be further improved, enabling the DAPA to

focus on defense force improvement projects.


**Enhancing the Expertise of** To enhance the expertise of public officials in

**Public Officials in Defense** defense project-related institutions, the MND

**Acquisition Programs** and the DAPA are seeking ways to resolve

problems encountered by public officials during

their frequent job rotations, and to improve field sense and expertise of

servicemembers . To this end, in 2019, the positions of professional public officials

were included in the program management field of the DAPA and the positions of

professional servicemembers were designated in the MND, the JCS, each service,

and the DAPA to enhance the job rotation between acquisition specialists and force

specialists of each service. Such measures have also laid the foundation for

improving defense project capabilities. The MND and the DAPA plan to establish a

training institution specializing in defense acquisition and strengthen the

professionalism of the acquisition workforce by integrating the defense acquisition

education system–which is currently divided into the KDNU and the DAPA–and

establishing a systematic education system from the perspective of the total life cycle

of weapons systems.


-----

3. Strengthening National Defense R&D Capabilities


**Improving the National Defense** The MND and the DAPA are innovating

**R&D Execution System** the national defense R&D system to

effectively prepare for future wars, where

advanced technologies will dictate the patterns of warfare.

The current characteristic of defense R&D can be defined as a "pursuit type"

focused on developing technologies necessary for the weapons systems for which the

requirements have already been determined. In the future, however, national defense

R&D will be improved to a "leading type" that enables creative and challenging

technology development where advanced technologies of the Fourth Industrial

Revolution create the requirements for weapons systems. Pursuant to the "Act on

the Promotion of Innovation in Defense Science and Technology", the MND and the

DAPA plan to expand the "future challenge defense technology development" system

and enhance the strategic technology planning through the principle of selection and

concentration by selecting weapons systems subject to key planning in the future.

Moreover, through the allocation of roles for each institution, the ADD will focus

on defense research capabilities required for the development of future core and

new technologies including the implementation of the future challenging defense

technology development project. The DTAQ, on the other hand, will strengthen the

management of military supplies and defense technologies by exclusively conducting

defense quality control and reliability evaluation, research and prediction of defense

technologies, and planning, analysis, and evaluation of technologies.


**Expanding the Utilization of** The MND and the DAPA will develop a

**National R&D Capabilities in the** more open and flexible defense R&D

**Domain of Defense** program to encourage civilian partici
pation and expand the military use of

outstanding civilian technologies. First, a method of agreement with the private

sector will be adopted in the field of technology development, while the scope of the

"diligent performance recognition program" will be extended. The MND and the

DAPA will provide the means of actively bringing the capabilities of the private

sector into the defense sector, including co-ownership of R&D outcomes, access to

defense R&D infrastructure for civilian entities, and support for technologies of

which there is a lack of through government-private joint R&D.

Furthermore, the MND and the DAPA plan to set up a cooperation system where

national R&D capabilities can be utilized. First, national R&D capabilities are being


-----

actively utilized in the basic research field for defense R&D within the framework of

the "Strategy for Future Defense Development Based on Science and Technology"

which was formulated in April 2018 by the MND, the MSIT, and the DAPA.

Measures are also taken to devise a collaboration system under which the strengths

of national R&D and defense R&D are mutually and actively utilized.

4. Building a Competitive Defense Industry and Vitalizing Defense

Export


**Bolstering Competitiveness by** The defense industry is the cornerstone of

**Establishing a Foundation for** national security. By acquiring and supply
**Vigorous Growth of the** ing weapons systems with performance and

**Defense Industry**

quality that meet the standard of the ROK

Armed Forces on time, the defense industry

has played a key role of laying a foundation for the buildup of military strength and

the realization of steadfast defense. The defense industry is characterized by a

monopoly on demand where the government is the only consumer and by the few

number of defense companies compared to other private industries. These

characteristics make the scale of production in the domestic defense industry closely

linked to policy line changes. Thus, the government̓s role in fostering and developing

the defense industry is crucial.

Since the launching of the DAPA in 2006, there has been a call for providing

differentiated support foundation which is in line with the characteristics of the

defense industry, where the government is the sole consumer. As a result, the "Act on

the Development and Support of the Defense Industry" was enacted in 2020 which

stipulates various systems, while separating the clauses related to the development of

the defense industry from the "Defense Acquisition Program Act". Thus, full policy

support measures were mapped out to strengthen the competitiveness of the defense

industry and to take the leap from a domestic oriented-industry to an export-oriented

industry.

Aside from these measures, the ROK government carries out the "Basic Plan

for Defense Industry Promotion" every five years to present basic policies and

mid- to long-term directions for supporting and fostering the defense industry in a

reasonable manner. The "Basic Plan for Defense Industry Promotion for 2018-2022"

aims to acquire advanced weapons system development capabilities and bolster

global competitiveness. It covers the criteria of creating a developmental ecosystem


-----

of the defense industry, strengthening defense R&D capabilities, fostering promising

small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and ventures, transforming into an

export-oriented industrial structure, and creating quality jobs.

Furthermore, the ROK government is in the process of reinforcing its support for

domestic development and production of weapons systems, improving defense cost

structures, improving the designation system for defense products and companies,

strengthening defense statistics research and analysis capabilities, and establishing

effective communication and information exchange measures with the defense

industry. Moreover, a defense venture support program and a global defense small

giants promotion support program are underway to foster promising SMEs and

ventures, and the "defense innovation cluster program" is being promoted so that

these programs are carried out in an integrated manner. The defense innovation

cluster program is a program that creates a cluster where the defense industry

production system, science and technology system, enterprise support system, and

the military system are combined in an efficient manner. This cluster not only carries

out defense activities such as establishing a roadmap for region-tailored defense

parts, organizing and operating a consultative body for localization, and operating

a laboratory for the localization of defense parts but also serves as a support hub for

fostering SMEs and ventures by promoting a conduit for providing comprehensive

support for SMEs and regional job-specific programs.

In addition, the ROK government is implementing a preemptive quality control

policy to improve the reliability of weapons systems through the stabilization

of quality and safety control systems. The government is also expanding the

management area and is establishing a precautionary system to reinforce the safety

system.

**Vitalizing Defense Exports** Export of defense articles not only strengthens

the country’s defense capabilities but also vital
izes the economy as it maintains the operation rate of the defense industry and

creates high-quality jobs by addressing the shortage-of-demand issue through

market expansion. Defense exports further contribute to the expansion of defense

cooperation with partner countries.

The ROK government has established intergovernmental cooperation channels

by creating a joint committee for defense industry and logistics and signing defense

cooperation MOUs. It also has actively assisted the domestic defense industry in

becoming globally competitive through efforts such as giving support for remodeling

and development projects for export, reducing technical fees upon export, and


-----

Seoul International Aerospace & Defense Exhibition (ADEX, October 2019)

supporting SMEs in entering overseas markets. ROK defense exhibitions such as

the Seoul International Aerospace & Defense Exhibition (ADEX), the International

Maritime Defense Industry Exhibition (MADEX), and the Defense & Security Expo

Korea (DX-Korea), which are held every two years, play a major role in developing

the country̕s defense industry into an export-oriented global industry. The 2019

Seoul ADEX, in particular, was a venue for successful international defense

cooperation that accommodated around 290,000 visitors and 430 companies from 34

countries–the highest ever–and resulted in consultations and contracts being made

worth more than USD 21 billion.

Thanks to such efforts, the scale of defense exports in recent years has grown

significantly compared to the past. In addition, regions targeted for export are

expanding from North America to Asia, Middle East, and Central and South

Americas, while the defense articles are diversifying from ammunition and guns to

advanced weapons systems such as mobile firepower, aviation, ships, and guided

weapons.

However, with the competition in the global defense export market intensifying in

recent years, the requirements set for by purchasing countries are becoming more

diverse, hence requiring a policy change to find new routes for defense exports.

Accordingly, to take the leap towards an export-oriented defense industry and create

more jobs, the ROK government seeks to expand the exports of SMEs by converting

the technology acquisition-oriented offset[26)] system into an industrial cooperation[27)]

system. The government is also promoting various export methods such as exporting

secondhand weapons systems, exchanges and counter purchasing, and leasing,

and is continuously enhancing its government-level support including financial

support, inter-government sales, and linkage with industrial cooperation in other

fields. Organic cooperation among government ministries is expected to be vitalized

by convening the "Defense Industry Development Council" for consultations on

government-wide support for defense exports.


2019 ADEX

**26)**
A trade in which a buyer
of foreign weapons and
equipment receives certain
reciprocal services, such
as technology transfer
and guaranteed export
of domestic military
supplies, from the foreign
counterpart to the contract.

**27)**
A practice of a buyer of
foreign weapons and
equipment proposing a
joint development and
production of parts and
technologies or a joint
investment to the foreign
counterpart to the contract,
or mandating a certain
cooperative relationship
such as cooperation on
exports of domestic parts
and technologies.


-----

In order to respond to the negative defense export conditions caused by the spread

of COVID-19 in 2020, the ROK government will make efforts to enhance the

fundamental competitiveness of export, such as competitive pricing and core parts

technology development.


-----

## 5 Securing the Appropriate

#### Defense Budget and the Efficiency of Budget Operation for Steadfast Defense

To maintain a firm defense posture against diverse security threats and stably implement

defense reform, an adequate defense budget must be secured. In addition to securing

an adequate defense budget, the MND is promoting highly efficient management across

all areas of national defense to effectively utilize the budget.

1. Defense Budget Status


The national defense budget covers the costs of carrying out various projects related to

defense policies to produce public goods called national defense. The appropriate size of

a defense budget is generally determined by the ability of a nation to bear the financial

burden as well as the costs of building, operating, and maintaining military strength that

will counter security threats.

The proportion of the defense budget in the gross domestic product (GDP) and

government spending has been maintained with little change over the past five years. In

2021, the defense budget accounted for 2.64% of the GDP and 9.47% of total government

spending. The defense budget trend over the past five years is shown in [Chart 5-10].

[Chart 5-10] Trend of Defense Budget Over the Past Five Years (Original Budget)


**Defense budget (KRW trillion)** Defense budget–to–total Defense budget Defense budget–to–GDP

government spending ratio (%) increase rate (%) ratio (%)

10.07 10.06 9.94 9.79
9.47

50.2 52.8

46.7
43.2

40.3

8.2

7.4

7

5.4

4

2.62 2.64
2.27 2.43

2.2


**2017** **2018** **2019** **2020** **2021**


-----

The defense budget-to-GDP ratio of each country tends to be proportionate to the

severity of the security threats that it faces. As [Chart 5-11] shows, countries facing

a relatively low level of security threats, such as France, United Kingdom, Japan,

China, and Germany, spend about 1 to 2% of their GDP on defense spending. In

comparison, countries involved in conflicts or military confrontations, such as Israel,

Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Pakistan, spend more than 3% of their GDP on

defense spending.

In 2019, the ROK̕s defense budget-to-GDP ratio came to 2.43%, which is higher

than the world average of 2.02%, but lower than those of nations involved in conflicts

or military confrontations.

[Chart 5-11] Defense Budget-to-GDP Ratios of Key Nations (as of 2019)


Germany

United United 1.26% Iraq
States Kingdom 9.12% ROK

3.19% 2.00% 2.43%

Israel Iran

5.82% 3.80%

1.93%

3.66% 0.94%

France

Pakistan Japan

10.06%

Saudi Arabia

1.28%

China

4.65%

Kuwait


-  Source: The Military Balance 2020 (Center for Strategic and International Studies, February 2020)


2. The Importance of Securing an Adequate Defense Budget

The ROK̕s security environment is exposed to diverse threats such as North

Korea’s military threats as well as transnational and nonmilitary threats. To lay the

foundation for the complete denuclearization and a permanent peace regime on the

Korean Peninsula, superior defense capabilities must be obtained. Moreover, an

adequate level of military force is necessary for the ROK to independently lead inter
Korean issues amid neighboring countries in Northeast Asia building their military

forces.

In order to establish a strong defense posture against various security threats, it is

essential to continuously invest in major defense requirements for force operations

such as military supplies, installations, and education and training. At the same time,


-----

securing an adequate level of defense budget is also required to seamlessly promote

Defense Reform 2.0, which seeks to further transform the military into an elite force

and acquire advanced weapons systems. Furthermore, in order to effectively respond

to the changing security environment where transnational and nonmilitary threats

including infectious diseases and terrorism are on the rise, it is necessary to secure

an appropriate level of budget for discretionary spending in addition to the budget for

fixed spending such as labor costs and meal expenses which account for a large part

of the defense budget.

It is important to maintain a national defense capacity that corresponds to the size

of the ROK economy in order to enable the people to live a peaceful and comfortable

life amid various security variables, and this can be achieved when supported by an

adequate defense budget.

3. Defense Budget and the Mid-Term Defense Plan

**2021 Defense Budget** To ensure the right conditions for the implementation

of Defense Reform 2.0 aimed at building a powerful

defense capacity, the defense budget in 2021 was set at KRW 52.8 trillion,

representing a 5.4% increase from the previous year. Costs required to operate and

maintain troops and forces (force operation costs) totals KRW 35.8 trillion,

accounting for 67.8% of the defense budget. The force enhancement budget for

acquisition and development of weapons systems is set at KRW 17 trillion or 32.2%

of the defense budget. The size and allocation of the defense budget in 2021 based on

general accounting are shown in [Chart 5-12].

[Chart 5-12] Defense Budget in 2021 (General Account)

(Unit: KRW billion, %)

|Category|Col2|2020 Budget (A)|2021 Budget(B)|Changes (B-A)|Increase Rate|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total Defense Budget||50,152.7|52,840.1|2,687.4|5.4|
|Force Operation Costs|Subtotal|33,472.3|35,843.7|2,371.4|7.1|
||Troops Operating Costs|19,860.0|20,587.2|7,272|3.7|
||Force Operation and Maintenance Costs|13,612.3|15,256.4|1,644.1|12.1|
|Force Enhancement Budget||16,680.4|16,996.4|3,160|1.9|


-----

Compared to the previous year, force operation costs increased by 7.1% to KRW

35.8 trillion. Along with the major criteria required to demonstrate the capabilities

of the ROK Armed Forces in full scale, such as military supplies, installations,

and education and training, the defense budget was used to enhance the ROK

Armed Forces’ comprehensive security capabilities to respond to transnational and

nonmilitary threats, including infectious diseases and terrorism, and to reinforce the

military base and coastal security operation posture. The budget was also formulated

with an emphasis on transforming the defense manpower structure into an elite

structure, conducting cutting-edge defense operations, and improving the service

conditions for servicemembers.

For the efficient operation of advanced equipment during wartime and peacetime,

the defense budget for equipment maintenance was increased by 7.7% compared

to 2020 and installation maintenance spending was fully realized. Moreover,

to maintain realistic combat power of servicemembers, defense spending was

prioritized to invest in essential requirements for carrying out stable defense

operations such as continuous establishment of scientific training systems.

In addition, to reinforce capabilities to respond to transnational and nonmilitary

threats such as infectious diseases and terrorism, the MND allocated budgets for

purchasing face masks for stockpiling, offering disease control and prevention

services, and reinforcing medical equipment and supplies in military hospitals.

Budget for the reinforcement of defense equipment and articles was also set up

following the additional designation of counter-terrorism and counter-CBRN special

mission units. Security installations were also reinforced to improve the ROK Armed

Forces’ military base and coastal security operation posture in an innovative manner,

while the budget for the introduction of high-performance AI-based surveillance

equipment was drastically increased.

As the number of standing troops is to be reduced by 2022, the budget for

recruiting additional NCOs and civilian military employees required to operate

advanced equipment and secure skilled combatants was reflected into the defense

budget. The MND also drew up a budget to advance the overall force operation

by applying core technologies of the Fourth Industrial Revolution to the defense

domain, such as the launching of the ROK Army Smart Unit, the ROK Navy Smart

Air Base, and the ROK Air Force Smart Wing.

As for the improvement of service conditions for servicemembers, their salary

was raised in 2021 to 45% of the minimum wage in 2017 and the cost of meal per

person was also raised by 3.5% to satisfy the preferences of the servicemembers.

Furthermore, the budget for military group insurance and haircuts was newly


-----

established, and the budget for self-development activities, such as learning foreign

languages and obtaining certifications, was also increased.

The MND evenly drew up a budget for all elements of cyber-operations such as

surveillance and defense in cyberspace and a budget to prime reserve forces into elite

force such as adjusting the compensation fee for mobilization training to a realistic

level, introducing science and technology in reserve military training, and supplying

sufficient equipment and materials to mobilization units.

The force enhancement budget was increased by 1.9% to KRW 17 trillion

compared to the previous year. The budget was formulated with a set of objectives

including the establishment of a response system against omnidirectional threats,

reinforcement of national defense R&D capabilities, and ensuring the conditions for

stable production in the defense industry.

A total of KRW 6.2 trillion has been allocated to secure the capability to respond

to nuclear and WMD threats and to establish a base force for surveillance,

reconnaissance, and command and control, including KRW 2.3 trillion for the

continuous reinforcement of the core capabilities of the ROK Armed Forces in leading

combined defense. A budget of KRW 6.3 trillion has been allocated to guarantee the

conditions for the reorganization of military structure following defense reform, and

another KRW 4.3 trillion to enhance national defense R&D capabilities.

The MND allocated KRW 209.9 billion to respond to diverse threats including

cyber and space threats and terrorism and to enhance the country̕s disaster support

capabilities, KRW 1.47 trillion to increase the capability to develop advanced

weapons such as future strategic technologies and manned and unmanned complex

systems that will lead the era of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, and another

KRW 96.8 billion to foster and build the defense industry base to support the

transformation of the domestic defense industry into an export-oriented structure

and to create high-quality jobs.


**Mid-Term Defense Plan for** The Mid-Term Defense Plan is a blueprint for

**2021–2025** the formation and operation of military forces

over the next five years in response to current

and anticipated future threats and to the changes in the security environment.

The Mid-Term Defense Plan for 2021-2025 efficiently allocates financial resources

to maintain the National Defense Policy for 2019-2033, the Basic Plan for Defense

Reform 2.0, and the basis of policy tasks. The plan also aims to actively respond to

changes in the security environment such as the recent COVID-19 outbreak and to

promote policy tasks.


-----

The total budget allocated to the Mid-Term Defense Plan for 2021–2025 is KRW

300.7 trillion, which is an annual average increase of 6.1%. The Size of the budget for

the Mid-Term Defense Plan for 2021-2025 is shown in [Chart 5-13].

[Chart 5-13] Mid-Term Defense Budget Size


(Unit: KRW trillion)

|Category|2020|Years Subject to the Mid-Term Plan|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||2021|2022|2023|2024|2025|Total|
|Defense Budget (Growth Rate)|50.2 (7.4%)|53.2 (6.0%)|56.5 (6.3%)|59.8 (5.9%)|63.6 (6.3%)|67.6 (6.3%)|300.7 (6.1%)|
|Force Operating Costs (Growth Rate)|33.5 (6.9%)|36.1 (7.8%)|38.3 (6.3%)|40.1 (4.7%)|42.0 (4.7%)|44.0 (4.8%)|200.6 (5.6%)|
|Force Enhancement Budget (Growth Rate)|16.7 (8.5%)|17.1 (2.5%)|18.2 (6.2%)|19.7 (8.4%)|21.6 (9.5%)|23.6 (9.3%)|100.1 (7.2%)|



The major contents of the Mid-Term Defense Plan for 2021-2025 in the category of

force operations are as follows.

First, the MND plans to establish a robust military readiness posture through the

strengthening of force support and reinforcement of security capabilities required

for maintaining warfighting capabilities. To maximize existing force operation

capabilities, the MND will improve the PBL program and post- logistics support

for the introduction and operation of advanced military forces such as the F-35A

and HUAV. Moreover, the ROK Armed Forces’ security operational readiness will

be enhanced by installing high-performance CCTVs at harbors, ports, and military

bases, thereby reinforcing the functions of barbed wire fences, guard posts, light

towers, etc. and eliminating blind spots in the border areas.

Second, the MND plans to establish an omnidirectional medical support system

that will isolate and treat patients and provide support for the private sector in case

of an outbreak of an infectious disease, and to reinforce equipment and supplies

for quick response to terrorism and CBRN attacks or large-scale and emergency

disasters. For the expansion of cyber-information and surveillance capabilities, the

ability to respond to transnational and nonmilitary threats including cyber-threats,

disasters, and terrorism will be further secured by strengthening the ROK Armed

Forces’ counter-cyber-capabilities.

Third, to foster a smart military with stronger combat power despite the reduction of

troops, the MND plans to refine the military structure and introduce Fourth Industrial

Revolution technologies to the defense domain. For the maintenance of combat

power despite troop reduction, combat units will be reinforced with officers and non

-----

commissioned officers, while noncombatant areas will be reinforced with civilian

workforces to acquire and utilize the required expertise. In order to secure skilled

combatant by improving the cadre acquisition and operation system, the cadre rank

structure will be reorganized from the existing pyramid shape to a pot shape which

enables "small-scale acquisition and long-term utilization of cadres". The MND

also plans to promote the priming of reserve forces into an elite force and establish

a realistic scientific training system to minimize the impact of troop reduction. By

2024, a total of 202 reserve military training camps nationwide will be merged into

40 scientific reserve army training units, thereby maximizing the effect of training.

Compensation for mobilization of reserve forces will also be raised to the level of a

sergeant’s salary to boost the servicemembers’ morale and guarantee better training

conditions. In spite of the shortening of the military service period, the MND aims to

establish a realistic scientific training system to conduct trainings in an environment

similar to actual combat without having any restrictions in time and space, which will

improve the ROK Armed Forces’ proficiency within a short period.

Fourth, the MND plans to persistently improve servicemembers’ human rights,

welfare benefits, and working conditions to the level that meets the expectation

of the people and social standards. For the reasonable compensation for military

service, servicemembers’ salary will be raised to KRW 676,000–which is 50% of

the minimum wage of sergeants in 2017–by 2022, and of the sergeants to KRW

963,000 by 2025. Furthermore, the servicemembers’ fatigue duty, such as weeding

and cleaning, will be carried out by civilian workforces to ensure conditions for

servicemembers to focus on combat missions and grant them opportunities for self
development, such as financial aids, thereby creating a productive military service

environment. To improve the military medical system to the level that meets the

people’s standards, medical indemnity insurance for all servicemembers will be

introduced throughout the military, which will lower the individual burden of

medical expenses when using private hospitals. For stable service conditions and

continuous improvements in the aging residential environment, the MND will

acquire 197,000 houses and rooms for military cadres, and will increase the number

of daycare centers within military premises from 155 to 187 by 2025 to create a

balance between work and personal life.

Lastly, the MND will foster a safe, citizen-friendly defense environment to build

trust between servicemembers and the people. Efforts will be made to protect

servicemembers from particulate matter and infectious diseases by supplying

protection masks and replacing military-purchased passenger vehicles with

green vehicles, while aging facilities such as wastewater treatment stations and


-----

pipelines will be renovated to prevent water pollution. Moreover, oil pipes will

be established above ground to prevent soil pollution and improvements will be

made in buildings containing asbestos. In line with demolition and environmental

cleanup projects following the return of US military bases, removal of unused

military installations, and payment of compensation to local residents living in

areas requiring countermeasures against noise, the MND plans to build military

installations considering the inconvenience of residents and shared growth with the

local communities.

In the force enhancement area, to build an elite military force based on advanced

science and technologies that is capable of taking the initiative in responding to

omnidirectional security threats, the MND has secured independent surveillance

and reconnaissance capabilities of the ROK Armed Forces and allocated financial

resources with a primary focus on expanding strategic deterrence capabilities such

as–responding to nuclear and WMD threats. Resources have also been allocated

to other priorities including the bolstering of operational response capabilities

through OPCON transition and military structure reorganization and counter
threat forces against transnational and nonmilitary threats such as cyber and space

threats, terrorism, CBRN, and disasters, and the fostering of the defense science and

technology and the domestic defense industry. Specific plans are as follows.

First, KRW 35.2 trillion is allocated to acquire core forces to implement strategic

deterrence, such as surveillance and reconnaissance, and to respond to nuclear and

WMD threats. In order to secure capabilities to carry out independent surveillance

and reconnaissance activities and acquire capabilities for precision-strike against

strategic targets for the ROK Armed Forces, the MND will expand the ROK Armed

Forces’ surveillance and long-range strike capabilities by procuring military

reconnaissance satellites, MUAV, next-generation submarines as well as long
range air-to-ground missiles (AGMs) and new missiles. Furthermore, to establish

the KAMD system, the MND will build overwhelming response capabilities

through the reinforcement of missile forces and will continue to reinforce ballistic

missile detection capabilities and capabilities to defend the key national facilities.

The ballistic missile early-warning radar-II and L-SAMs will be deployed and the

performance of Patriot missiles and Cheolmae-II will be further improved.

Second, KRW 50 trillion is allocated to the securing of forces necessary for

military structure reorganization and OPCON transition. For the acquisition of key

military capabilities related to OPCON transition, approximately KRW 11.6 trillion

is allocated to reinforce counterfire warfighting capabilities, precision-guided

weapons, and communication capabilities. With KRW 38.4 trillion allocated to the


-----

essential forces of each battlefield function for military structure reorganization, 230

mm-class MRLs, wheeled armored vehicles, next-generation Aegis destroyers, KF
X, and amphibious helicopters will be procured to enhance the ROK Armed Forces’

ground, naval, and air operations capabilities qualitatively and quantitatively.

Third, KRW 1.9 trillion is allocated to improve the ROK Armed Forces’ capabilities

in carrying out anti-terrorism operations, providing disaster relief, and protecting

overseas nationals, and to respond to transnational and nonmilitary threats such as

the COVID-19 pandemic. In the field of counter-terrorism, the MND will procure

customized equipment and articles–such as folding guns, explosive detecting and

eliminating robots, new CBRN reconnaissance vehicles, and dry decontamination

apparatus–to reinforce the special strike and night surveillance capabilities of the

ROK Armed Forces and guarantee the mission execution capabilities of anti-terrorism

units and counter-CBRN units according to the designation of responsible units for

each city and province. The MND will also strengthen the ability to carry out relief

activities and to protect overseas nationals in the event of a disaster by deploying

medevac helicopters and amphibious assault ships.

Lastly, KRW 24.8 trillion is allocated to carry out defense R&D and invigorate

the defense industry. The MND plans to increase the share of defense R&D in

the mid-term defense budget to 8.3%. Especially, the investment will mainly take

place in the early stages of the mid-term to acquire new technologies of the Fourth

Industrial Revolution in the defense domain. Heavy investment will be made in basic

research and core technology development centered on 8 areas of defense strategic

technology–such as autonomous technologies and AI–including restructuring of

R&D institutions and reinforcement of infrastructure to ensure that creative R&D

reinforcement projects are carried out.

4. Efficient Defense Management


**Implementing Defense** Since 2013, the MND has been operating the "De
**Fiscal Reform** fense Management Efficiency Inspection Com
mittee" presided by the Vice Minister of National

Defense and joined by civilian experts to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of

defense operations. The committee is the first group to conduct preliminary

feasibility studies and in-depth evaluations of force operation projects, and promoted

tasks related to logistics innovation including procurement, replacement parts, and

distribution utilizing civilian expert groups.


-----

In 2015, the Defense Management Efficiency Inspection Committee was

transformed into the "Defense Fiscal Reform Promotion Group" to go beyond the

simple streamlining of defense management and focus on fundamental financial

reforms. The Defense Fiscal Reform Promotion Group selects projects that have a

significant impact on defense finance and require fundamental system improvement,

and reviews and manages them.

In 2016, the MND implemented in phases measures for developing the defense

planning and management program, including the optimization of the planning

document system, to respond flexibly to changes in the defense environment and

to reasonably allocate and manage limited defense financial resources. In 2017, the

MND replaced troops serving in the field of combat service support, such as those

responsible for sales at military supermarkets and administration at military welfare

centers, with civilian workforce, thereby improving efficiency in troop operations

and contributing to the ROK government’s job creation policy.

In 2018, the MND improved the procurement support system such as com
mercialization of military supplies to procure superior munitions, coordinated and

integrated installation projects at each military base, and entrusted the management

and operation of military housing facilities to the private sector, which resulted in

the efficient operation of troops and financial savings. In 2019, a defense operation

system suitable for the Fourth Industrial Revolution was formulated with the use of

future core technologies, such as expanding defense cloud services and providing

solutions for pipe leaks in military premises using big data. The system has laid the

foundation for budget reduction.

In 2020, an upgrade was made in the operation system after applying the core

technologies of the Fourth Industrial Revolution–such as the use of IoT and smart

logistics warehouses–to defense operations, thereby reducing costs. In addition, the

MND enhanced the effectiveness of overall operations by improving the efficiency

of defense resources utilizing private resources and by refining the defense system

and operation method.

Along with such efforts, the MND will continue to implement intensive fiscal

reforms for high-efficiency defense management by removing inefficient elements in

overall defense.


**Operation of the Military Executive** To increase the efficiency and expertise

**Agency System** of defense operation and the quality of

defense services, the MND has design
ated and is operating organizations, whose responsibilities are business-like and


-----

execution-focused, as military executive agencies.

In the Military Executive Agency System, agency heads are hired through open

recruitment procedures within and without the military; are given autonomy in

organization, personnel affairs, and finance, and; are held responsible for the

management and performance of their agencies. Pilot operation of several military

executive agencies began in 2009, and the number has continuously grown. As

of 2020, 16 military executive agencies are operated in the areas of maintenance,

supply, medical care, printing, and intelligence. The status of military executive

agencies is shown in [Chart 5-14].

[Chart 5-14] Military Executive Agencies (16 Agencies)

|Year Designated|Total|Under the Control of the MND (6)|Army (2)|Navy (5)|Air Force (3)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||16|||||
|2009|3|Korea Armed Forces Printing & Publishing Depot Armed Forces Capital Hospital||Naval Supply Depot||
|2011|3|Armed Forces Daejeon Hospital||Naval Repair Depot One|83rd Information & Communication Maintenance Depot|
|2012|3|The Armed Forces Medical Research Institute||Naval Repair Depot Two|82nd Aero Maintenance Depot|
|2013|3||Army Consolidated Maintenance Depot|Naval Repair Depot Three|Air Force Consolidated Supply Depot|
|2014|3|Korea Joint Interoperability Test Center Defense Integrated Data Center||Naval Shipyard||
|2017|1||Army Consolidated Supply Depot|||



Organizations designated as military executive agencies are continuously

generating tangible results including increased productivity and improved service

quality. The error printing rate of the Korea Armed Forces Printing & Publishing

Depot reached 2.03% before being designated as a military executive agency but

dropped to 0.23% after the designation. The Army Consolidated Maintenance Depot

strengthened its maintenance capacity by converting 545 outsourced items into self
maintenance items. In addition, the Armed Forces Capital Hospital was certified

as a general hospital in 2015 after its efficiency in operation and securing excellent

medical personnel was verified; the MND continues to exert efforts to improve


-----

military medical services as it plans to open and operate the Armed Forces Trauma

Center beginning in 2021.

The military executive agencies are doing their best to increase their competi
tiveness and gain trust in the quality of their products and services based on proactive

and performance-oriented achievements[28)]. As such, the MND plans to expand

the operation of military executive agencies to various fields including welfare and

military installations.


**28)**
Achievements include 226
patent applications, 261
publishing copyrights, 78
external certifications,
and 611 research papers
in the related fields of 6
institutions.


-----

##### Chapter
# 6

## Developing a Robust ROK–US Alliance that is Mutually Complementary and Promoting Defense Exchanges and Cooperation

Section 1 Developing a Mutually Complementary and Robust ROK-US

Alliance

Section 2 Expeditious Wartime Operational Control Transition

Based on a Robust ROK–US Alliance

Section 3 Promoting Substantiality and Expansion of

Defense Exchanges and Cooperation

Section 4 Contributing to International Peacekeeping and

Protecting Overseas Koreans


-----

-----

## 1 Developing a Mutually

#### Complementary and Robust ROK-US Alliance

The ROK–US alliance is a key pillar of peace and prosperity on the Korean Peninsula and

in the region, and continues to develop into a comprehensive strategic alliance based

on common values and mutual trust. The ROK and the US have not only maintained a

robust combined defense posture for complete denuclearization and establishment of

permanent peace on the Korean Peninsula even during the process of exerting efforts to

ease tensions and build military confidence between the two Koreas, but also continued

to deepen and expand the scope and level of alliance cooperation. Through such

combined defense posture and alliance cooperation, the two countries are committed

to protecting the common national security interests and developing a robust ROK–US

alliance in a mutually complementary and future-oriented manner.

1. Continued Development of the ROK–US Alliance as a

Comprehensive Strategic Alliance


Over the past 67 years, the ROK–US alliance has not only defended the ROK from

external threats but also contributed greatly to the country’s development in politics,

economy, society, and culture.

Playing a key role in the defense of the Korean Peninsula, the ROK–US alliance

is contributing to stability, peace, and prosperity in Northeast Asia as well. At the

ROK–US summit in June 2019, the leaders of the two countries assessed the ROK–

US alliance to be robust in all areas, not only in security but also in regional and

global issues, and agreed to continue their close cooperation, considering their

alliance as a key pillar of peace, stability, and prosperity in the region. In addition,

the two leaders agreed to further strengthen their ROK–US alliance, keeping in mind

the history and spirit of the great alliance.

Based on the agreement, the ROK MND and the US DoD discuss major policies,

manage alliance issues, and discuss ways to further develop the alliance through

various high-level security consultative meetings including the SCM[1)], the MCM[2)],

and the KIDD[3)].

At the 52nd SCM held in October 2020, the defense authorities of the ROK and

the US reaffirmed the need for close collaboration and cooperation to achi-eve


**1)**
The highest level of the
ROK–US bilateral security
consultative meeting
participated in by the
ROK Minister of National
Defense, the US Secretary
of Defense, and senior (key)
defense and foreign affairs
officials.

**2)**
The highest level of the
ROK–US bilateral military
consultative meeting
between the JCS of the two
countries.

**3)**
First held in 2012, the
KIDD is an integration of
various ROK–US defense
consultative meetings
for better efficiency and
effectiveness.


-----

a permanent peace regime on the

Korean Peninsula. The ROK Minister

of National Defense and the US Secre
tary of Defense agreed that stability

has been maintained and that the

possibility of accidental clashes has

been significantly reduced through

the suspension of hostilities in all bor- 52nd ROK–US SCM (October 2020)

der areas on land, at sea, and in the air,

which was achieved by the two Koreas implementing the CMA, and through

continuous implementation and management of the Armistice Agreement by the

United Nations Command (UNC).

The Minister of National Defense and the Secretary of Defense assessed the ROK
US alliance to be robust and reaffirmed their commitment to combined defense to

defend the ROK as agreed upon under the Mutual Defense Treaty Between the ROK

and the US.

In particular, the US reaffirmed its unwavering commitment to the combined

defense with the ROK as specified in the Mutual Defense Treaty, including the

provision of extended deterrence to the ROK by operating all categories of military

capabilities including nuclear, conventional, and missile defense capabilities. In the

same context, the Minister and the Secretary agreed to jointly seek ways to enhance

the deterrence posture of the ROK–US alliance and to implement the tailored

deterrence strategy (TDS).

Furthermore, following the pledge by the ROK and US heads-of-states to pursue

harmonious cooperation between the ROK’s New Southern Policy and the US Indo
Pacific Strategy in accordance with the regional cooperation principles of openness,

inclusiveness, and transparency, the MND and DoD carried out the Future Defense

Vision of the ROK–US Alliance joint study considering the changes to the future

security environment and, through the study, derived joint principles for the defense

authorities of both nations and defense cooperation measures for each field to enable

effective responses against new challenges and security threats in the future. Under

the commitment of developing the ROK–US alliance’s defense cooperation in a

complementary, future-oriented manner, the Minister and the Secretary agreed to

close cooperation so that the alliance can protect common national security interests

in the world–especially in Northeast Asia–even after the establishment of peace on

the Korean Peninsula.

The ROK–US alliance continues to develop into a comprehensive strategic


-----

alliance that contributes to peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula as well as

the region and the world. The scope of alliance cooperation is broadening to cover

new areas including cyber, space, the defense industry, science and technology,

and maritime security; regionally, it is expanding its cooperation to Northeast

Asia and global security issues. As seen through the activation of the ROK–

US cooperative system in response to the global spread of COVID-19 in 2020,

the two countries are continuously enhancing defense cooperation to respond to

transnational and nonmilitary threats by conducting peacekeeping activities and

anti-piracy operations, providing support for stabilization and reconstruction

efforts, humanitarian assistance, and disaster relief, and suggesting regional security

cooperation initiatives.

In particular, to ensure effective joint responses to the increasing threats in the space

domain, the two sides are holding close cooperation in areas such as SSA information

sharing, professional manpower exchanges, and combined exercises in the space

domain. The ROK and the US are shaping such efforts through the ROK–US defense

space cooperation consultative working-level meeting launched in 2013. At the 15th

meeting in 2020, the two countries agreed to the continuous development of the

current exchange areas and the deepening of their cooperation through initiatives

such as conducting a study on establishing the ROK–US joint space policy direction.

Likewise in the field of defense science and technology and the defense industry,

the ROK and the US are committed to strengthening their cooperation on the

complementary use of comparative advantages between the two countries. To

this end, several high-level regular consultative meetings, such as the Defense

Technology and Industrial Cooperation Committee (DTICC), Defense Technology

Security Consultative Meeting (DTSCM), Security Cooperation Committee (SCC),

and Logistics Cooperation Committee (LCC), are operated by the two countries.

In the future, the ROK MND and the US DoD will continue their diplomatic

efforts for the denuclearization of North Korea and the establishment of permanent

peace on the Korean Peninsula. As global partners, the two countries will further

develop the robustness of the ROK–US alliance in a mutually complementary and

future-oriented manner to protect their security interests in Northeast Asia as well as

the global realm.

2. Maintaining a Firm ROK–US Combined Defense Posture

Even during the process of exerting efforts to ease tensions and build confidence


-----

in the military domain between the two Koreas, the ROK and the US continue to

maintain a robust combined defense posture.

The two countries have continuously enhanced their combined operations plans

to prepare for contingencies in both wartime and peacetime, and are verifying

and supplementing the operation plans through ROK–US combined theater-level

command post exercises. In particular, ROK–US combined field maneuver training

exercises improve the execution capability and interoperability of combined

operations under the principle of "guaranteeing a balanced combined readiness

posture throughout the year".

The two countries are focusing on maintaining a combined defense posture for

responding to the dynamic changes on the Korean Peninsula, and at the same time

working closely to develop their comprehensive alliance capacity for responding

to common security threats. In particular, the ROK and the US are communicating

closely to make progress and achieve actual results in preparing for OPCON

transition to a Future CFC led by the ROK Armed Forces, and are periodically

assessing and evaluating the OPCON transition implementation status through the

annual SCM and MCM So that the ironclad combined defense posture is maintained

like it is today.

Meanwhile, the two countries agreed in 2018 to maintain the current ROK–US

combined forces command system even after wartime OPCON transition and to

firmly maintain the combined defense posture by maintaining the current level of

combinedness, operational efficiency, and readiness posture.

The ROK and the US are committed to maintaining a powerful combined

defense posture, and will be committed even after progress with the complete

denuclearization and peace policy of the Korean peninsula is made or the wartime

OPCON transition is completed. The two states will continue to maintain a

cooperative system by persistently developing interoperability between the two

states’ armed forces at all levels including policy, strategy, and tactics.

3. Ensuring a Stable Stationing Environment for the United States

Forces Korea (USFK)


**United States Forces** The USFK base relocation project is a project that

**Korea Base Relocation** consolidates and rearranges the USFK bases scatter
ed across the country into two hub bases in Pyeong
taek and Daegu to ensure a stable stationing environment for the USFK and the


-----

efficient use and balanced development of national land.

The USFK base relocation project consists of the Yongsan Relocation Plan (YRP)

and the Land Partnership Plan (LPP). YRP moves units stationed in Seoul including

the USFK Headquarters to Pyeongtaek, while LPP moves the US 2nd Infantry

Division located north of the Han River in Dongducheon and Uijeongbu Camp

Humphreys in Pyeongtaek. The project is being carried out in accordance with the

Special Act on Support, Etc. for Pyeongtaek-si, Etc. Following the Relocation of US

Military Bases in Korea ("Act on Supporting the USFK Base Relocation").

Since the relocation construction at Camp Humphreys began in November

2007, the MND is in the process of relocating the relevant USFK units as soon as

the construction of the facilities inside the camp are completed. The construction

of school facilities ended in August 2013. Major units including the USFK

Headquarters, UNC Headquarters, and US 2nd Infantry Division Headquarters were

relocated to Camp Humphreys in 2018, followed by hospitals and other support units

in 2019. The relocation of the remaining units, including the CFC Headquarters, will

be completed in the future. Once the relocation project is completed, the USFK, in

a more stable stationing environment, is expected to continue to play an important

role in preventing military conflict on the Korean Peninsula, promoting peace and

stability in Northeast Asia, and contributing to global peace going forward.

MND is also in the process of construction of resident support facilities and

amenities including roads, waterworks, sewerage facilities, and community centers

for Pyeongtaek residents are underway in accordance with the Act on Supporting

the USFK Base Relocation. In conjunction with the relocation project, the existing

US base sites are being returned to the ROK. As of December 2020, a total of 68

US bases have been returned, and 12 additional bases will gradually be returned to

the ROK in accordance with the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA). The defense

authorities of the ROK and the US are strengthening joint efforts for the active

management of the environmental conditions and other matters for the timely return

of the bases.

The MND recognizes the importance of the USFK’s relocation and camp returns,

and will continue to closely cooperate with the US to successfully complete the YRP

and the LLP.

**Defense Burden Sharing** Defense Cost sharing refers to the ROK govern
ment bearing a portion of the total costs required

for the US military’s maintenance in the ROK to ensure a stable stationing

environment for the USFK and to maintain a robust ROK–US combined defense


-----

posture. Defense cost sharing is an exception to Article 5[4)] of the SOFA, which states

that the US bears all expenditures incident to the maintenance of the USFK, and the

ROK started its contribution[5)] in 1991 based on a Special Measures Agreement

(SMA)[6)].

The defense cost sharing consists of three categories–labor cost, ROK-funded

construction, and logistics cost. The ROK and the US divide and allocate the total

amount of annual defense cost sharing to the three categories and spend the budget

in accordance with the procedures agreed upon by both sides during the signing of

the SMA. The total amount of the annual defense cost sharing is set to a reasonable

and fair level via close consultations between the two countries with comprehensive

considerations of the USFK’s contribution to the defense of the Korean Peninsula

and the need to provide a stable stationing environment for the USFK, the ROK’s

financial capacity, and the security situation on the Korean Peninsula.

Since August 2019, the ROK and the US have been negotiating to conclude a

new SMA, and the ROK government is doing its best to derive reasonable, fair

[Chart 6-1] Annual Defense Burden Sharing Amount Agreed Upon by the ROK and the

United States

(Unit: USD 100 million)


**4)**
Article 5 of the SOFA
(Facilities and Areas-Cost
and Maintenance) provides
the following:

-  1: The United States will

bear, without cost to the
Republic of Korea, all
expenditures incident
to the maintenance of
the United States armed
forces in the Republic of
Korea, without cost to the
United States, all facilities
and areas.

-  2: The ROK will furnish,

without cost to the United
States, all facilities and
areas.

**5)**
The US not only covered
all expenditures for the
maintenance of the USFK
following Article 5 of the
SOFA but also funded and
constructed most of the
facilities that the ROK was
supposed to provide in
consideration of the ROK
government’s financial
conditions. Due to the
deterioration of the US
financial situation and the
ROK’s economic growth,
the two countries signed
the SMA in 1991. Since
then, the ROK has shared
a portion of the USFK’s
stationing costs.

**6)**
The official title of the
SMA is the "Agreement
Between the United
States and the Republic of
Korea Concerning Special
Measures Related to Article
V of the Agreement Under
Article IV of the Mutual
Defense Treaty Between
the United States and
the Republic of Korea,
Regarding Facilities and
Areas and the Status of
the United States Armed
Forces in the Republic of
Korea."

|Round|1st, 2nd|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|3rd|Col8|Col9|4th|Col11|Col12|5th|Col14|Col15|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Year|1991|1992|1993|1994|1995|1996|1997|1998|1999|2000|2001|2002|2003|2004|
|Amount|1.5|1.8|2.2|2.6|3.0|3.3|3.6|3.9|3.3|3.9|4.4|4.7|5.5|6.2|


(Unit: KRW 100 million)

|6th|Col2|7th|Col4|8th|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|9th|Col11|Col12|Col13|Col14|10th|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|2005|2006|2007|2008|2009|2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|
|6,804|6,804|7,255|7,415|7,600|7,904|8,125|8,361|8,695|9,200|9,320|9,441|9,507|9,602|10,389|


-  [Since the 6th SMA, the currency for payment has been switched to Korean won.]

[Chart 6-2] Defense Burden Sharing Status (as of 2019)


**16%**

support, as well as other

types of provisions of

KRW 500.5 billion (All paid in kind)


paid in cash)


**36%**

Construction support to ROK funded
the USFK facilities including construction
barracks and surrounding KRW 371 Logistics cost
facilities (All support, except billion KRW 167.4
12% of design and construction billion
oversight costs, paid in kind)

**48%** Labor cost

KRW 500.5 billion

Salaries support for the ROK
employees to the USFK (All


-----

negotiation results accepted by the National Assembly and the people.

Most of the defense sharing cost has been redirected to the ROK economy,

contributing to job creation, domestic consumption growth, and regional economic

development. All of the labor cost has been paid to the ROK citizens working for

the USFK, while 88% of ROK funded construction–with the remaining 12% being

design and construction oversight costs–and 100% of the logistics cost are supported

in kind (facilities, equipment, services, etc.) through domestic contractors.

The SMA has undergone numerous changes over the past three decades. The

ROK and the US governments have made continuous efforts to improve rules and

regulations in response to the development of democracy and the maturing civil

society in the ROK. Transparency and accountability in the defense burden sharing

program have been improved through the enhanced participation from the ROK

government in the execution process, and various efforts are being made to protect

the rights and interests of the ROK employees in the USFK and improve their job

security.

In addition to the defense cost sharing provided in accordance with the SMA,

the ROK government directly and indirectly[7)] supports the USFK in various fields.

The composition and scale of direct and indirect supports for the USFK have also

changed in line with changes in the security environment. For instance, the ROK

government has been providing direct support including maintenance support

around USFK bases and support for US communication lines and combined C4I

system, and indirect support including various tax exemptions and reductions.

Considering such efforts, the ROK government will continue to carry out discussions

with the US so that the defense burden sharing amount continues to be determined

at a reasonable and fair level in the future, while making every effort to ensure that

the various support provided by the ROK government contributes to reinforcing the

development of a robust ROK–US alliance and the enhancement of the combined

defense posture.


**7)**
Direct and indirect
supports are classified as
follows:

-  Direct support: A form

of support that involves
government spending

-  Indirect support: A form

of support that does
not involve government
spending but supports
the USFK in a way that
helps save the forces’
financial resources

**8)**
John H. Tilelli Jr., the
8th commander of the
CFC, contributed to the
maintenance of a robust
ROK–US alliance, including
the project for establishing
the "Wall of Remembrance"
within the Korean War
Veterans Memorial in
Washington, D.C. The
General was awarded in
2019, appreciating him as a
representative pro-Korean
member.

**9)**
James N. Mattis, the
26th US Secretary of
Defense, contributed to
the defense of the Korean
Peninsula during his
tenure by emphasizing
the unwavering security
pledges in accordance with
the ROK–US alliance. He
also presented a blueprint
for the buildup of a robust
ROK–US combined
defense system after the
agreement on the Guiding
Principles Following the
Transition of Wartime
Operational Control in
2018.


**Enhancing ROK–US Mutual** The ROK and the US operate a variety of

**Understanding** programs, including ROK–US friendship

activities, to help enhance trust and build

friendship between the two countries. The MND provides a Korean cultural

experience program where USFK service members are invited to experience Korean

culture, and since 1972, some 19,000 USFK service members have participated in

this program. In 2019, around 240 USFK service members on five separate occasions

participated in various programs, including Taekwondo camps, visits to historical


-----

sites, cultural experience programs, and field trips to national defense facilities,

broadening their understanding of Korean history and culture.

In November 2019, the MND organized the ROK–US Alliance Night dinner event

in celebration of the 51st SCM and invited around 500 guests including ROK and US

delegates to the SCM, key government officials, USFK and CFC servicemembers,

and the Korean Augmentation to the United States Army (KATUSA) personnel.

During the dinner, the Minister of National Defense presented the ROK–US Alliance

Award to retired General John H. Tilelli Jr.[8)], the recipient of the 7th General Paik

Sun-Yup ROK–US Alliance Award.

Meanwhile, former US Secretary of Defense, James Mattis[9)] was selected as the

recipient of the 8th General Paik Sun-Yup ROK–US Alliance Award in 2020. The

General Paik Sun-Yup ROK–US Alliance Award was created in 2013 in celebration

of the 60th anniversary of the ROK–US alliance to strengthen the value and meaning

of the alliance, and is awarded to US personnel who have dedicated themselves to

the alliance and the defense of the ROK. The honored recipients of the award during

the past seven years include the late General Walton Walker,[10)] Colonel William

Weber,[11) ] the late General James Van Fleet,[12)] Major General John Singlaub,[13)] the

late General John Vessey,[14)] the late General Mark Clark,[15)] and General John Tilelli.

The USFK also runs various programs to enhance mutual understanding between

the ROK and the US The USFK officially launched the Good Neighbor Program

in 2003 for local communities, which involves open house events, local festivals,

friendship dinners, visits to US military vessels, and English classes. The program

has enabled cultural exchanges between the USFK and local communities, and helped

enhance their understanding of each other. The USFK soldiers continue to work on

building trust with local communities by supporting local residents and social welfare

facilities with typhoon recovery aid and briquette delivery, among others.

Meanwhile, MND has been partici-pating in activities carried out by the "70th

Anniversary of the Korean War Co
mmemoration Committee", a gover
nment-wide committee launched in

2020 to commemorate the 70th anni
versary of the outbreak of the Korean

War. During the ROK Defense Mi
nister’s visit to the US in February

2020, the Minister paid his respects to

Korean War veterans by visiting and

The General Paik Sun-Yup ROK–US Alliance Award

extending his gratitude to the veterans (November 2019)


**10)**
Awarded in 2013, Walton
Walker laid the groudwork
for Incheon Landing by
successfully defending the
front line of Nakdonggang
River during the early stage
of the Korean War.

**11)**
Awarded in 2014, William
Weber is the chairman of
the Korean War Veterans
Memorial Foundation who
has actively campaigned
for better recognition of the
Korean War in the US

**12)**
Awarded in 2015,
James Van Fleet served
in the Korean War as the
commander of the 8th
US Army, also renovated
the training system of the
ROK Armed Forces and
continued to contribute to
the ROK’s development
after the end of the Korean
War.

**13)**
Awarded in 2016, John
Singlab made a significant
contribution in overcoming
the crisis on the Korean
Peninsula caused by the
"Panmunjom axe murder
incident" and to the
creation of the CFC.

**14)**
Awarded in 2017, John
Vessey served as the first
Commander of the CFC
and played a decisive role
in the creation of the CFC
as the commander of the
USFK.

**15)**
Awarded in 2018,
Mark Clark, the former
commander of the UNC,
negotiated and concluded
an armistice agreement as
a representative of the UN
forces in the ROK.


-----

at VA Nursing Homes and those living near Washington, D.C. Also, by hosting

various events for Korean War veterans such as visiting the 1st Marine Division,

which was the US lead effort in the Incheon Landing Operation during the Korean

War, to pay his respects to the Korean War veterans residing in the California

area, the Defense Minister was able to not only uplift the spirit of the ROK–US

alliance, which has continued for over 70 years amid the brutality of war, but also

demonstrated the robustness of the alliance both at home and abroad.

In particular, the Minister’s speech on the "Development of the ROK–US alliance

and establishment of a peace regime on the Korean Peninsula" to an audience

consisting of professors, students, and experts on the Korean Peninsula at the US

National Defense University, which was a first for a ROK Minister of National

Defense, contributed to broadening the audience’s understanding of the security

situation on the Korean Peninsula and the ROK’s defense policies, as well as

enhancing the value and meaning of the ROK–US alliance.


-----

## 2 Expeditious Wartime

#### Operational Control Transition Based on a Robust ROK–US Alliance

Based on the robust ROK–US alliance, the ROK Armed Forces is reinforcing its

independent response capabilities to counter North Korean threats and is systematically

and proactively preparing for wartime operational control (OPCON) transition according

to the Conditions-based Wartime Operational Control Transition Plan (COTP) for a stable

establishment of a new combined defense system led by the ROK Armed Forces. The

ROK Armed Forces will make efforts for an expeditious reinforcement of their defense

capabilities necessary for wartime OPCON transition and for the acceleration of the

transition through periodic assessments.

1. Background and Progress


In order to meet a nationwide demand for "realizing steadfast national defense

befitting the national and military strength of the ROK", the ROK Armed Forces

is systematically and proactively pursuing a conditions-based wartime OPCON

transition[16)] based on the robust ROK–US alliance. At the ROK–US summit in

June 2017, the two countries agreed to an expeditious pursuit of a conditions-based

wartime OPCON transition, making it an opportunity to establish a new combined

defense system led by the ROK Armed Forces. At the 50th SCM in October 2018, the

defense authorities of the ROK and the US signed the "Alliance Guiding Principle

Following the Transition of Wartime Operational Control", gaining a momentum for

wartime OPCON transition.

The ROK Armed Forces is making a military-wide effort to build public trust and

set the conditions for wartime OPCON transition through the creation of a ROK
led combined defense system in the future, and is striving to reinforce the defense

capabilities necessary for wartime OPCON transition in conjunction with Defense

Reform 2.0. In addition, the ROK and the US are closely assessing the status of

meeting the transition conditions, including developing future command structures

and strategic documents for a stable wartime OPCON transition, securing military

capabilities necessary to lead the combined defense and the alliance’s comprehensive


**16)**
A method of wartime
OPCON transition when
the transition conditions of
capabilities and security
environment are met.


-----

response capabilities against North Korea’s nuclear and missile threats, and the

three-stage combined certification assessment[17)] of the Future Combined Forces

Command’s (F-CFC) mission execution capabilities. In 2018, the two countries

agreed on the basic framework of the combined defense system and future command

structure that will be applied after wartime OPCON transition, and in 2019, the two

sides primarily assessed the ROK critical military capabilities and conducted an

initial operational capability (IOC) certification assessment for F-CFC.

In 2020, the ROK and US carried out key tasks for wartime OPCON transition,

focusing primarily on evaluating the alliance’s comprehensive response capabilities

against North Korea’s nuclear and missile threats, and conducted a rehearsal for FOC

certification assessment of F-CFC through the 20-2 ROK–US combined exercise.

The ROK Armed Forces plans to thoroughly consider changes in the security

situation on the Korean Peninsula and expeditiously expand their defense capabilities

necessary for wartime OPCON transition, thereby expediting the consultation

procedure to enable the transition when the conditions are met.

2. Systematic and Proactive Pursuit of Conditions-Based Wartime

OPCON Transition


**Development of Strategic** For an expeditious transition of wartime OPCON

**Documents** on the basis of the robust ROK–US alliance, the

ROK and US are in the process of developing

strategic documents that define the F-CFC’s command structure, missions, and roles.

At the 50th SCM in 2018, the ROK Minister of National Defense and the US

Secretary of Defense agreed to maintain a structure similar to the current CFC

structure after wartime OPCON transition and have a ROK four-star General/

Admiral serve as the F-CFC commander. The defense authorities have been

developing strategic documents that regulate the ROK–US combined defense system

after wartime OPCON transition. At theROK Minister of National Defense-US

Secretary of Defense meeting in June 2019, the two sides agreed to have "a separate

ROK four-star General/Admiral who is not the Chairman of ROK JCS" execute the

duties of the F-CFC commander, determining the basic framework of the F-CFC

command structure. In 2020, after developing the F-CFC commander’s authorities,

roles, and responsibilities in detail to ensure the F-CFC commander’s mission

execution capabilities, the ROK and US agreed on a single set of draft bilaterally
agreed upon Strategic Documents for the FOC certification assessment.


**17)**
Stage 1: Initial Operational
Ability (IOC) certification
assessment → Stage 2:
Full Operational Capability
(FOC) certification
assessment → Stage 3: Full
Mission Capability (FMC)
certification assessment.


-----

The two countries will continue to develop strategic documents in a way that

further strengthens the ROK–US alliance and the combined defense system, while

the strategic documents will continue to be refined through combined certification

assessment until they are finalized at the time of wartime OPCON transition.


**Acquiring Capabilities to Lead** In conjunction with Defense Reform 2.0, the

**Combined Defense** ROK Armed Forces is making systematic

efforts for the early acquisition of military

capabilities needed to lead the combined defense and the alliance̕s comprehensive

response capabilities against North Korea̕s nuclear and missile threats. In particular,

the MND allocated approximately KRW 300 trillion for the 2021-2025 Defense

Midterm Plan and endeavors to reflect all the requirements for the buildup of key

military forces for wartime OPCON transition by continuously increasing the

portion of the national budget earmarked for improving defense capabilities.

The ROK and the US meticulously review the assessment results of the conditions

for the wartime OPCON transition by holding a special Permanent Military

Committee (sPMC)[18)] every year in order to improve the credibility of the assessment

of conditions for wartime OPCON transition. In particular, the sPMC was convened

five times in 2019 where the two countries affirmed the ROK critical military

capabilities, and in 2020, the two sides mainly assessed the alliance’s comprehensive

response capabilities against North Korea’s nuclear and missile threats. As such, the

ROK and US will carry on with their efforts to pursue wartime OPCON transition

in a stable manner and take the initiative in responding to omnidirectional security

threats by acquiring, at an early stage, the military capabilities necessary for leading

the combined defense and the response capabilities against North Korea’s nuclear

and missile threats.


**ROK–US Combined** The ROK and the US have been assessing and

**Certification Assessment** refining F-CFC’s mission execution capabilities

through the three-stage process of combined

certification assessment. In order to enhance the objectivity and fairness of the

results, the two countries formed a combined assessment group to conduct an

evaluation based on the same criteria.

In 2019, the ROK and the US successfully implemented the IOC certification

assessment (stage 1) through systematic preparations. To conduct a IOC certification

assessment, the two countries enhanced the ROK–US Combined Certification

Group’s capacity to assess by conducting a rehearsal during Dong Maeng exercise


**18)**
A four-star level military
committee between the
ROK JCS Chairman and
the Senior US Military
Officer Assigned To Korea
(SUSMOAK) to evaluate
the OPCON transition
conditions


-----

in March 2019, and continuously confirmed in advance the preparation status for

the IOC certification assessment through the KIDD and the Permanent Military

Committee (PMC)[19)]. In addition, the ROK Armed Forces had an opportunity

to integrate the efforts of the entire military at the wartime OPCON Transition

Assessment Conference hosted by the Minister of National Defense. As a result, the

ROK Armed Forces successfully carried out the IOC certification assessment, which

was conducted during the ROK–US CCPT in August 2019. The ROK Minister of

National Defense and the US Secretary of Defense agreed at the 51st SCM to pursue

the FOC certification assessment (stage 2) the following year, but the two nations

focused on meeting the conditions to conduct the FOC certification assessment by

simultaneously conducting a rehearsal that applied the F-CFC structure during the

20-2 CCPT, considering various conditions such as COVID-19.

While maintaining a robust combined defense posture, the ROK Armed Forces

will continue to enhance F-CFC’s mission execution capabilities to ensure a stable

wartime OPCON transition.


**19)**
A four-star level standing
military committee
between the ROK JCS
Chairman and the Senior
US Military Officer
Assigned To Korea
(SUSMOAK)


-----

## 3 Promoting Substantiality

#### and Expansion of Defense Exchanges and Cooperation

The ROK Armed Forces is strengthening strategic defense exchanges and cooperation

with neighboring countries including China, Japan, and Russia to establish peace on the

Korean Peninsula and in Northeast Asia. The ROK Armed Forces is also implementing

the New Southern Policy and the New Northern Policy at the defense level, considering

the increasing roles and responsibilities of ASEAN and India in the regional security

domain and the potential of Eurasia. At the same time, the ROK Armed Forces has been

continuously promoting exchanges and cooperation with traditional allies in Western

Europe and Oceania while diversifying the targets of defense diplomacy to the Middle

East and Central and South America.

1. Promoting Strategic Defense Exchanges and Cooperation with

Neighboring Countries


**Defense Exchanges and** The ROK and China have made rapid progress in

**Cooperation with China** various areas, such as politics, economy, society,

and culture for 28 years since the establishment of

diplomatic relations in 1992. After the two countries established friendly cooperative

relations in the course of diplomatic ties, their relationship was upgraded to a

"strategic cooperative partnership" in 2008.

In December 2017, during the ROK-China Summit, the two leaders agreed to

expand bilateral cooperation to areas such as politics, diplomacy, and security and to

vitalize various high-level dialogues. In December 2018, the defense authorities of

the ROK and China agreed on the full

normalization of defense exchanges

and cooperation. The two countries

have been reinforcing their strategic

communication through two defense

ministerial meetings (Asia Security

Summit in June and ADMM-Plus in

November) and the 5th vice-ministerial

strategic defense dialogue in October, ROK–China Defense Ministerial Talks (June 2019)


-----

which were all held in 2019.

By agreeing to senior military personnel exchanges, regular meetings such as

strategic defense dialogues and defense policy talks, unit exchanges between

military services, repatriation of Chinese soldiers’ remains, academic conferences

between military research agencies, mutual education programs between education

institutions, and to promote the connection of additional hotlines through a revision

of the Navy and Air Force Hotline MOU at the 18th defense policy working-level

talks in January 2020, the defense authorities of the two countries are promoting

national defense exchanges and cooperation in a more substantial manner.

To prevent accidental collisions from Chinese military aircraft’s entry into the

Korea Air Defense Identification Zone (KADIZ), the defense authorities of the ROK

and China are having dialogue and sharing necessary information through hotlines

established between the two countries’ Navy and Air Force. As such, communication

between the two sides is expected to be further strengthened.

Due to the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, defense exchanges

and cooperation between the two countries are facing a new situation as well

as challenges. Nonetheless, the defense authorities of the ROK and China will

strengthen their strategic communication to enhance the "strategic cooperative

partnership". Through continuous promotion of defense exchanges and cooperation

at various levels and in diverse fields–such as the 7th Chinese soldiers’ remains

repatriation ceremony, a friendly cooperation project between the two countries,

in September 2020–the two countries will continue to contribute to the stable

development of bilateral relations and the establishment of peace and stability on the

Korean Peninsula and in Northeast Asia.

**Defense Exchanges**

**and Cooperation with Japan**

Japan is a neighboring country that the

ROK should cooperate not only for

bilateral relations but also for peace

and prosperity in Northeast Asia and

the world. ROK–Japan Defense Ministerial Talks

(November 2019)

The ROK and Japan have regularly

held bilateral Defense Ministerial Meetings since 1994, and established the

foundation for defense exchanges and cooperation in 2009 by signing the Letter

of Intent on Defense Exchanges between the ROK and Japan at the 14th Defense


-----

Ministerial Meeting in 2009. Following the ROK–Japan Defense Ministerial Meeting

in 2015, the two countries’ Defense Ministers have continuously convened bilateral

talks during multilateral conferences such as the Asia Security Summit (ASS). The

Defense Ministers held bilateral talks during the ADMM-Plus in November 2019 as

well, and agreed to continue to enhance their defense exchanges and cooperation in a

future-oriented manner.

However, the defense relationship between the two countries experienced

difficulties due to the distorted perception of history and claims of sovereignty over

Dokdo Island by some Japanese political leaders, as well as a Japanese patrol aircraft

conducting a threatening flyby close to a ROK vessel that was carrying out rescue

operations in December 2018 and the unilateral press release[20)] by Japan containing

misleading facts about the situation. And the export control measures against the

ROK in July 2019 under the pretext of security concerns is a barrier to the future
oriented development of the defense relationship between the two countries.

Following Japan’s action, on August 23, 2019, the ROK government decided to

terminate the General Security of Military Information Agreement (GSOMIA),

which was signed for the purpose of exchanging sensitive military information for

security reasons, and notified Japan of the termination. On November 22, 2019,

however, the ROK government, as a means to resolve the situation, suspended the

termination under the premise that the effect of the GSOMIA could be suspended

at any given time. With the suspension of termination still in place, the ROK is

demanding Japan’s change of attitude.

The ROK will, when it comes to common security issues, continue to cooperate

with Japan for peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula and in Northeast Asia

while firmly and strictly responding to Japan’s distortion of history, unjust claims

over Dokdo Island, and unilateral and arbitrary actions on pending issues.


**20)**
Japan claimed that its
patrol aircraft’s threatening
low-altitude flying over the
ROK rescue vessels was a
normal and announced the
completion of a unilateral
investigation without factchecking although the ROK
made numerous accounts
that the ROK destroyer did
not illuminate the tracking
radar.

**21)**
A policy to promote
common prosperity and
peace in Eurasia, including
the Korean Peninsula,
by strengthening the
connection with the
Eurasian region


**Defense Exchanges** Russia is a key partner in the ROK govern
**and Cooperation with Russia** ment’s New Northern Policy[21)]. The ROK and

Russia have continued to develop their strate
gic communication and mutual cooperation so that Russia will play a constructive

role in the denuclearization and establishment of a peace regime on the Korean

Peninsula, including the ROK President’s visit to Russia after 19 years in June 2018

and holding of five summits since 2017.

In the field of defense, communication between military authorities is being

reinforced through various consultation channels such as the JCS chief director-level

meeting, joint military committee, and consultative bodies for each service in 2019.


-----

In particular, the visit of Russian

Ground Forces commander to the ROK

in the same year resumed the exchan
ges between army generals after 16

years.

Meanwhile, the MND showed a firm

response to the airspace intrusion of a

Meeting between the ROK Chairman of JCS and the Russian military aircraft over Dokdo
Russian Ground Forces Commander (October 2019)

Island in July 2019, in which the MND

strongly requested Russia for measures to prevent recurrence. The two countries

are in the process of making agreements on the installation of a hotline to prevent

accidental collisions caused by entry into the KADIZ.

Year 2020 marks the 30th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic ties between

the ROK and Russia. Various government-wide exchanges and cooperation measures

were devised to carry out meaningful projects in the field of defense ; however, the

countries are undergoing difficulties in holding exchanges and cooperation due to the

pandemic. As soon as conditions are met in place in the future, the MND will continue

to promote various defense exchanges and cooperation with Russia.

2. Expanding Defense Exchanges and Cooperation with Key

Countries in Each Region

**Southeast Asia and** The ROK has continued to make efforts to contribute to

**Oceania** the strengthening of regional security by establishing

multilateral cooperation with ASEAN on regional

security threat factors. The ROK is also promoting mutually beneficial and tailored

cooperation in the field of defense and defense industry that takes into consideration

each country̕s characteristics in line with the ROK government̕s New Southern

Policy (NSP) that aims to shore up cooperation with ASEAN.

President Moon Jae-in visited all 10 ASEAN member states within 2 years since

his inauguration, which is a first for a ROK President, providing an opportunity to

develop friendly and cooperative relations with all partner countries of the NSP.

In particular, during the President’s visit to Thailand–a traditional alliance and a

major defense industry cooperation country since the deployment of Thai troops

to the Korean War–the GSOMIA was signed and agreed with Thailand, thereby

solidifying the institutional foundation for promoting cooperation in defense and


-----

the defense industry between the two countries. In September 2018, President Moon

signed an MOU on defense cooperation with Brunei, the ROK–ASEAN dialogue

coordinating nation, to serve as the driving force for the development of defense

cooperation between the two countries.

In line with the ROK government’s NSP, the MND is strengthening its cooperation

in defense and the defense industry with Southeast Asian countries by holding

ministerial- and vice-ministerial-level meetings, various policy working-level

meetings, and regular meetings between respective military services.

First, a ministerial meeting was convened with the Defense Ministers of Vietnam

and Singapore during the 18th SLD in May 2019. The ministers of the three

countries, exchanged opinions on the regional security situation including the

Korean Peninsula and measures to promote their defense cooperation. In November

2019, the ROK Minister of National Defense participated in the ADMM-Plus held in

Thailand to hold bilateral talks with the Defense Ministers of Vietnam and Indonesia

and Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand. Along with their discussion on development

plans for cooperation in defense and the defense industry, the ROK called for active

support and cooperation for the complete denuclearization and establishment of

permanent peace on the Korean Peninsula. In December 2019, during his visit to

Indonesia, where active defense cooperation is taking place based on a special ROK
Indonesia strategic partnership, the ROK Defense Minister held a meeting with the

Minister of Defense and the Coordinating Minister for Political, Legal, and Security

Affairs of Thailand, and agreed to upgrade their cooperation in defense and the

defense industry to a higher level based on the ROK–Indonesia Defense Cooperation

Agreement.

In Singapore, the Vice Defense Ministers of the ROK and Singapore attended the

Fullerton Forum[22)] in January 2019 to discuss defense issues and ways to enhance

defense industry and technological cooperation between the two countries. At the

8th vice-ministerial-level ROK–Vietnam Strategic Defense Dialogue held in June

2019, the two countries discussed in depth pending defense issues, such as high-level

military exchanges, cybersecurity cooperation, and defense industry and logistics

cooperation. At the Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD) in September 2019, the ROK

Minister of National Defense held bilateral talks with the Philippines Undersecretary

for Defense Policy to discuss the security situation on the Korean Peninsula and

issues on defense exchanges and cooperation. During a meeting with the Laos

Permanent Secretary of National Defence, the ROK Minister of National Defense

acknowledged the establishment of the ROK Defense Attaché Office in Laos and

agreed to further develop their defense cooperation based on the establishment


**22)**
A track 1.5 (government
plus civilian participants)
director general–level
multilateral security
consultative meeting
known as the Shangri-La
Dialogue Sherpa meeting
established in 2002 by
(under the supervision
of) the United Kingdom’s
International Institute for
Strategic Studies (IISS), the
forum is participated by
around 30 countries from
the Asia-Pacific region,
including the ROK, the US,
China, Japan, and Russia,
as well as the EU and NATO


-----

of this office. At the 9th Beijing Xiangshan Forum in October 2019, a ROK–

Malaysia defense vice-ministerial meeting was held to discuss ways to promote

defense exchanges and cooperation, such as cybersecurity cooperation and defense

industry cooperation, while a high-level defense talk with Cambodia at the Seoul

International Aerospace & Defense Exhibition (Seoul ADEX) was also held during

the same period. Based on the MOU on the ROK–Cambodia Defense Cooperation

signed in 2018, the two countries agreed to promote defense cooperation.

The MND is expanding its cooperation with Southeast Asian countries through

working-level policy meetings and regular meetings between military services. In

October 2019, the national defense policy working-level meeting that was agreed to

at the 7th ROK–Vietnam Strategic Defense Dialogue in October 2019 was held for

the first time during which the two nations utilized the opportunity to institutionalize

the basic framework of defense cooperation and to detail the cooperation plans for

specific areas. With the Philippines, the ROK designated year 2019, which marks the

70th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic ties between the two countries,

as the year of mutual exchanges between the ROK and the Philippines, and actively

promoted exchanges and cooperation in the defense domain. As for bilateral

relations, the ROK Air Force Chief of Staff visited the Philippines in February,

and the Chairman of the Philippines JCS visited Korea in May 2019, with a regular

consultative body between the two armed forces being established as well. Defense

industry and logistics cooperation between the two countries has also robustly

progressed with the revision of the MOU on Defense and Logistics Cooperation

in June and with the ROK providing the Philippines with retired naval vessels in

August. The visit of the Secretary of National Defense of the Philippines to the ROK

to attend the launching ceremony of a frigate also contributed to defense industry

and logistics cooperation. In September 2017, the ROK signed an MOU on defense

cooperation with Myanmar, laying the institutional foundation for defense exchanges

and cooperation and seeking cooperation measures to promote cooperation in

defense and the defense industry.

Meanwhile, the MND is actively promoting and diversifying defense cooperation

through regular consultative meetings and combined exercises between the MND

and each military service centering around Australia and New Zealand, the

traditional allies in Oceania which deployed troops to the ROK during the Korean

War.

The 4th ROK–Australia Foreign and Defense Ministers’ (2+2) Meeting in

December 2019 was held to discuss the security situation on the Korean Peninsula

and the Asia-Pacific region as well as ways to strengthen security and defense


-----

cooperation, including PKOs between the two countries, and signed an MOU

Regarding Cooperation Related to Missing Korean War Personnel to promptly

repatriate the remains of Australian Korean-War veterans. The Defense Ministers of

both countries convened a defense ministerial meeting on the same day to conduct

in-depth discussions on strengthening cooperation in science and technology and

the defense industry based on the MOU on Cooperation in the Fields of Defense

Research, Development, Testing and Evaluation signed in November 2019 and on

invigorating combined exercises between the countries including the HAIDOLI
WALLABY exercise (ROK–Australian Navy combined exercise).

The ROK–New Zealand Defense Ministerial Meeting was held at the ADMM
Plus in November 2019. Both ministers evaluated the security situation on the

Korean Peninsula and the progress of security and defense cooperation between

the two countries, and agreed to make close efforts to promote defense cooperation

in various fields such as combined exercises, defense industry cooperation, and

personnel exchanges.

**Southwest Asia including India** As the ROK government strengthens vari
ous forms of cooperation with India by

promoting the NSP for peace and prosperity in the region, interest in defense

cooperation with countries in Southwest Asia is increasing. Accordingly, the ROK

government is actively promoting defense exchanges and cooperation through high
level personnel exchanges and by holding regular consultative meetings with major

countries in Southwest Asia including India.

In particular, the ROK and India have developed their relations by extending

the scope of exchanges and cooperation based on the increase in free trade and

investments, common values of democracy and market economy, and common

aspiration for peace and prosperity. In 2015, the relationship between the two

countries was upgraded to a "special strategic partnership", and the two leaders made

mutual state visit in 2018 and 2019, thereby forming a closer relationship. Such firm

relationship between the ROK and India led to the development of national defense

cooperation, in which exchanges between high-ranking military personnel including

Defense Ministers were actively carried out. A Defense Ministerial Meeting was

held with the Indian Minister of Defence at the Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD) in

September 2019, and the ROK Minister of National Defense officially visited India

at the invitation of the Indian Minister of Defence. Highly evaluating the military

exchanges between the two countries, the Defense Ministers held various regular

consultative meetings including the ROK–India Vice Foreign and Defense Ministers’


-----

(2+2) Meeting, and discussed in depth exchanges and cooperation in various fields

including combined exercises, military education, PKOs, and military medicine and

disaster relief cooperation. In particular, during the ROK Defense Minister’s visit

to India, the two sides exchanged the "roadmap for defense industry cooperation",

which will serve as the basis for practical defense industry cooperation between

the two countries, and established a practical cooperative relationship for joint

production, development and export.

**Central Asia** Central Asia is the key region of Eurasia that connects Asia,

Europe, and Africa, and has high potential for future economic

development based on its abundant resources. Considering Central Asia to be a

major partner in the New Northern Policy (NNP), the ROK government launched the

"Presidential Committee on Northern Economic Cooperation" in 2017 and signed a

Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU).

The MND has been actively supporting the ROK’s NNP in the defense domain by

inviting Central Asian countries to the SDD, thereby strengthening communication

and vitalizing educational exchanges and defense industry cooperation among

the countries. In particular, since establishing the ROK-Central Asia Plus Defense

Vice-Ministerial Talks, which is a defense vice-ministerial consultative meeting

of the five Central Asian countries and Mongolia, on the occasion of SDD 2018,

the MND has continued discussions on security cooperation with Central Asia.

In the 2nd Talks held the following year, high-ranking officials, including the

Deputy Minister of Defense of Uzbekistan, the Deputy Chief of the General Staff

of Kazakhstan, the Deputy Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of

Kyrgyzstan, and the Kyrgyz Ambassador to Korea participated and discussed ways

to strengthen cooperation through diplomatic, security, and economic channels and

to share information on the regional security situation. The countries also agreed to

continuously develop the platforms for defense exchanges and cooperation.

Uzbekistan is a key country in the NNP. With President Moon’s visit to Uzbekistan

in 2019, the relationship between the two countries was upgraded from "strategic

partnership" to "special strategic partnership". And as seen through the participation

of the Uzbekistan Deputy Minister of Defense at the SDD and hosting of defense

policy talks, the ROK is continuously discussing ways to improve cooperation with

Uzbekistan. Since 2017, active exchanges have taken place in the field of education

such as dispatching instructors from the Joint Forces Military University (JFMU) to

the Academy of the Armed Forces of Uzbekistan to share knowledge and experience

in the field of military science including tactics, and training the Uzbekistan


-----

officers at the Korea Military Academy, the ROK Army College, and the ROK Air

University. As of 2020, the ROK and Uzbekistan are at the stage of expanding their

fields of exchanges and cooperation such as holding video conferences between

military medicine personnel of the two countries.

As for Kazakhstan, in 2019, President Moon visited the country on the 10th

anniversary of establishment of a "strategic partnership" between the two countries.

The ROK–Kazakhstan defense policy working-level meeting was resumed after 7

years, and it is expected to deepen and develop exchanges and cooperation between

the two countries in the field of defense .

**Middle East** The Middle East has significant value as a major supplier of

energy resources in the world. The MND has strived to streng
then cooperation in defense and the defense industry with countries in the Middle

East.

The ROK and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) have developed their relationship

in various areas, including economy, society, and culture, since the establishment

of diplomatic ties in 1980. The two countries have been continuing various forms of

defense cooperation since the signing of the Agreement on Military Cooperation in

2006. With the approval of the National Assembly, the ROK has been deploying the

Akh Unit to the UAE since January 2011. In March 2018, President Moon visited the

UAE to hold a summit with Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi Mohammed bin Zayed Al

Nahyan, agreeing to upgrade the bilateral relationship from "strategic partnership"

to "special strategic partnership" and to strengthen their cooperation through the

establishment of diplomatic and defense consultative meetings. The Crown Prince

visited the ROK in February 2019. In the same month, the ROK Minister of National

Defense visited the UAE to meet with the UAE Minister of State Defense. In

October, the ROK Vice Minister of National Defense again visited the UAE to hold a

diplomatic and defense vice-ministerial meeting as well as bilateral talks. The UAE

Minister of State Defense made a visit to the ROK in December, held a meeting with

the ROK Minister of National Defense and agreed to further expand and strengthen

cooperation in defense and the defense industry between the two countries,

continuing stable cooperation through active exchanges.

The ROK’s cooperation with Saudi Arabia continues to develop as well. The ROK

Vice Minister of National Defense visited Saudi Arabia in April 2019 for bilateral

talks with Saudi Arabia’s Defense Minister Assistant at the 1st ROK-Saudi Arabia

Defense Cooperation Committee, and held bilateral talks with the Chairman of the

General Staff who visited the ROK to attend the 8th SDD in September 2019. In


-----

October 2019, the ROK Minister of National Defense made active efforts to vitalize

defense exports through bilateral talks with Saudi Arabia’s Chairman of the General

Staff, who participated in the Seoul ADEX, requesting Saudi Arabia’s support for

the ROK’s excellent defense products. In November 2019, the ROK Minister of

National Defense visited Saudi Arabia to hold bilateral talks with Crown Prince of

Saudi Arabia Mohammed bin Salman as well as their Defense Minister, and made

efforts to institutionalize defense cooperation between the two countries.

The ROK Minister of National Defense attended the UAE International Defense

Exhibition & Conference (IDEX) in February 2019 and the ROK Vice Minister of

National Defense attended the Turkey International Defense Industry Fair (IDEF) in

May 2019 to hold bilateral talks with delegations and military officials from major

countries in the Middle East including Oman and Egypt, and discussed ways to

promote cooperation in defense and the defense industry. The Egyptian Defense

Minister Assistant who visited the ROK for the 8th SDD held in September 2019 held

bilateral talks with the ROK Vice Minister of National Defense and agreed to make

active efforts to strengthen cooperation in defense exchanges between the ROK and

Egypt. In October 2019, the ROK Minister of National Defense visited Oman to

sign an MOU on defense cooperation. The Defense Ministers of the two countries

agreed to make mutual efforts to expand defense cooperation between the ROK and

Oman and especially discussed in depth ways to further enhance defense industry

cooperation.

While continuing to take interest to changes in the situation and dynamics in the

Middle East, the MND will further develop cooperation in defense and the defense

industry with major countries in the Middle East including UAE, Saudi Arabia,

Oman, and Egypt through regular high-level military meetings and working-level

meetings.

**Europe and Canada** Europe is a major partner in the ROK’s security and a

major pillar of defense diplomacy centered on tradi
tional allies, and has expressed its willingness to continue supporting the ROK in the

process of establishing peace on the Korean Peninsula. The MND is invigorating

cooperation in the defense and defense industry domain centered on bilateral and

mini-multilateral consultative bodies with European nations, and at the same time, is

deepening its relations with European countries in various ways by strengthening

friendly cooperative relations with the EU and NATO.

In March 2019, the ROK Minister of National Defense, along with King Philippe

and Queen Mathilde of Belgium, attended the memorial ceremony for Belgian


-----

Korean War veterans to express gratitude for the dedication of Belgian veterans

and to reaffirm the traditional friendly relationship formed based on Belgium’s

participation in the Korean War.

At the ROK–UK Defense Ministers’ Meeting organized by the ROK Minister

of National Defense in June 2019, the Defense Ministers of the ROK and the UK

discussed ways to cooperate on realizing denuclearization and establishing a

permanent peace regime on the Korean Peninsula. Meanwhile, the ROK Vice

Minister of National Defense held talks with the UK Director-General of International

Security in May 2019 and discussed current issues on defense and defense industry

cooperation between the two countries and directions for future cooperation.

With France, the ROK is promoting a joint roadmap for strengthening cooperation

in the defense and security areas between the ROK and France as part of a follow
up measure after President Moon’s visit to France in October 2018. In May 2019, a

telephone conference was held between the ROK Minister of National Defense and

the French Minister of the Armed Forces on the occasion of the French military’s

rescue of Korean civilians during counter-terrorism activities, and during the

telephone conference, the two ministers discussed in depth ways to detail the

cooperation issues agreed upon during the ROK–France Summit in October 2018. In

June 2019, the two ministers attended a ceremony in Paris to deliver French soldiers’

identification tags which were excavated during remains recovery activities at

Arrowhead Hill inside the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ).

The MND has been improving exchanges with Central European countries–

which are regarded as a new growth engine in Europe–and deriving measures for

cooperation in defense and the defense industry through high-level exchanges such

as the defense vice-ministerial talks between the ROK and the Visegrád Group[24)]

since 2016. The 4th vice-ministerial talks was held in Seoul in September 2019

to exchange opinions on the regional security situation and discuss measures to

enhance national cooperation in

defense and the defense industry.

Ministerial talks with Hungary and

bilateral talks with the Czech Republic,

Vice-Ministerial talks with Slovakia

were also held to shape cooperation

plans for each country.

In November 2019, the ROK Minister

of National Defense held talks with the

Signing of the MOU on ROK–Hungary Defense

Hungarian Minister of Defense who Cooperation (November 2019)


**24)**
A regional partnership
of Central Europe that
consists of the Czech
Republic, Poland, Hungary,
and Slovakia. The name is
derived from the Hungarian
town of Visegrád, where
their first meeting took
place in 1991.


-----

visited the ROK to attend the 30th anniversary of diplomatic relations between the

ROK and Hungary. By signing an MOU on defense cooperation–which sets forth

the exchange of defense information and experiences between the two countries,

consultations on defense policy issues, and military technical cooperation–the two

countries laid the institutional foundation for strengthening cooperation in defense

and the defense industry between the ROK and Hungary.

Bulgaria expressed its interest in defense industry cooperation with the ROK

through discussions on defense industry cooperation at a summit and a prime

ministerial meeting during the Bulgarian Prime Minister’s visit to the ROK in

September 2019. The ROK Vice Minister of National Defense held talks with the

Deputy Minister of Defense of Bulgaria in the same period to seek practical ways for

exchanges and cooperation between the two countries in the field of defense and the

defense industry.

The MND has been enhancing communication and exchanges with Greece, another

traditional ally that deployed combat troops to the ROK during the Korean War,

since the launching of the Greek Defense Attaché Office in the ROK in June 2018. A

ROK–Greece defense ministerial talk was held in February 2019 and defense vice
ministerial talks were held in October 2019 and November 2020, where ways to

expand bilateral defense, defense industry, and logistics cooperation were discussed.

In May 2019, the ROK Vice Minister of National Defense attended the IDEF and

held talks with the Turkish Deputy Minister of Defense and the Vice President of

Defense Industries to discuss ways to strengthen cooperation in defense and the

defense industry. The MND also carried out veterans diplomacy by encouraging

Turkish veterans of the Korean War.

During President Moon’s visit to northern Europe in June 2019, the ROK decided

to deepen the comprehensive and overall cooperation relationship with Finland,

Norway, and Sweden during summit meetings with each country. In particular,

the ROK solidified the foundation for

cooperation in defense and the defense

industry in various ways such as by

offering flowers to the Norwegian

Memorial, visiting logistics support

ships, participating in the unveiling

ceremony for the Swedish national

veterans monument, and signing of

MOU on defense logistics cooperation.

ROK–Greece Defense Vice-Ministerial Talks
(November 2020) The ROK Minister of National De

-----

fense met with the Prime Minister

of Sweden who visited the ROK in

December 2019 and exchanged broad

opinions on the regional security

situation on the Korean Peninsula and

Europe as well as ways for defense

and defense industry exchanges and

cooperation. In addition, defense vice- Talks with the ROK Minister of National Defense and

the Prime Minister of Sweden (December 2019)

ministerial talks were held with the

Finnish Deputy Minister of Defense who visited the ROK to attend the 8th SDD. The

two countries agreed to further strengthen cooperation in defense and in the defense

industry including the K-9 Thunder. (self-propelled artillery of the ROK)

The ROK Minister of National Defense asked for NATO’s cooperation in towards

the ROK’s efforts to establish peace on the Korean Peninsula in talks with the

Chairman of the NATO Military Committee in May 2019. The two sides discussed

ways to strengthen cooperation based on key interests such as cyber-cooperation and

establishment of a military consultative meeting. In 2019 in particular, the MND

dispatched ROK military officers to the International Military Staff (IMS) of NATO

to strengthen cooperation between the ROK and NATO.

To enhance cooperation between the ROK and the EU, the Cheonghae Unit has

participated in the EU’s counter-piracy operations since 2017 in accordance with the

ROK–EU basic agreement on crisis management that took effect in late 2016.

The ROK Minister of National Defense held talks with EU foreign affairs and

security policy senior representatives in June 2019 and hosted the 3rd ROK–

EU security and defense dialogue in November 2019 which are efforts to expand

practical security cooperation with the EU.

Canada, another key member of NATO, is also a participating nation in the Korean

War and a traditional ally of the ROK that has consistently expressed its support for the

Korean Peninsula peace policy. The ROK Vice Minister of National Defense held talks

with the Canadian Deputy Minister of National Defence during the SDD in September

2019 to discuss pending defense cooperation issues between the two countries.

**Central and South America** The ROK has been actively engaging in eco
nomic cooperation with countries in Central and

South America, and continues to seek defense cooperation measures in various fields

to expand defense diplomacy in the field of defense and to garner support towards

the ROK’s defense policies.


-----

The ROK and Chile signed a ROK
Chile Defense Cooperation Agreement

during the Chilean President’s visit

to the ROK in April 2019, laying the

foundation to promote cooperation

in defense and the defense industry

between the two countries. In May

2019, a joint government defense Signing ceremony for the ROK–Chile defense

cooperation agreement (April 2019)

industry cooperation delegation for

Central and South America visited Colombia and Peru to create an opportunity to

assess each country’s defense industry status and the possibility for cooperation

in the defense industry with the ROK. In October 2019, the ROK Vice Minister of

National Defense held bilateral talks during the Paraguayan Vice Defense Minister’s

visit to the ROK and discussed the security situation on the Korean Peninsula and

ways to strengthen cooperation in defense and the defense industry between the two

countries. In October, the Chilean ship Esmeralda arrived at the Busan naval port for

cruise training during which the ROK and Chile built a close cooperative relationship.

The MND plans to actively promote cooperation in the defense industry with key

countries in Central and South America while maintaining friendly relations with

these nations by promoting regular high-ranking military personnel exchanges.

**Africa** As Africa is gaining strategic importance as a new source of key

resource and a new economic cooperation partner, the MND is

invigorating defense exchanges and cooperation in various fields including high
level military exchanges, exchanges between each military service, and defense

industry cooperation with the aim of shaping the conditions for defense industry

exports and expan-ding national defense diplomacy.

The ROK Minister of National

Defense signed an MOU on defense

cooperation with Senegal during the

Senegalese Defense Minister’s visit

to the ROK in October 2019, laying

the institutional basis for bilateral

cooperation in defense and the defense

industry. The ROK Vice Minister of

National Defense held bilateral talks

Signing of the MOU on ROK–Senegal Defense

with the Vice Defense Minister of Cooperation (October 2019)


-----

Ethiopia in September 2019 and with the Vice Defense Minister of Botswana in

October 2019, and agreed to continue strengthening their cooperation in defense and

the defense industry. In particular, in a situation where troop rotation of the Hanbit

Unit deployed to South Sudan was limited due to the COVID-19 pandemic, troop

rotation was smoothly carried out thanks to active cooperation from Ethiopia such as

opening an airport to facilitate our troop rotation.

The MND will continue its efforts to establish a foundation for cooperation in

defense with major African countries and to discover specific cooperation issues that

can be promoted between the countries.


**Non-face-to-face** Every country in the world has reinforced their immig
**Defense Diplomacy** ration regulations to prevent the spread of COVID-19,

which resulted in many restrictions on mutual visits

between countries for defense diplomacy. Under such circumstances, most major

bilateral and multilateral face-to-face meetings scheduled in 2020 were either

postponed or canceled.

As an alternative to the situation where face-to-face defense diplomacy is limited,

the MND is actively implementing non-face-to-face defense diplomacy by means

of telephone or video conference with major partner countries, and is further

strengthening the activities of ROK defense attachés and foreign defense attachés

stationed in the ROK. Since March 2020, the ROK Minister of National Defense

has held telephone and video talks with the Defense Ministers of the US, China,

India, UAE, Canada, and Estonia, while the ROK Vice Minister of National Defense

with the Vice Defense Ministers of the UK, Vietnam, and New Zealand to share

the experience and know-how gained through the ROK government’s K-quarantine

and the ROK Armed Forces’ response to the pandemic, and to discuss plans for

cooperation in defense and the defense industry.


**Defense Diplomacy Marking the 70th** Year 2020 marks the 70th anniver
**Anniversary of the Korean War** sary of the outbreak of the Korean

War, and the MND carried out and

cooperated on various projects that expressed appreciation for the sacrifices and

dedication of the UN sending states and their veterans.

In June 2020, the ROK Minister of National Defense sent a letter of appreciation

to the Defense Ministers of the countries that sent troops during the Korean War.

In the letter, the Minister expressed his appreciation for the veterans who sacrificed

themselves to safeguard the ROK’s liberal democracy and peace and asked for


-----

their unwavering support towards the ROK’s efforts to establish a peaceful Korean

Peninsula. In addition, the ROK Minister of National Defense and the US Secretary

of Defense made a joint announcement commemorating the 70th anniversary of

the Korean War, expressing their appreciation for the sacrifices and courage of the

soldiers and their firm determination to preserve peace on the Korean Peninsula.

In May 2020, the ROK government distributed 1 million masks to veterans of UN

sending states as a small token of appreciation for their sacrifices and dedication

during the Korean War 70 years ago. The MND provided transport aircraft for quick

delivery of the masks to veterans, and the ROK military attachés delivered the masks

directly to veterans.

3. Reinforcing Multilateral Security Cooperation

The importance of multilateral cooperation in response to traditional and non
traditional security threats is increasing; in particular, the need for international

cooperation in the process of responding to the global spread of COVID-19 in 2020

is becoming more important. Despite such environment, the ROK government

is striving to raise its stature in the international community through active

international cooperation, such as sharing the K-quarantine experience.

To reinforce multilateral security cooperation, the MND has been actively

participating in major multilateral security conferences in the region, including the

ADMM-Plus and the ASS, to encourage the international community’s support for

the establishment of peace on the Korean Peninsula. The SDD is also held every year

to strengthen the ROK-led multilateral security cooperation. In particular, the MND

and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA) will co-host the 2021 UN Peacekeeping

Ministerial Conference in April 2021. The meeting, which will be held for the first

time in Asia, will be the largest and highest-level conference on peacekeeping

attended by defense and foreign affairs ministers from more than 150 countries

around the world, where international cooperation on peacekeeping activities will be

discussed led by the ROK.

The major multilateral security meetings in the region the MND participates

are shown in [Chart 6-3]. In addition to the meetings stated below, starting in

2021, the MND will also be participating in the Munich Security Conference, an

offshore multilateral security consultative meeting, to further expand multilateral

cooperation.


-----

[Chart 6-3] Multilateral Security Consultative Meetings Participated in by the MND

|Track 125) Multilateral Security Meeting|Track 1.526) Multilateral Security Meeting|
|---|---|
|• ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus) • ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) • Tokyo Defense Forum (TDF)|• Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD) • Asia Security Summit (ASS) • Halifax International Security Forum (HISF) • Northeast Asia Cooperation Dialogue (NEACD) • Fullerton Forum|


**Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD)** The MND has been hosting the SDD–a

multilateral security dialogue joined by

defense vice-ministerial-level officials and civilian security experts from all over the

world–annually since 2012 to contribute to multilateral security cooperation in the

Asia-Pacific region and the establishment of peace on the Korean Peninsula. The

SDD contributes to building trust in the defense domain and promoting multilateral

cooperation by providing a venue for dialogue and discussions on common

international interests as well as the security situation on the Korean Peninsula and

in the Asia-Pacific region. In addition, the MND holds various bilateral and small
scale multilateral conferences with the participating countries at the SDD and seeks

ways to promote mutual defense exchanges and cooperation. In recent years,

delegations from major countries around the world–including the Asia-Pacific,

Americas, Europe, Middle East, and Africa–have attended, reinforcing the

dialogue’s status as a major high-level multilateral security meeting in the region.

The 8th SDD in 2019, the largest in scale since its inception with 53 countries and 2

international organizations participating, was held under the theme "Building Peace

Together: Challenges and Visions". At the dialogue, the ROK explained its efforts to

ease military tensions since the signing of the CMA, and formed a consensus among

the participating countries on the permanent settlement of peace on the Korean

Peninsula. In addition, the ROK has sought ways to promote cooperation in defense

and the defense industry by holding

mini-multilateral meetings, including

the defense vice-ministerial talks with

Visegrad Group, ASEAN, and Central

Asia, and bilateral talks with 25

participating countries including India,

Canada, Singapore, and France.

The 9th SDD in 2020 was held in the

form of a special seminar, i.e., video

2020 Seoul Defense Dialogue video seminar

debate, considering the global spread (September 2020)


2020 Seoul Defense
Dialogue

**25)**
Multilateral security
meetings held between
governments to promote
regional and world peace
and stability, and to discuss
participating countries’
common security interests

**26)**
Multilateral security
meetings engaging
participating nations’
governments, civilian
groups, and academics
to promote regional and
world peace and stability,
and to discuss participating
countries’ common
security interests


-----

of COVID-19. The seminar was held by connecting domestic and foreign civilian

security experts through video conferencing and was broadcast live for the officials

in the security domain including national defense officials from around the world.

Under the theme "Emerging Security Challenges: Overcoming through Solidarity

and Cooperation", the participating countries, together with renowned security

experts, discussed in depth the world order and international cooperation measures

in the post-COVID era and the implications of non-traditional security threats to

national defense.

The ROK government actively shared the achievements of K-quarantine and

formed a consensus on the importance of the ROK government’s efforts to establish

peace on the Korean Peninsula with the international community. Despite the

limitations brought about by the pandemic, during this year’s SDD, the participating

countries not only maintained the dialogue’s driving force as an annual multilateral

security consultative meeting but also contributed to continuing talks and

communication in the field of defense.

**ROK–ASEAN Special Summit** The 3rd ROK–ASEAN special summit in

2019 commemorated the 30th anniversary

of the ROK–ASEAN dialogue relations, looking at the achievements of cooperation

for the past 30 years and presenting a vision for future cooperation for the next 30

years. In the field of defense and defense industry, the MND operated a task force to

support the successful hosting of the special summit. First, the MND actively

promoted the ROK–ASEAN special summit at international multilateral meetings

including the ADMM-Plus and policy briefing sessions for the defense attachés

group in the ROK. In addition, the MND supported the export of defense articles by

holding an export conference with the coast guards from 10 ASEAN countries and

by promoting the excellence of the ROK’s weapons system to ASEAN leaders who

visited military units operating these weapons systems and defense companies.

Through these efforts, the 2019 ROK–ASEAN special summit contributed in

achieving the diversification of diplomacy through the expansion of cooperation

related to NSP and the reinforcement of ASEAN’s support for the peace process on

the Korean Peninsula.


**ROK–ASEAN Defense Vice-** The ROK–ASEAN defense vice-ministerial

**Ministerial Talks** talks, first held during the 2017 SDD, has been

held every year until 2019. At the first iteration

in 2017, the two parties shared the recognition on the need for defense cooperation


-----

between the ROK and the ASEAN based on the direction of development of defense

cooperation between the ROK and the ASEAN. In 2018, the ROK shared its

experiences in developing the defense industry following the implementation of NSP

and discussed ways to further expand the win-win defense cooperation between the

ROK and the ASEAN. At the 2019 talks, marking the 30th anniversary of the ROK
ASEAN dialogue relations, the participants broadly discussed areas where defense

cooperation between the ROK and the ASEAN can be enhanced in the future. They

also formed a consensus on the importance of cooperating on and responding to

cybersecurity threats, which is being emphasized recently by the world. The ROK–

ASEAN defense vice-ministerial talks, which has been held three times, is

becoming an annual consultative meeting of importance in the defense domain that

is no longer just a sidebar meeting at the SDD.


**ASEAN Defense Ministers’** The MND participates in ADMM-Plus, which

**Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus)** was first launched in 2010, every year. The 7th

meeting in 2020 was held in the form of video

conference due to the outbreak of COVID-19. At the meeting, the ROK Minister of

National Defense emphasized the importance of multilateral security cooperation to

respond to the changed security environment and introduced cases of the ROK’s

response to the pandemic based on "solidarity and cooperation". To develop national

defense cooperation with the ASEAN countries, the Minister agreed to expand

commissioned education for PKO, strengthen cooperation in response to cyber-threats

in the region, and participate in combined exercises organized by the ASEAN countries.

The Minister also explained that building trust on the Korean Peninsula contributes

to the establishment of peace in the Asia-Pacific region, and asked for support and

cooperation from member states for the peace process on the Korean Peninsula.

Meanwhile, from April 2017 to March 2020, the Minister, together with his

Singaporean counterpart, successfully

completed the mission of co-chairing

the "marine security subcommittee",

one of the seven subcommittees of

the ADMM-Plus. In addition, the

Minister is faithfully carrying out the

task of co-chairing the "cybersecurity

subcommittee" with Malaysia since

7th ADMM-Plus (December 2020) April 2020.


-----

**Other Multilateral Security** The MND has strengthened its multilateral

**Cooperation Meetings** security cooperation activities, discussing

security issues with high-level defense officials

and security experts in the Asia-Pacific region, through its participation in the

Fullerton Forum, the ARF, the Tokyo Defense Forum (TDF)–an Asia-Pacific

director general-level security consultative forum–and the Beiging Xiangshan

Forum held in China. Furthermore, the MND participates in the Northeast Asia

Cooperation Dialogue (NEACD)–whose key members are countries that

participated in the six-party talks–every year, seeking ways to build military

confidence between nations and advance cooperation in Northeast Asia. The MND

will continue to exert its efforts to gain broader support for the ROK’s security policy

by bolstering stronger multilateral security cooperation activities and sharing with

partner countries the ROK government’s position on peace and stability on the

Korean Peninsula and in Northeast Asia.

4. Strengthening International Non-proliferation[27)] and Counter
proliferation Activities


**27)**
Diplomatic efforts to
prevent the proliferation of
various types of weapons
including WMDs as well as
their delivery systems and
conventional arms.

**28)**
See Appendix 20
"International Disarmament
and Non-Proliferation
Agreements and
Organizations" (p. 416)

**29)**
After joining the IAEA in
1957 and signing out the
Nuclear Non-proliferation
Treaty (NPT) in 1975, the
ROK joined the Zangger
Committee (ZC) in 1995,
the NSG in 1995, and the
Comprehensive Nuclear
Test–Ban Treaty (CTBT) in
1999.

**30)**
The IAEA is an international
organization that provides
technological support to
promote the peaceful use
and that seeks to prevent
the military use of nuclear
materials (established in
1957, holds 172 member
states.)

**31)**
The NSG is an export
control regime concerning
nuclear materials as
well as nuclear-related
technologies, equipment,
and dual-use items. Unlike
the Zangger Committee,
the NSG controls exports
to all nonnuclear states
regardless of their
membership with the NPT
(established in 1978, holds
48 member states.)


**International** Since the end of the Cold War, the international

**Non-proliferation Efforts** community has been strengthening global non
proliferation efforts to curb the spread of WMDs,

WMD-related materials, technologies and delivery systems, as well as conventional

arms. The global non-proliferation regime consists of international treaties,

international organizations that oversee and inspect the implementation of treaties,

and export control systems that restrict the transfer of related materials, equipment,

and technologies. The international community has also enhanced the effectiveness

of non-proliferation regimes by introducing sanctions against nonfulfillment of

nonproliferation obligations based on UN Security Council Resolutions, and

supplementing the issue of applying regulations against nonmember states and non
state actors.

Since joining the UN in 1991, the ROK participated in various international non
proliferation regimes and activities that regulate nuclear weapons, chemical and

biological weapons, missiles, conventional arms, etc.[28)]

The MND established legal and institutional foundations to execute non
proliferation responsibilities in accordance with non-proliferation treaties and

international organizations, and the thorough and faithful execution of these


-----

**32)**
The BWC bans the
development, production,
and stockpiling of
biological weapons
including biological agents
and toxins (established
in 1975, holds 183 state
parties.)

**33)**
The CWC is a treaty that
prohibits the development,
production, stockpiling,
use, and transfer of
chemical weapons, and
that requires state parties
to destroy all their chemical
weapons and related
facilities within 10 years
after the CWC enters into
force (established in 1997,
holds 193 state parties.)

**34)**
Including the "Act on the
Control of the Manufacture,
Export, and Import
of Specific Chemical
Substances and Biological
Agents for the Prohibition
of Chemical and Biological
Weapons" (Chemical
and Biological Weapons
Prohibition Act).

**35)**
The Australia Group is
an export control regime
to prevent the spread of
chemical and biological
weapon-related materials,
dual-use items, and
technologies to states
that may use and produce
chemical and biological
weapons (established in
1985, holds 43 countries.)


Conference of Parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention (November 2019)


Regular chemical inspection performed by the MND
(2019)


responsibilities contributed greatly to the improvement in credibility and trans
parency of the ROK.

With regard to nuclear weapons, the ROK, as a member of major nuclear non
proliferation regimes[29)], has contributed to the international community’s non
proliferation efforts by steadily implementing the comprehensive safeguard

agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) **[30) ]and by**

exchanging information with the member states of the Nuclear Suppliers Group

(NSG) **[31)] to prevent transfers of nuclear materials and technologies that can be**

used for military purposes. The MND has been maintaining close cooperative

relations with other relevant agencies to support the ROK government’s nuclear non
proliferation policy.

In the area of chemical and biological weapons, the ROK joined the Biological

Weapons Convention (BWC)[32)] in 1987 and the Chemical Weapons Convention

(CWC)[33)] in 1997, and enacted relevant laws[34)] for the domestic implementation of

these conventions. The MND is fulfilling its defense-related obligations through

measures such as maintaining safety management systems by conducting regular

inspections on military research institutes, and is sharing information on states of

proliferation concerns and acquiring the latest information and technologies by

dispatching defense specialists to relevant international conferences. Since joining

the Australia Group (AG)[35)] in 1996, an export control regime for chemical and

biological weapons non-proliferation, the MND and the DAPA have worked with the

relevant agencies including the Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy (MOTIE) to

improve local laws for a more systematic implementation of export control measures.[36)]

Missile proliferation control is also important because WMD threats are

directly related to missile capabilities that deliver them. Accordingly, the ROK

has proactively participated in international efforts to prevent the proliferation

of missiles by voluntarily joining export control regimes including the Missile


**36)**
Provisions related to
chemical and biological
agents as well as their
production, equipment,
and technologies specified
in the Foreign Trade
Act implement the AG’s
control requirements. The
Public Notice on Trade of
Strategic Items designates
all the items specified in the
AG control lists into control
lists. The revised Chemical
and Biological Weapons
Prohibition Act implements
the requirements of the
CWC, the BWC, and
the UN Security Council
Resolution 1540.


-----

Technology Control Regime (MTCR)[37)] in 2001 and the Hague Code of Conduct

against Ballistic Missile Proliferation (HCOC)[38)] in 2002. The MND has dispatched

defense specialists to relevant international conferences to suggest views on

policy issues, and has thoroughly implemented relevant obligations including pre
launch notifications and annual declaration submissions, thereby strengthening the

transparency of ROK’s missile programs.

The international community’s non-proliferation activities have expanded to

cover not only WMDs–including nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons–but

also conventional arms. The member states of the Wassenaar Arrangement (WA)[39)]

have agreed on guidelines and lists to control transfers of conventional arms as

well as dual-use items[40)] and technologies, implemented them domestically, and

voluntarily shared information regarding the implementation. Since the ROK joined

the WA in 1996, the MND and the DAPA have reported weapons transfer semi
annually to the WA Secretariat while actively participating in discussions on the

creation and revision of control lists to protect the ROK defense industry. The Arms

Trade Treaty (ATT)[41)], which took effect in 2014, is the first legally binding single

treaty concerning conventional arms that control the transfers of seven categories

of weapons systems[42)], small arms, light firearms, and munitions parts. The ROK,

an original signatory to the ATT, ratified the treaty in 2017.[43)] The MND and the

DAPA are faithfully implementing related treaties in accordance with reinforced

international standards and domestic laws and regulations. As a country that has

joined all four major international export control regimes[44)], the ROK designates

and controls goods and technologies that require trade restrictions, such as export

permission requirement, as strategic items[45)], in accordance with international

export control principles. In the process of approving exports, the MND closely

consults with relevant government agencies on export-related military matters

and on determining whether the importing country complies with export control

regulations.[46)]

The ROK will actively participate in the international community’s non-proliferation

efforts to contribute to regional stability and global peace while bolstering the

foundation for international cooperation for security on the Korean Peninsula.

**International [47)]** The emergence of WMD and terrorism
**Counter-proliferation Efforts** related threats in the wake of the September

11 attacks in 2001 formed a consensus that

traditional methods, such as export controls, may have a limited effect in preventing

the proliferation of WMDs. As a result, proactive counter-proliferation policies have


**37)**
MTCR is an export control
regime where member
states voluntarily control
the spread of rockets
and UAV capable of
delivering WMDs as well
as related equipment and
technologies (established
in 1987, holds 35 member
states.)

**38)**
HCOC is a political
commitment, in which
states voluntarily subscribe
to, that sets a code of
conduct to prevent the
proliferation of ballistic
missiles. It bans support
for the missile development
programs of countries that
may develop or acquire
WMDs (established in
2002, holds 143 member
states.)

**39)**
An export control regime
concerning conventional
arms as well as dual-use
items and technologies
(established in 1996, holds
42 member states.)

**40)**
Items that have both
industrial and military
applications.

**41)**
A treaty that establishes
common standards to
regulate international trade
in conventional arms to
prevent their illegal trade
and use (established in
2014, holds 110 parties.)

**42)**
Includes battle tanks,
armored vehicles, largecaliber artillery systems,
combat aircraft, attack
helicopters, warships,
missiles, and missile
launchers.

**43)**
Major non-signatory to the
ATT include North Korea,
Russia, India, Pakistan,
and Indonesia.
The US signed the ATT but
has not ratified it.


-----

**44)**
The four major international
export control regimes
are the NSG, the AG, the
MTCR, and the WA. There
are currently 30 "clean
countries" that have joined
all four regimes, including
the ROK and Japan in Asia.

**45)**
These are items that
international export control
regimes have designated
as subject to export
controls. They may include
conventional arms, WMDs,
and missiles, as well as
materials, software, and
technologies that can
be used to develop and
produce them.

**46)**
The DAPA makes final
approvals for military-use
strategic items because the
duty has been delegated
by the MND.

**47)**
All kinds of efforts to
protect their territories
and people by reducing
or eliminating the actual
threats posed by WMDs
or by deterring enemies’
desire to use them.


emerged. The MND has continuously

cooperated with the international

community to prevent the prolife
ration of WMDs and counter related

threats.[48)]

The MND has participated in eleven

Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI)[49)]

exercises since 2009, and is con- PSI exercise

tributing to international cooperation

by dispatching naval ships and search teams. Moreover, since 2017, the WMD search

team of the ROK CBRN Defense Command has also participated in this exercise and

is strengthening its search training against suspicious cargoes.

In particular, the ROK hosted PSI exercises in 2010 and 2012, and conducted

tabletop exercises for proliferation prevention and WMD seizures as well as

maritime interdiction and boarding and inspection training. The ROK held the PSI’s

annual Operation Expert Group (OEG)[50)] meeting in Seoul in September 2012.

[Chart 6-4] PSI Exercise Hosting Countries


**48)**
Non-proliferation focuses
on preventing transfers
of strategic items, while
counter-proliferation
involves physical
interceptions of resources
such as materials and
funds already in the
transferring process.

**49)**
These are international
cooperative activities
launched in June 2003
under the leadership of
the US to prevent the
international proliferation of
WMDs. Activities include
information-sharing among
member states, a ban on
the trade of WMD as well as
their delivery systems and
illegal weapons, and joint
operations.

|Year|2009|2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Country|Singapore|ROK|No exercise held|ROK·Japan|UAE|US|

|Year|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Country|New Zealand|Singapore|Australia|Japan|ROK|No exercise held|


Since 2014, six countries–the ROK, the US, Japan, Singapore, Australia, and New

Zealand–have hosted PSI exercises in the Asia-Pacific region annually in rotation.

The ROK hosted the PSI "Eastern Endeavor 19" in 2019 and discussed measures

to strengthen the member states’ counter-proliferation capabilities, focusing on

academic conferences and map exercises.

The MND will continue to enhance cooperation with the international community

through active participation in counter-proliferation activities.


**50)**
The OEG consisting of 21
major member states is in
charge of the operation of
PSI.


-----

5. Strengthening International Logistics Cooperation

**International Logistics Cooperation** The MND is striving to secure stable

logistics support capabilities in both

wartime and peacetime through active international logistics cooperation and to

respond flexibly to unforeseen threats.

In particular, the MND is cooperating with the US through bilateral conferences,

such as the Logistics Cooperation Committee (LCC)[51)] and the WHNS Combined

Steering Committee (WCSC),[52)] and multilateral talks including the Pacific Area

Senior Officer Logistics Seminar (PASOLS)[53)].

In July 2019, the ROK held the 51st LCC in Hawaii and agreed to improve some of

the End User Monitoring (EUM)[54)] system procedures and cooperation in logistics.

In April 2019, the ROK and the US held the 26th WCSC to discuss ways to develop

a wartime support plan in 12 areas including engineering, maintenance, and supply

in order to ensure uninterrupted deployment of US reinforcements in wartime. At the

meeting, the two countries discussed the revision of guidelines for the establishment

of schedules and plans between the ROK and the US and agreed to stay active in

developing the guidelines to further develop wartime support plans. Such efforts

to strengthen logistics cooperation between the ROK and the US will contribute to

improving the readiness and combat power of the ROK military in the future.

Based on regular consultative meetings with Australia, Israel, and Singapore, the

ROK is continuing its efforts to develop logistics cooperation in various areas such

as munitions support, logistics innovation, and logistics information system. The

first working-level logistics cooperation meeting with New Zealand was held for the

first time in November 2019 to increase cooperation in logistics innovation between

the two countries. As such, the ROK is promoting the diversification of international

logistics cooperation.


**51)**
As a subcommittee of
the SCM, the LCC is a
highest-level meeting in the
logistics domain to discuss
logistics cooperation
issues. It is a regular
consultative meeting held
every year in rotation.

**52)**
WCSC is a regular meeting
held in the ROK every year
to discuss the wartime host
nation support of the US
reinforcement forces based
on the Wartime Host Nation
Support (WHNS) signed
between ROK and US in
1991.

**53)**
PASOLS is a multilateral
meeting that shares
logistics information and
operation experiences
among nations in the
Pacific Ocean and Indian
Ocean. The member states
hold the meeting every year
in turns.


**54)**
A type of activity carried
out to directly check
whether munitions and
equipment sold as FMS
in the US are used in
accordance with the
purpose of the initial sale. 51st LCC (July 2019) 26th WCSC (April 2019)


-----

**Signing of Acquisition and** International logistics cooperation

**Cross-Servicing Agreements (ACSAs)** is carried out in accordance with

Acquisition and Cross-Servicing

Agreements (ACSAs). Therefore, the ROK newly signs or revises ACSAs to enable

efficient mutual logistics support.



[Chart 6-5] Status of ACSAs

**Nations That have Concluded ACSAs with the ROK (Concluded Years)**


United States (1988), Thailand (1991), New Zealand (2007), Turkey (2008), Philippines (2009),

Israel/Australia/Canada (2010), Indonesia/Singapore (2011), Cambodia/Spain/UK (2012), Mongolia (2013),

Germany (2016), Vietnam (2018), France (2019)

To date, the ROK has signed ACSAs with 17 countries. In March 2019, the ROK

provided an opportunity to promote logistics cooperation with France by signing a

letter of intent (LOI) to promote logistics exchanges and cooperation between the

two countries. The ACSA with Australia was revised in June 2020.

The 48th PASOLS was held in Papua New Guinea in September 2019, where

delegates from 28 countries and 2 organizations attended to share their experiences

in various disasters and discuss ways to support mutual logistics.

In the meeting, the ROK received favorable feedback from the participating nations

for presenting a new model for establishing a future disaster system with a disaster

safety net.


**Transfer of Military** To enhance defense cooperation and vitalize defense

**Supplies** exports, the MND is actively transferring military

supplies that the ROK Armed Forces no longer use to

nations in need. At the same time, the MND is also extending the scope of free

transfer to Southeast Asian countries as well as South America and Africa. Transfer

items are also diversifying, including vessels, aircraft, maneuvering equipment,

firepower equipment, and engineering equipment. An overview of transfers of

military supplies is shown in [Chart 6-6].

The MND will continue to promote cooperation so that efficient, systematic

logistics support can be provided in the right place at the right time, considering

various changes in domestic and international security conditions. Furthermore, the

MND will actively participate in bilateral and multilateral logistics meetings held

internationally to promote the capabilities of the ROK Armed Forces and strengthen

cooperation in mutual logistics support.


-----

[Chart 6-6] Transfer of Military Supplies

|Period|Regions|Transferred Items|
|---|---|---|
|1993 - 1999|Asia|Vessel, aircraft, vehicle, combat gear, and others|
|2000 - 2009|Asia, South America|Vessel, aircraft, engineering equipment, maneuvering equipment, and others|
|2010 - Present|Asia, South America, Africa, Oceania|Vessel, engineering equipment, maneuvering equipment, firepower equipment, landing equipment, munitions, and others|


-----

## 4 Contributing to International

#### Peacekeeping and Protecting Overseas Koreans

The ROK overcame the tragedy of the Korean War with the support of the UN

and the international community, and achieved remarkable economic growth and

democratization. As a result of economic and political development, the ROK became

a donor nation that has not forgotten the support that it has received and a country

that actively participates in peacekeeping operations as a responsible member of the

international community. As of November 2020, around 1,030 ROK personnel are

deployed to contribute to the ROK’s mission of elevating the country’s international

stature.[56)] In addition, the ROK is reinforcing its activities to preemptively protect

overseas Koreans in case of overseas disasters by actively utilizing military assets.

1. UN Peacekeeping Operations


**56)**
Comparison of various
international peacekeeping
activities
1. UN PKO

-  Host: Led by the UN

-  Command and Control:

Commander of
peacekeeping forces
(PKF) appointed by the
UN secretary-general

-  Expenses: Borne by the

UN

2. Multinational Forces’

Peace Operations

-  Host: Led by regional

security organizations or
particular countries

-  Command and

Control: Commander
of multinational forces
(MNF)

-  Expenses: Borne by

deploying countries

3. Defense Exchanges and

Cooperation Activities

-  Host: Led by deploying

countries

-  Command and Control:

Military commanders of
deploying countries

-  Expenses: Borne by

deploying countries

**57)**
Currently, there are
seven missions in Africa
(Western Sahara, Central
African Republic, Mali, the
Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Sudan, Abyei,
and South Sudan), three in
the Middle East (Lebanon,
Syria, and Palestine),
two in Europe (Kosovo
and Cyprus), and one in
Asia (India and Pakistan).
Nearly 120 countries have
together deployed around
70,000 personnel to these
missions.


**Overview of UN** UN peacekeeping operations began with the

**Peacekeeping Operations** establishment of the United Nations Truce

Supervision Organization (UNTSO) in Palestine

in 1948 to monitor armistice agreements. 13 PKO mission units[57)] are currently

carrying out their duties, including armistice monitoring and reconstruction support,

in conflict areas around the world.

Starting with the deployment of an engineering unit to Somalia in 1993, the ROK,

which joined the UN in 1991, has deployed a ROK Armed Forces medical assistance



[Chart 6-7] ROK Participation in UN Peacekeeping Operations

(As of November 2020, unit: persons)


Lebanon
Dongmyeong Unit (280)

Darfur, Sudan

UNMISS staff (1) UNIFIL staff officers (4)

Western Sahara
MINURSO staff (3)

South Sudan India and Pakistan
Hanbit Unit (270) UNTSO staff (8)

UNMISS observers
and staff officers (7) Yemen UNMHA

staff (0)


-----

team to Western Sahara, an engineering unit to Angola, the Sangnoksu Unit to

East Timor, and the Danbi Unit to Haiti, and continued to engage in peacekeeping

operations in conflict areas around the world. As of November 2020, a total of 573

ROK personnel are carrying out their missions in seven countries. They include 280

in the Dongmyeong Unit in Lebanon, 270 in the Hanbit Unit in South Sudan, and

those deployed individually. An overview of the ROK's participation in peacekeeping

operations is shown in [Chart 6-7].

**Dongmyeong Unit in Lebanon**

Following the adoption of UN Security

Council Resolutions 425 and 427 in 1978,

the UN established the United Nations

Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and

began to monitor the armistice agree
ment between Lebanon and Israel. In Maneuvering patrol activity (July 2020)

2006, when the conflict between Israel

and Hezbollah intensified, the UN increased the number of peacekeepers from 2,000

to 15,000 and requested member states to participate.

In July 2007, with the National Assembly’s approval, the ROK government

deployed the Dongmyeong Unit, a peacekeeping unit of 350 personnel, to Tyre in

southern Lebanon. Dongmyeong Unit conducts reconnaissance and surveillance

activities to block the smuggling of illegal weapons and entry of militants into its

area of operation in southern Lebanon. In addition to armistice monitoring, the unit

has carried out multi-functional civil-military operations called Peace Wave and

humanitarian assistance activities. The unit has helped improve the living conditions

of local residents through various humanitarian assistance activities such as

providing medical support for local residents, renovating public facilities and school

facilities, and offering Taekwondo classes. The unit’s successful civil–military

operations have been well-received in Lebanon and significantly contributed to the

stabilization of the southern Lebanon region.

In particular, during the Beirut explosion which resulted in huge number of

casualties in August 2020, Dongmyeong Unit urgently provided the Lebanese

Armed Forces with 6,000 sets of daily necessities including face masks stockpiled

by the unit and 4,000 sets of locally-purchased medical supplies. Major activities of

the Dongmyeong Unit are listed in [Chart 6-8].


**58)**
"Dongmyeong" means
bright light of the east from
an eastern country, and
signifies hope for a bright
future and peace.


-----

[Chart 6-8] Major Activities of Dongmyeong Unit


(As of November 2020)


|Operational Activities|• Surveillance and reconnaissance in the operation area: 110,000 times • On-foot and vehicular reconnaissance, and explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) reconnaissance: 6,400 times • Combined reconnaissance with Lebanese forces: 110,000 times|
|---|---|
|Civil–Military Operations and Humanitarian Assistance|• Medical support for local residents: 150,000 times • Treatment of livestock: 35,000 heads • Taekwondo class: 2 towns (Abbassia and Burglia) / Soap art class: 5-town tour • Korean class: Distance education • Projects for local residents: 417 projects (public facilities, school facilities, sewage facilities, etc.) • Support for Lebanese forces: 105 cases • Support related to the Beirut explosion: 6,000 sets of daily necessities including face masks and 4,000 sets of medical supplies (delivered to the Lebanese Armed Forces)|


**Hanbit Unit in South Sudan**


After Sudan gained independence

from the joint colonial rule of the

United Kingdom and Egypt, a civil

war broke out in 1955 due to political

and religious causes, and after two

peace treaties, South Sudan became Bor-Pibor road repair completion

indepen-dent from Sudan in July 2011.

To assist the reconstruction of the newly independent nation, the UN established the

United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) and requested its

member states to deploy troops.

After receiving the National Assembly’s consent in September 2012, the ROK

government created an engineering unit supporting reconstruction in South Sudan

(Hanbit Unit) in January 2013 and deployed 300 troops to South Sudan on March 31,

2013.[60)]

In the Bor region that had been devastated by civil war, the Hanbit Unit has

successfully carried out reconstruction support activities including embankment

construction along the Nile as well as the construction and repairs of airport, roads,

and bridges. The unit has also assumed humanitarian assistance missions such as

refugee protection, provision of drinking water, and medical support. In addition,

to help the local residents of South Sudan to get back on their feet, the unit operates

seven courses in the Hanbit Vocational School, including agriculture, carpentry, and

civil engineering. Major activities of the Hanbit Unit are listed in [Chart 6-9].


Hanbit Unit

**59)**
The name “Hanbit” stems
out of the desire to become
“one bright light that leads
the world” through support
for the reconstruction
of South Sudan and
humanitarian activities.

**60)**
The deployment to South
Sudan is the ROK’s 7th
UN peacekeeping forces
deployment following
deployments to Somalia
(1993-1994, reconstruction
assistance), Western
Sahara (1994-2006,
medical assistance),
Angola (1995-1996,
reconstruction assistance),
East Timor (1999-2003,
security and border
control), Lebanon
(2007-present, armistice
monitoring), and Haiti
(2010-2012, reconstruction
assistance.)


-----

[Chart 6-9] Major Activities of Hanbit Unit

(As of November 2020)

|Reconstruction Support Operations|• Bor Airport renovation, construction of a new helicopter garage, parking ramp and terminal • Maintenance and repairs of Bor–Pibor road and drainage renovation (drain system, installation of corrugated steel plate) • Maintenance and repairs of Bor–Mangella road and support for emergency repairs for swept-away areas • Road repairs, drainage renovation, and drainage and restoration equipment support for submerged areas in the Bor region • Installation of a photovoltaic power plant at Jonglei State Hospital (Obstetrics and Gynecology)|
|---|---|
|Civil–Military Operations and Humanitarian Assistance|• Establishment of the Jonglei State Peace Center, supply of medicine and other materials to Bor Hospital • Provision of flood relief aid to Jonglei State (3 tents for 14 persons) • Supply of educational materials to elementary schools in the Bor and Pibor regions, renovation of the lecture hall at the lifelong education center in John Garang Memorial University • Operation of Hanbit Farm: approx. 29,000㎡, planted 12 crops • Operation of Hanbit Vocational School (six programs including farming): 588 graduates, local instructors currently being trained • Training in the ROK: 79 persons visited the ROK over 7 sessions (before the spread of COVID-19) to complete the agricultural technology course • Taekwondo and Korean language classes • COVID-19 prevention: Supply of 20,000 face masks and 10,000 COVID-19 diagnostic kits to the South Sudan government|
|Refugee Protection|• Repairs of internal and external roads, assistance in drainage for submerged areas during the rainy season • Repairs of a refugee camp, reinforcement of protective walls, construction of 14 new guard posts|
|UN Missions Facility Construction Support|• Construction of 12 units of UN staff lodging in the Bor base, and guard posts, shelters, and sanitation and convenience facilities at the Bor Airport (septic tanks, sports facilities, oil storage, etc.) • Reinforcement of protective walls and internal roads (4.8km) of the Bor base • Reinforcement of protective walls, external moats, and parapet walk (1.8km) in the Pibor and Akobo independent operation bases • Facility renovation for the UN missions in the Bor base (5 units), and others|



Through various types of reconstruction support activities, Hanbit Unit is

contributing to the alleviation of tribal conflicts by increasing the number of

infrastructure and promoting exchanges in South Sudan. The unit’s resident-friendly

civil-military operation is regarded as a highly exemplary activity by the UN and

local officials. In particular, in a situation where rotation of all units belonging

to the UNMISS was temporarily suspended due to the spread of COVID-19 in

2020, only the Hanbit Unit (the 11th and 12th contingent) was able to carry out

rotations after close consultation with the UN and the South Sudan government.

The 12th contingent of the Hanbit Unit, after safely completing the rotation process

by undergoing strict quarantine measures, provided face masks and COVID-19

diagnostic kits to the South Sudan government. Such aid led to the recognition of the

importance of the Hanbit Unit’s mission and the reliability of the ROK’s quarantine

capabilities by the international community.


-----

**Military Observers and Staff Officers** The ROK government currently has

**in UN Missions** around 20 personnel dispatched to

UN missions in major conflict re
gions including India, Pakistan, Lebanon, South Sudan, and Western Sahara. Some

of them work as observers and armistice monitoring agents, and some as military

staff officers in UN missions. In addition to UN peacekeeping operations, the ROK

government increased its contribution to UN Special Political Missions by

dispatching ROK military observers to the UN Mission to Support the Hudaydah

Agreement (UNMHA)[61)], which was established in January 2019. Observers monitor

armistice violations and undertake tasks, such as patrols, investigations, reporting,

and mediation, under the control of UN missions. Staff officers of UN missions carry

out their duties in major staff offices of each command such as intelligence,

operations, and logistics offices.

2. Multinational Forces’ Peace Operations


Peace operations of multinational forces are activities undertaken by multinational

forces under the leadership of select countries and regional organizations based on

UN Security Council resolutions or other grounds. Together with UN peacekeeping

operations, peace operations by multinational forces play an important role in the

stabilization and reconstruction of conflict regions. Since 2001, the ROK government

has been deploying Haesung, Cheongma, Dongeui, Dasan, and Ashena units to

Afghanistan and Seohee, Jema, Zaytun, and Daiman units to Iraq.

The Ashena Unit, in particular, was deployed to Afghanistan in 2010 to support the

stabilization and reconstruction of the country. The unit protected the reconstruction

activities of the Provincial Reconstruction Team during a span of more than 1,800

escort and surveillance operations between 2010 and June 2014, thereby contributing

significantly to the stabilization and reconstruction of Afghanistan.

As of November 2020, the ROK deployed 318 personnel in five countries for

multinational forces’ peace operations including 306 in the Cheonghae Unit and

12 individually deployed personnel. An overview of the ROK’s participation in

multinational forces’ peace operations is shown in [Chart 6-10].


**61)**
One of the UN missions
which was established
in accordance with UN
Security Council Resolution
2452 to support the
execution of the Hudaydah
Agreement (December
2018) signed between
the Yemeni government
and the Houthi rebels.
The UNMHA monitors
the implementation of
the agreement to provide
humanitarian assistance
to Yemen, and does not
fall under the 13 missions
for UN peacekeeping
operations.


-----

[Chart 6-10] ROK’s Participation in Multinational Forces’ Peace Operations

(As of November 2020, unit: persons)


US Africa Command (1) Bahrain Combined

Maritime Forces
staff officers (4)

US Central
Command IMSC under Cheonghae Unit
Coordination/ liaison officers (2 / Bahrain)
staff officers (3)

Somali waters

Kuwait CJTF-OIR

Cheonghae Unit (306)

coordination officers (2)

EU CTF-465

Djibouti CJTF-HOA staff officer
coordination officer (1) (1 / Gulf of Aden)


**Cheonghae Unit in** Due to the civil war in Somalia, there was a sharp in
**Somali Waters** crease in the amount of damages caused by piracy in the

waters off the coast of Somalia since 2004. The UN

Security Council consequently adopted Resolution 1838[62)] with the UN requesting

member states to dispatch military vessels and aircraft to the region. The ROK

government deployed the Cheonghae Unit to the Gulf of Aden off the Somali coast

in March 2009 after obtaining the National Assembly’s consent.

As of November 2020, the unit is composed of one destroyer, one helicopter, three

rigid-hull inflatable boats (RHIBs), and 306 troops. While acts of piracy in the Gulf

of Aden have gradually declined, it remains crucial to secure the safety of the area.

The Gulf of Aden is a major maritime route for transportation of strategic goods,

including crude oil and liquefied natural gas (LNG), and about 30% of the total

maritime cargo volume of the ROK passes through the area.[63)] Cheonghae Unit’s

major missions are to convoy domestic and foreign vessels, support safe navigation,

and participate in maritime security operations of the Combined Maritime Forces

(CMF) and the EU, and protect ROK citizens in contingencies.

In January 2011, the Cheonghae Unit successfully executed the "Operation

Dawn of Gulf of Aden" to rescue a ROK ship and its crew from pirates. In March

2011 and August 2014, the unit also effectively carried out the "ROK nationals

evacuation operation in Libya", where ROK nationals and foreigners were safely

evacuated from Libya to nearby countries. In April 2015, the first "floating" ROK

embassy was opened on ROKS Wang Geon destroyer to safely evacuate six ROK

citizens who were caught in Yemen as well as to maintain contact with and protect

any ROK citizen who remained in Yemen. This is a stellar example of organic


Temporary expansion
of operation areas of
Cheonhae Unit

**62)**
Cheonghae Unit is
operating around north of
latitude 11° south, west of
longitude 68° east. The unit
calls upon states to fight
against piracy by deploying
naval vessels and military
aircraft. It is allowed to
utilize naval vessels and
military aircraft operating
on the coast of Somalia
as long as it conforms
to the international
law. It also urges the
states to cooperate with
Somalia’s transitional
federal government in the
fight against piracy, and
the states and regional
organizations to protect the
World Food Program (WFP)
maritime convoys carrying
food aid.

**63)**
Two Chinese destroyers
and one logistics support
vessel, two Japanese
vessels and two patrol
aircraft, and one ROK
vessel (Cheonghae Unit)
are deployed for anti-piracy
operations in the Gulf of
Aden. The ROK served as
the commander of the CTF151 in 2019.


-----

cooperation between the MND and the MOFA taking the lead in protecting overseas

ROK nationals. In April 2018, the unit completed an operation to safely transport

three ROK nationals, who had been rescued from pirates off Ghanaian territorial

waters from Nigeria to Ghana. Since February 2017, the Cheonghae Unit has been

conducting interdiction operations to block pirates entering the Gulf of Aden from

the northern coasts of Somalia by participating in six EU counter-piracy operations[64)]

Major activities of the Cheonghae Unit are listed in [Chart 6-11].

[Chart 6-11] Major Activities of Cheonghae Unit


(As of November 2020)

|Convoy|Col2|Safe Voyage Escort|Col4|Maritime Security Operations|Counter-piracy Operations|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|ROK Vessels|Foreign Vessels|ROK Vessels|Foreign Vessels|||
|510|1,875|19,570|2,968|703 times (1,731 days)|21 times / 31 vessels|


|Col1|ROK Nationals Rescue|
|---|---|
|January 2011|Operation Dawn of Gulf of Aden (Rescued all 21 sailors of Samho Jewelry who were kidnapped by Somali pirates)|
|March 2011|Evacuation operation of ROK nationals in Libya (37 ROK nationals evacuated to Malta and Greece from Libya)|
|April 2011|Operation to rescue the Hanjin Tenjin sailors (All 14 ROK and 6 Indonesian sailors of Hanjin Tenjin were rescued after pirate attacks)|
|December 2012|Operation to rescue the Gemini sailors (Escorted 4 ROK sailors who were released after being captured by pirates)|
|August 2014|Evacuation operation of ROK nationals in Libya (Escorted the evacuation of 18 ROK nationals and 86 foreigners to Malta from Libya)|
|April 2015|Evacuation operation of ROK nationals in Yemen (Escorted the evacuation of 6 ROK nationals and 6 foreigners to Oman from Yemen)|
|April 2018|Operation to escort kidnapped ROK nationals off the coast of Ghana (Escorted 3 ROK nationals kidnapped by pirates to Ghana)|
|August 2018|Escorted operation to rescue ROK nationals kidnapped by Libyan armed groups|
|November 2019|Dispatched to offshore near Yemen where 2 ROK nationals were captured by Houthi rebels|


Meanwhile, tensions in the Middle East including the Strait of Hormuz have

continued to grow since May 2019. To

ensure the safety of ROK nationals

and the freedom of navigation in

such situation, the ROK government

temporarily expanded the operation

area of the Cheonghae Unit in January

2020 from the Gulf of Aden to the Gulf

of Oman and the Persian Gulf (also

known as Arabian Gulf), including

Humanitarian assistance for an Iranian ship stranded

the Strait of Hormuz. In February in the temporarily expanded operation area


**64)**
Operation Atalanta is a
counter-piracy operation
conducted by the EU (CTF465) to protect vessels that
pass through the sea off
the coast of Somalia. The
operation began in 2008,
and the Cheonghae Unit
has participated in the EU
operation since 2017.


-----

2020, during operations in the expanded area, ROK’s Wang Geon destroyer (the 31st

contingent of the Cheonghae Unit) rescued 10 sailors from an Iranian vessel that had

been stranded for about a week. The rescued sailors were provided with sufficient

supplies including fuel and food. The Strait of Hormuz is a strategically important

area as more than 70% of the ROK’s crude oil imports pass through the area and

ROK vessels navigate the strait around 900 times a year. The Cheonghae while

carrying out its mission independently in the expanded operation area will conduct

joint operations with the International Maritime Security Construct (IMSC)[65)] when

necessary to protect ROK nationals and vessels.

In this regard, two liaison officers from the Cheonghae Unit were dispatched to

the IMSC in February 2020 to conduct necessary cooperation activities including

information sharing.


**Staff Officers and Coordination Officers** The ROK Armed Forces has dis
**of Multinational Forces** patched a total of 10 staff officers

and coordination officers to the

CMF in Bahrain, the Combined Joint Task Force-Horn of Africa (CJTF-HOA) in

Djibouti, the Combined Joint Task Force-Operation Inherent Resolve (CJTF-OIR)[66)]

in Kuwait, and the United States Central Command and Africa Command. Their

major missions are performing staff duties for the CMF, establishing combined

operations plans, supporting the rotation and combat service of the ROK Armed

Forces overseas deployment units, and cooperating with local allied forces. The ROK

Armed Forces continues to stay active in participating in multinational forces’ peace

operations. In December 2019 in particular, two coordination officers were dispatched

to the CJTF-OIR to carry out ISIS suppression operations.

3. Defense Exchanges and Cooperation Activities

Upon request from a given country, the ROK Armed Forces dispatches their forces

to areas where there is no risk of combat and servicemembers’ safety is assured to

conduct defense exchanges and cooperation activities in noncombatant fields such as

education and training, humanitarian assistance, and disaster relief.

In November 2013, the ROK Armed Forces deployed the Araw Contingent to

support recovery efforts in the Philippines, which suffered severe typhoon damage.

The Araw Contingent successfully completed its mission of assisting with the

recovery of damaged areas and withdrew in December 2014. In March 2014,


**65)**
A consortium of countries
tasked with escorting the
Strait of Hormuz. Stationed
in Bahrain, its member
states are the United
States, United Kingdom,
Australia, Saudi Arabia,
UAE, Albania, Bahrain, and
Lithuania

**66)**
CJTF-OIR carries out
operations to defeat ISIS in
Iraq and Syria


-----

following the disappearance of a Malaysian passenger plane, the ROK Armed Forces

conducted an overseas multinational coalition search operation. Furthermore, in

an effort to prevent the spread of the Ebola virus, the ROK government dispatched

the Korea Disaster Relief Team (KDRT), consisting of 6 medical officers, 9 nursing

officers, and civilian medical personnel, to Sierra Leone, one of the major West

African countries affected by the outbreak from December 2014 to March 2015.


**Akh Unit in the** The UAE requested the deployment of the ROK

**United Arab Emirates** Armed Forces in August 2010 to improve their

education and training standards, and advance their

defense system by benchmarking the ROK Armed Forces’ education and training

system. After obtaining the National Assembly’s consent, the ROK government in

January 2011 deployed the UAE Military Training Cooperation Group, known as the

Akh Unit, to the Al Ain region in response to the request. The 1st contingent had

around 130 troops, and the number increased to 150 starting with the 5th unit. The

Akh Unit was relocated to Sweihan on September 28, 2016, at the UAE General Staff

Department’s request. The UAE government fully covered the construction and

relocation cost of KRW 32 billion.

The Akh Unit provides education and training to the UAE special warfare units,

and conducts combined exercises with the UAE forces while protecting ROK

citizens during contingencies. The ROK Armed Forces is improving UAE forces’

education and training system and contributing to the enhancement of the UAE

forces’ special warfare operations execution capabilities. Meanwhile, the ROK

Armed Forces is also benefiting from the UAE by utilizing the deployment as an

opportunity to improve their special operations capabilities through exercises in

arid and high temperature desert environments that the ROK Armed forces cannot

experience back home as well as realistic exercises utilizing the UAE forces’ cutting

edge facilities and equipment.

In particular, training activities such

as high-altitude and nighttime para
chuting training, which are limited in

the ROK are carried out actively, and

the ROK Armed Forces also saves on

exercise costs by utilizing the advanced

**67)**

"brother" in Arabic

friendliness toward the

As a symbol of trust and cooperation High Altitude Low Opening of the Akh Unit people of the UAE.


-----

between the ROK and the UAE, the Akh Unit has contributed in advancing the

relationship between the two countries into a "special strategic partnership". In June

2020, the rotation between the 16th and 17th contigents of the Akh Unit took place in

the midst of the global spread of COVID-19, by utilizing the KC-330 Cygnus, a Multi

Role Tanker Transport (MRTT), which was introduced at the end of 2019 for the first

time among overseas deployment troops. This made it possible to reduce rotational

costs, and improve mission execution conditions through the transport of munitions

and firearms. Since the deployment of the Akh Unit, the ROK and the UAE have

strengthened military confidence between the two countries by engaging in active

exchanges and cooperation such as special warfare exercises and mutual visits by

delegations in the Army, Navy, and Air Force in the field of cyber and logistics. Major

activities of the Akh Unit are listed in [Chart 6-12].

[Chart 6-12] Major Activities of Akh Unit

(As of November 2020)

|Enhancement of UAE Forces’ Capabilities|• Contribution to the development of the UAE Armed Forces by improving their special warfare operations execution capabilities • Improvement of the education and training system of the UAE Armed Forces|
|---|---|
|Enhancement of ROK’s Military Capabilities|• Utilization of the cutting edge facilities and equipment of the UAE to enhance special operations capabilities • Exercises to enhance survivability under harsh conditions (high temperature above 50°C, desert) • Long-range firing exercise, High Altitude Low Opening (HALO) exercise, and mountain warfare exercise|
|Expansion of Defense Exchanges|• UAE observation of major ROK exercises and participation in ROK–UAE combined exercises • Exchange of officers for consignment education by each service of the ROK–UAE Armed Forces • Medical cooperation including the treatment of UAE military patients and families at ROK civilian hospitals • Establishment of a defense diplomacy hub in the Middle East that covers cooperation for defense exports|



4. Expansion and Development of the Foundation for Peacekeeping

Operations


**Hosting the UN Peacekeeping** The "UN Peacekeeping Ministerial Con
**Ministerial Conference** ference", scheduled to be held in the ROK in

2021, is expected to serve as an important

opportunity for the ROK, as a country that leads world peace, to strengthen its

contribution to the international community. The proposal to hold the next

conference in the ROK was made at the 3rd Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference

which was held at the UN Headquarters in March 2019. Furthermore, during


-----

President Moon̕s keynote speech at the 74th UN General Assembly in September

2019, the President declared that the ROK will be hosting the 2021 Peacekeeping

Ministerial Conference, which will be the first time that this conference will be held

in Asia. The UN Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference is the largest, highest-level

regular conference in the field of peace and security to discuss current issues in

international peacekeeping operations and promote the expansion of contributions

from each country. Defense and foreign affairs ministers from more than 150

countries[68)] attend the conference. About 110 countries participated in the 1st and

2nd conferences held in the UK and Canada in 2016 and 2017, respectively, and the

3rd conference hosted by the United Nations in 2019. Three areas of peacekeeping

operations were selected as core agendas[69)] upon consultation with 10 co-chairs[70)],

which will be discussed at the 4th conference. Members from the private sector such

as representatives of relative international organizations, academia, and press are

also expected to participate.

By hosting the Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference, the ROK government intends

to raise its stature in the international community by deriving new international

norms and pledges for peacekeeping operations in fields where the ROK gains

advantages such as new technologies and peace building. As year 2021 marks the

ROK’s 30th anniversary of joining the UN, the ROK government, through a top
level official’s speech, will deliver a message of peace on the Korean peninsula and

garner support from the international community concerning the policies on the

Korean peninsula.

At the last conference, the MND made pledges such as the ROK hosting a UN

peacekeeping training course, providing equipment including Mine-Resistant

Ambush Protected (MRAP) vehicle, and increasing the proportion of female

peacekeepers. The MND, at the next conference, plans to propose various

contribution pledges utilizing the ROK’s strengths as a technological powerhouse.

For systematic preparations for the 4th

conference, the MND and the MOFA

launched a Preparatory Committee for

the 2021 UN Peacekeeping Ministerial

Conference, cochaired by the Ministers

of National Defense and Foreign Aff
airs, and a Preparatory Secretariat for

working-level support. During two

Preparatory committee meetings in

Launching of the Preparatory Secretariat for the

May and November 2020, 10 relevant Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference (July 2020)


**68)**
Member states of the
Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations
(C34) under the UN General
Assembly.

**69)**
① Strengthening the

mission execution
capabilities

② Sustainment of peace
③ Safety and protection

of civilians


**70)**
The ROK, the United
States, the United
Kingdom, Canada,
Ethiopia, Rwanda,
Bangladesh, Indonesia,
Netherlands, Pakistan, and
Uruguay

**71)**
The group consists of
general planning, internal
cooperation (establishing
pledges), conference
management, and
promotion.


-----

**72)**
The UNMISS and
the United Nations
Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO)

**73)**
The Experts’ Working
Groups (EWGs) of the
ADMM-Plus have been
established to facilitate
cooperation in the following
areas:
① peacekeeping

operations

② counterterrorism
③ maritime security
④ military medicine
⑤ humanitarian aid and

disaster relief (disaster
relief and humanitarian
assistance)

⑥ humanitarian mine

action. One ASEAN
country and one PLUS
country assume cochairmanship of each
EWG. There are 10
ASEAN countries (Laos,
Malaysia, Myanmar,
Vietnam, Brunei,
Singapore, Indonesia,
Philippines, Cambodia,
and Thailand) and 8 Plus
countries (ROK, United
States, China, Japan,
Russia, Australia, New
Zealand, and India).

**74)**
From September 14 to
23, 2019, a PKO exercise
was conducted at the
Bogor PKO Center in
Indonesia, with a total of
370 personnel from the 18
countries that participate
in the ADMM-Plus. From
the ROK, 12 observers and
training members of the
ROK International Peace
Support Standby Force,
also known as Onnuri Unit,
participated in training
sessions in 6 areas (sexual
exploitation and abuse,
mine accidents, illegal
search, child soldiers,
security screening,
and IED).

**75)**
Exercise conducted
between April 30, 2019 and
May 13, 2019 where 18
warships, 10 aircraft, and
more than 3,500 troops
participated.


ministries including the MND and the MOFA gathered to collaborate on hosting a

successful conference by coming up with contribution pledges as the host nation that

actually benefit the UN and agreeing to strengthen inter-agency cooperation to induce

the participation of member states. In addition, the Preparatory Secretariat will consist

of four teams[71)] and will continue to make sound preparations for the successful

hosting of the Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference.

Meanwhile, in July 2020, the MND and the MOFA sent 30,000 face masks printed

with promotional phrases for the 2021 Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference to

two UN missions[72)] in Africa, which are carrying out their duties despite harsh

conditions such as the COVID-19 pandemic. The distribution fueled the international

community’s interest in the conference which will be held in 2021 and at the same

time showed the ROK’s willingness to contribute to peacekeeping operations.

**Co-chairing ADMM-Plus**

**Experts’ Working Groups on**

**PKOs and Maritime Security**

From 2014 to 2017, the ROK served as

the co-chair of the ADMM-Plus Ex
perts’ Working Group on Peacekeeping

Operations (PKO EWG)[73)] along with ADMM-Plus EWG on Maritime Security

Cambodia. In September 2014 and

September 2015, the ROK hosted a meeting of the PKO EWG in Seoul to discuss

practical ways to cooperate among the member states. In September 2019, the ROK

participated in a PKO exercise conducted in Bogor, Indonesia[74)], sharing the ROK’s

outstanding capabilities in peacekeeping operations and gaining recognition as a

leading country in peacekeeping operations in the international community. The

ROK also served as the co-chair of the ADMM-Plus EWG on Maritime Security

with Singapore from 2017 to 2020.

In May 2019, the two countries led the largest-ever[75)] live maneuver training exercise

on maritime security in the ROK and Singaporean waters. Furthermore, through

international conferences on maritime security, the ROK discussed maritime security

and confidence-building measures in international waters as well as the maritime

security capabilities of the ROK Armed Forces and multilateral cooperation activities

with the international community. Participation in the conferences has reinforced the

ROK’s stature as a responsible member of the international community and a leader

in maritime security.


-----

**Signing of MOUs on Peacekeeping** In August 2020, the MND signed

**Operations and Promoting Cooperation** an MOU on peacekeeping coo
peration with the UK and Viet
nam, and is planning to sign MOUs with Indonesia and Cambodia. After signing the

MOU on peacekeeping cooperation with Vietnam, a strategic cooperative partner of

the ROK, in September 2015, the MND dispatched combat engineers to the Vietnam

Peacekeeping Center in December 2015 and in September 2018 to train participants

on base protection and survival skills in specific crisis scenarios which may occur in

the PKO regions. Moreover, since September 2016, a total of seven Vietnamese

officers have been invited to attend the UN Staff Officers Course and Military

Experts Course at the PKO Center of the Korea National Defense University

(KNDU). This initiative contributed to strengthening the Vietnamese Armed Forces’

PKO capabilities as the participating Vietnamese officers received education and

learned know-hows on observation, surveillance, investigation, verification,

negotiation, and mediation.

On the occasion of the UK deploying an engineering unit to South Sudan in March

2017, the ROK and the UK signed an MOU on peacekeeping cooperation in January

2018 to establish an institutional foundation for further cooperation. Currently, the

ROK is continuing its cooperation with the UK on not only sharing information

related to peacekeeping but also offering the UN Staff Officers Course at the ROK’s

PKO Center to three British officers through commissioned education as of 2020.

The ROK plans to pursue MOUs with Cambodia and Indonesia as well. Cambodia

has years of experience in demining and if this experience is coupled with the

ROK’s advanced demining equipment, a synergy can be created and lead to a

new deployment model. Cooperation with Indonesia, on the other hand, will

be strengthened in areas of commissioned education, training, and information

exchanges based on its extensive experience in peacekeeping operations.

Accordingly, the ROK plans to strengthen cooperation with the ASEAN countries

by signing MOUs on peacekeeping cooperation.


**Reinforcing Functions of** The PKO Center was established as a dedicated

**the PKO Center** educational institution for PKO preparation at the

Joint Forces Staff College in August 1995. In

2015, the MND adjusted the PKO Center’s affiliation to come under the KNDU

based on the Enforcement Decree of the Act on the Establishment of the Korea

National Defense University, in order to reinforce its education and research

functions. This is also when the PKO Center was given its current official name. The


-----

PKO Center is in charge of providing pre-deployment education to key cadres of

deployed units and individually deployed personnel. It has been advancing the PKO

education system through exchanges and cooperation with the UN’s Department of

Peace Operations (DPO), the UN Division at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the

PKO centers of other countries, the Korea National Policy University UNPKO

training programs, and other relevant organizations at home and abroad. When the

deployed units or individually deployed personnel complete their missions, the PKO

Center publishes and distributes the units’ booklet on the outcomes of the

deployment and the individual agents’ mission reports to relevant offices. In

November 2013, the PKO Center received an education certificate for its UN Staff

Course from the UN DPO, and was re-certified in November 2018. The center is

currently pursuing to have the UN Observer Course certified by the UN.

[Chart 6-13] Number of Personnel Trained in the PKO Center

(As of 2020)

|Total|UN PKO|Multinational Forces’ Peace Operations|Defense Exchanges and Cooperation Activities|
|---|---|---|---|
|1,657|1,066 in 8 courses|38 in 5 courses|553 in 2 courses|



The PKO Center has been gradually expanding its functions and roles to

systematically support research, education, and training for peacekeeping operations.

In 2017, the PKO Center carried out training for instructors which was attended by

the UN and 12 countries in collaboration with the UN̕s Integrated Training Service

(ITS). In May 2018, the center hosted the annual conference of the Association of

Asia-Pacific Peacekeeping Training Center (AAPTC).[76)] In November 2019, the

PKO Center supported the MND-hosted UN Senior Mission Leaders’ Course and

contributed to the success of the course. By offering the course–which is a core

UN education program for cultivating candidates for high-ranking UN positions–

for the first time, it is expected to diversify the ROK’s contribution to peacekeeping

operations and help ROK officers advance to high-ranking positions in the UN.

Furthermore, in accordance with the ROK’s pledge to hold UN’s education programs

in the ROK from 2020 to 2024 made at the 3rd Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference

in 2019, the PKO Center plans to offer UN’s PKO courses once a year and will be

reviewing various factors caused by the COVID-19 pandemic to decide when and

how the courses will be offered.


**76)**
The annual conference of
the AAPTC was launched
in 2010, and in the 9th
conference held in the
ROK in 2018, the chief of
staff of the UN Department
of Peacekeeping
Operation and around 70
representatives from 20
member states participated
and discussed the direction
of PKO development.


-----

**Operation of a Standing Unit** Since December 2009, the ROK Armed Forces

**for Overseas Deployment** has been operating a standing unit for overseas

deployment consisting of some 4,000 troops

that can be deployed in one or two months after a PKO mission order is given. The

standing unit consists of a dedicated deployment unit of 1,000 troops, a designated

reserve unit of 1,000 troops, and a specially designated unit of 2,000 troops. The

dedicated deployment unit is the first to prepare for deployment when the need for

deployment arises. In July 2010, the International Peace Support Standby Force

(IPSSF), or "Onnuri Unit"[77)] was established as a unit devoted solely to overseas

deployment. The designated reserve unit prepares for the rotation of deployed

personnel or additional deployment, and the specially designated unit, a functional

unit, prepares for various deployment requirements. When the UN requests

deployments of engineering and medical units, the specially designated unit will

receive the required personnel mainly from the existing designated parent units

(engineering and medical) and will then be deployed. The structure of the standing

unit for overseas deployment is shown in [Chart 6-14] and the number of deployed

personnel is in [Chart 6-15].



[Chart 6-14] Structure of the Standing Unit for Overseas Deployment

|Joint Chie Standing|fs of Staff unit for|
|---|---|
|overseas deployment Dedicated Designated reserve unit Specially designated unit deployment unit (IPSSF)||



-  Specially designated unit: Engineering, medical, military police, UAV platoons (Marine Corps), transport units of

Navy and Air Force, helicopter units, etc.


**77)**
"Onnuri" is a Korean
compound word consisting
of "on", which means
"whole" and "all", and
"nuri", which means "the
world inhabited by people".
The name signifies a unit
that performs its missions
all over the world.



[Chart 6-15] Number of Personnel Deployed from the Standing Unit


(2010 - November 2020)

|Dongmyeong Unit|Ashena Unit|Akh Unit|Hanbit Unit|Total|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|7,607 (24 contingents)|1,745 (8 contingents)|2,234 (17 contingents)|3,403 (12 contingents)|14,989|


-----

5. Establishing a Response System to Protect Overseas Koreans

**Protecting Overseas Koreans** The ROK Armed Forces is reinforcing vari
ous activities to protect ROK nationals in an

active and pre-emptive manner by utilizing military assets including vessels and

transport aircraft in the event of a crisis such as major disaster or terrorism abroad.

In the past, the ROK Armed Forces has focused on assisting the rescue and transfer

of kidnapped ROK nationals as well as evacuation of ROK nationals when civil wars

broke out in Libya and Yemen, in which the tasks were mainly carried out by the

Cheonghae Unit dispatched to the Gulf of Aden. Nowadays, however, the ROK

Armed Forces is working more actively to protect ROK nationals, such as deploying

military transport aircraft and rescue teams in response to various natural disasters

and disaster situations. Recent major activities of the MND in protecting ROK

nationals utilizing military assets are shown in [Chart 6-16].

[Chart 6-16] Major Activities of the MND in Protecting the ROK Nationals

(As of November 2020)

|Period|Defense Exchanges and Cooperation Activities|
|---|---|
|October 2018|Supported military transport aircraft (C-130) for the evacuation of 799 ROK nationals isolated due to Typhoon Yutu in Saipan|
|May 2019|Dispatched a rescue team to support search-and-rescue after the Hungarian cruise ship sinking|
|February 2020|Transferred 6 ROK nationals and 1 Japanese spouse aboard a Japanese cruise ship to the ROK (Tokyo–Gimpo) (Code One, VCN-235 of the ROKAF)|
|May 2020|Supported 60 ROK nationals in Africa to return home (Addis Ababa–Incheon) (a returning air charter after transporting the 12th batch of Hanbit Unit)|
|July 2020|Deployed 2 KC-330 MRTTs to bring back home about 290 ROK workers in Iraq|



First, when ROK nationals including local tourists were isolated in Saipan due to

Typhoon Yutu in October 2018, the MND deployed a transport aircraft (C-130) for

the first time to safely transport a total of 799 people to Guam.

In the Hungarian cruise ship sinking accident[78)] in May 2019, the MND, in

cooperation with relevant organizations including the MOFA, dispatched seven

Sea Salvage and Rescue Units (SSUs) as members of the ROK government’s joint

rapid response team and provided rescue equipment. In addition, a 24-hour situation

support room was operated at the MND headquarters and the defense attaché in

Hungary was appointed as the rescue captain, making all-out efforts to search for

missing ROK nationals. This was the first case of dispatching a military rescue team

to rescue ROK nationals from a major accident that occurred abroad.

In 2020, the MND actively supported the transfer of ROK nationals who had


**78)**
An incident when the
Hungarian cruise ship
Hubbleani, which had 33
ROK nationals on board,
collided with a local cruise
ship in Danube River,
Hungary (7 survivors, 25
deaths, 1 missing)


-----

Search-and-rescue following the sinking of a
Hungarian cruise ship (May 2019)


Successfully transferred ROK workers in Iraq to
return home with KC-330 (July 2020)


difficulty returning to the homeland after restrictions in immigration were applied in

each country due to the global spread of COVID-19. In February, the MND deployed

an exclusive presidential aircraft (ROKAF aircraft #3, VCN-235) to transport 7

people, including 6 ROK nationals and 1 Japanese spouse aboard a Japanese cruise

ship to the ROK. In May, the MND helped 60 overseas Koreans from various parts

of the African continent return to their homes using an air charter which was to

return to the ROK after transporting the 12th contingent of the Hanbit Unit deploying

to South Sudan to carry out its mission. In the course of the rotation, the Hanbit Unit

also provided face masks to the ROK nationals in South Sudan and supported the

infection prevention activities.

In July, amid a situation where more than 2,000 confirmed cases occurred daily in

Iraq, the MND deployed two KC-330 MRTTs to support the prompt return of around

290 ROK workers in Iraq. This was the first case where an MRTT was deployed

to transport ROK nationals, and the ROK’s government joint rapid response team

composed of the MND, the MOFA, military medical personnel, and quarantine

officers supported the safe entry of workers.


**Establishing a Response System to** The MND is establishing a response

**Protect Overseas Koreans** system related to the military’s deploy
ment of emergency relief personnel

and resources to protect overseas Koreans. Accordingly, in September 2019, the

MND completely revised the Working-level Manual on Responding to Crisis to

Protect Overseas Koreans, which stipulates the response procedures and measures to

be taken by the MND in the event of a crisis abroad. The revised manual includes an

update on the types of crises that may occur and presents guidelines for military

asset support for prompt measures in the future. Moreover, the MND’s support for

transferring ROK workers in Iraq in July 2020 provided an opportunity to prepare


-----

detailed procedures on deploying KC-330 MRTTs and respond in a timely manner in

the event of a related situation, such as the transfer of ROK nationals during the

COVID-19 pandemic.

Meanwhile, considering the fact that government-wide cooperation is crucial

in protecting ROK nationals, the MND, together with relevant agencies and

organizations, is establishing an organic cooperation system through combined

situational exercises and meetings in preparation for crisis situations of ROK

nationals. The MND will continue to cooperate with relevant organizations

including the MOFA as well as each military service to complement and develop

the response system that will protect and rescue ROK nationals from various crisis

situations occurring around the world.


-----

-----

##### Chapter
# 7

## Embedding an Inclusive Culture in the Military: With the People, Trusted by the People

Section 1 Embedding a New Barracks Culture Trusted by the People
Section 2 Improving the Welfare and Working Environment for

Servicemembers

Section 3 Reorganizing the Military Medical System
Section 4 Reinforcing Human Rights Protection for Servicemembers
Section 5 Reinforcing Support for Discharged and Retiring Servicemembers,

and Privileges for War Veterans


-----

-----

## 1 Embedding a New Barracks

#### Culture Trusted by the People

By innovating the barracks culture, the ROK Armed Forces has made significant

achievements, including reduced casualties and desertion from duty. Accordingly, the

MND aims to embed a new barracks culture trusted by the people by ensuring a level

of autonomy and human rights for servicemembers that match the expectation of the

people while maintaining military readiness.

1. Fostering a Barracks Culture Driven by Autonomy and

Responsibility


**Harmony between Autonomy** Efforts to innovate the barracks culture,

**and Responsibility** promoted since 2014, has made significant

achievements such as reduction in casualties

and abandonment of military duty or post without permission. As such, it is being

well-received by the public for fostering a worry-free service environment. However,

with the public’s expectation on human rights and welfare of servicemembers

increasing, calls for cultivating a barracks culture that harmonizes autonomy and

responsibility while the ROK Armed Forces maintains a steadfast readiness posture

are continued.

Therefore, the MND will continue to make efforts to foster a sound barracks

life where creative thoughts and diversity of servicemembers are respected, and

strive to cultivate a barracks culture of autonomy and responsibility to enable

servicemembers to transform into "democratic citizens in uniforms" who can take

responsibility for their behavior.


**Use of Personal Mobile Phones** As an effort to relieve the sense of isolation

among servicemembers, receive-only mo
bile phones for common use and public video telephones have been provided since

2015. Moreover, to guarantee servicemembers’ basic rights in a wider scope, the

MND collected opinions from all members and conducted a trial operation before

fully allowing the "use of mobile phones after work" in July 2020. The use of mobile


Use of mobile
phones at
barracks after work


-----

Use of mobile phones by servicemembers (for self-development and communication with outside)

phones not only alleviated the sense of disconnection from society for

servicemembers but also contributed to the improvement of combat capabilities and

unity of military units by facilitating communication among unit members. In

addition, by allowing servicemembers to use their mobile phones to engage in self
development activities such as attending online courses, acquiring certificates, and

obtaining employment and business establishment information, it laid the foundation

for a sound, productive barracks life.

Meanwhile, to prevent security violations resulting from mobile phone use by

servicemembers, pertinent regulations have been enacted and a "defense mobile

security app" that controls the photo function on mobile phones has been developed

and is in use.

In order to eradicate side effects such as illegal gambling and digital sex offenses

in advance, the MND strives to reinforce preventive measures to minimize adverse

effects by coming up related contents with outside expert agencies and nurture

professional military instructors.


**Off-post Activities after** To help servicemembers prepare for their

**Working Hours on Weekdays** missions by providing sufficient rest and

autonomy as much as possible, off-post

activities by servicemembers after working hours on weekdays have been allowed in

earnest since February 2019 while considering the special characteristics of each unit

and the need to maintain military readiness.

Each individual is allowed to take

advantage of off-post activities up to

twice a month under the approval of the

commander, and can carry out small

group solidarity activities, hospital

visits, and meetings with family

members, as long as they do not interfere

with the military readiness posture.

Servicemembers enjoying off-post activities after

Off-post activities after working working hours on a weekday


-----

[Chart 7-1] Survey on the Perception of Servicemembers Toward Off-Post Activiities

after Working Hours on Weekdays

Postive Negative Don’t know


89.6%


89.1%


90.5%


Relieves the sense of

isolation


Alleviates stress Unity among unit

members


-  [Source: Korea Institute for Defense Analyses (KIDA, 2019)]

hours on weekdays have a positive impact not only inside the military but also outside

the military. Off-post activities relieve the sense of isolation and stress as well as

promote unity among unit members and strengthen mutual prosperity with the local

community. The MND plans to steadfastly allow off-post activities after working

hours on weekdays to ensure sufficient rest and autonomy of servicemembers.

**Fostering a Barracks Culture**

**that Respects Cultural Diversity**

The ROK society is undergoing rapid

trans-formation into a multicultural

society as the number of registered

foreign nationals has increased from

850,000 in 2008 to 1.27 million in An event inviting children from multicultural families

on Children’s Day

2019; hence it is necessary for the

military to recognize diversity as well. The MND has continued to make efforts to

create a barracks culture where social minorities, including servicemembers from

multicultural families, can live together as fellow members with others without being

subject to discrimination.

The MND will further reinforce education to enhance servicemembers’ awareness

of the multicultural society and establish related systems so as to improve the level of

understanding of cultural diversity among service-members and prevent any dispute

between members arising from discriminatory treatment. Through these efforts,

the MND will facilitate cultural diversity in barracks to contribute to fostering of a

creative barracks culture.


-----

2. Spreading a Barracks Culture wherein Basic Rights and Lives are

Respected

**Reinforcing Activities to Eradicate**

**Irrationalities**


The ROK Armed Forces has made a

wide variety of efforts to eradicate

irrationalities within the military to

"embed a high-morale military culture

of being with the people and trusted by Self-governing committee of servicemembers (top
notch servicemember system of the Air Force)

the people" and resolve the hardships of

servicemembers.

In order to eradicate unreasonable practices and irregularities, the MND is

conducting on-site inspections and providing education for key personnel related

to unit operation, and is reviewing the introduction of a self-governing system for

enlisted servicemembers to observe the rules voluntarily and plan and implement

self-correction activities. Furthermore, the MND will continue to make efforts to

select and reward excellent units for eradicating irrational practices.


**Prohibition of Giving Orders or Using** Due to the nature of the mission,

**Servicemembers for Personal Purposes** the military needs to maintain a

strict top-down relationship. Still,

servicemembers should also be able to refuse any illegal orders or instructions given

for personal purposes. The Framework Act on Military Status and Service stipulates

that even a superior officer may not issue any order unrelated to his or her duties or

beyond his or her authority. In line with this provision, the MND has prepared

provisions prohibiting superior officers from giving instructions to or using

servicemembers for personal purposes in the Unit Management Directive,

regulations of each service, and guidelines for violators.

In addition, to eradicate personal orders, the MND issued the "guidelines for

eradicating abuse of power in the defense domain" in May 2019 and presented

specific cases in the guidelines and introduced strict punishment standards by

revising the "Directive for Disciplinary Actions against Military Personnel and

Civilians".


-----

**Use of Proper Language**

In keeping with the growing impor
tance of human rights and as verbal

violence such as abusive language and

swear words causes various accidents

and incidents in the military, the ROK

Armed Forces is making efforts to A course from the Korean Language Culture

Outreach School

create a culture based on communi
cation, consideration toward others, and mutual respect among servicemembers by

promoting the use of proper language in barracks.

To promote the use of proper language among servicemembers, the MND has

published a guideline on language use in barracks and a comic book on the use of

appropriate language in barracks, and updated a special digital comic series on

The Korea Defense Daily. The MND also selects the "Barracks Language Leading

Unit". In addition, in collaboration with the National Institute of Korean Language,

the MND encourages servicemembers to take "Korean Language Culture Outreach

School" courses.

In the future, guided by the belief that "a positive barracks culture begins with

language that shows respect and consideration for others", the MND will continue to

develop effective ways to ensure the use of proper language among servicemembers.


**Identifying and** To ensure that servicemembers complete their

**Resolving Difficulties** military service in a healthy manner, the MND

operates a variety of systems to identify diffi
culties that they might face during their service period and to resolve them in a

timely manner. Servicemembers who are accustomed to living in free environments

could receive more stress or face more difficulties due to the controlled environment

and group living. As a proactive mea
sure to control the factors that may

interfere with adjustment to military

service, the MND conducts periodic

personality tests in four stages and

offers various programs including

assigning professional counselors in

battalions and lower units and the

Green Camp to provide psychological On-the-spot counseling


-----

counseling and therapy for servicemembers who are experiencing difficulties. In

addition, the MND continues to extend the scope of counseling through the National

Defense Help Call Center, which provides counseling and receives reports 24/7 and

operates various complaint reporting and management programs to identify and deal

with difficulties in a rapid, precise manner.

The MND, together with the Korea Institute for Defense Analyses (KIDA),

plans to take a more preventive approach to the issue by improving the reliability

of the personality test, supplement the education system for enhanced expertise

of professional counselors in barracks, and scientifically analyze the counseling

details of the National Defense Help Call Center to use them as data for preventing

accidents.

[Chart 7-2] Average Number of Daily Counseling Sessions at National Defense Help

Call Center

(As of November 2020, unit: cases)

|Year|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|No. of Sessions|47|111|159|176|170|134|159|


*[ ][As of September 1, 2018, public cyber counseling sessions are no longer available for the protection of ]

servicemembers’ privacy.

[Chart 7-3] Increase in Number of Professional Counselors by Year


(As of 2020, unit: persons)

|Year|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|No. of Counselors|95|148|207|246|297|346|383|383|522|633|



**Reinforcing the Suicide Prevention** In order to prevent noncombat casual
**Capabilities of Servicemembers** ties and protect precious lives, the

MND strives to ensure that all ser
vicemembers serve as "Gate-Keepers"[1)] in charge of preventing suicides. To this end,

the MND produces tailored educational content of "see-listen-talk"[2) ]certified by the

Ministry of Health and Welfare (MOHW) and offers suicide prevention education at

least semiannually with suicide prevention instructors. The MND also operates an

integrated suicide prevention system that consists of three phases–identification,

management, and separation–to help servicemembers adapt to the military service

and prevent suicide. In cooperation with the Military Manpower Administration

(MMA) and MOHW, the MND provides continuous treatment to servicemembers

who had been discharged early due to maladjustment to military service as a result


**1)**
A person who discovers
those at risk of suicide
early and enables them
to receive counseling
and treatment from a
professional agency
(professional counselor
in barracks) and provides
management and support
to prevent any suicide
attempts by those at risk of
suicide in an emergency.

**2)**
Educational content to
"see" signs of suicide for
those at risk of suicide, to
"listen" to their thoughts
and to "talk" to give them
advice.


-----

of psychiatric issues, among others,

through social security services for

psychology, welfare, and employment

even after their discharge.

The MND is enhancing the expertise

of suicide prevention instructors by

providing them with commissioned

training at professional institutions, (Army) Cultivating suicide prevention instructors

and these instructors are carrying out

itinerant education at each region for key personnel related to unit manage-ment such

as commanders.

In addition, to ensure the early stabilization of the unit where suicide incident has

occurred and the psychological stability of those involved, the MND will continue

to endeavor to embed a culture of respect for life by requiring commanders to

participate in suicide prevention education and establishing a healing program model

for post-management.

[Chart 7-4] Number of Suicide Prevention Instructors Trained by Year

(As of 2020, unit: persons)

|Year|2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|No. of Instructors|540|434|550|534|653|664|668|822|650|808|377|


-----

## 2 Improving the Welfare and

#### Working Environment for Servicemembers

Military welfare is a critical factor in determining the level of performance of combat

power as well as improving the quality of life and morale of servicemembers. Accordingly,

the MND is creating a sound environment for servicemembers to focus solely on their

duties through drastic improvements in military welfare, such as raising the salaries and

allowances of servicemembers, enhancing the military barracks, increasing support

for self-development, improving clothing and meals, and advancing residential support

programs for career servicemembers.

1. Drastic Improvement of Service Conditions


**Reasonable Remuneration for** To provide reasonable remuneration for

**Military Service** those fulfilling their military duty and en
hance the nation’s responsibility to this

matter, the MND promotes annual increase in the salary of servicemembers, and by

2022, it will amount to 50% of the 2017 minimum wage. As of 2020, the salary[3)] has

been raised to 40% of the 2017 minimum wage, and will be raised up to KRW

676,000 by 2022 based on the salary of sergeants.

In association with the raise, the MND signed MOUs with 14 commercial banks

in August 2018 and launched the Soldiers Preparing for Tomorrow Installment

Savings[4)] to provide lump sum money for servicemembers to propel themselves

into the civilian society following discharge. Since then, the number of subscribers

and accumulated money have continued to increase, surpassing 325,000 cumulative

subscribers as of November 2020 with each individual saving an average of KRW

288,000 a month.

Moreover, the remuneration and allowances for military personnel–which serve as

important factors in the acquisition and preservation of outstanding personnel–are

being improved to a reasonable, objective level in consideration of the characteristics

of military service and the operations and working environment. In 2019, salaried

volunteer servicemembers were paid the same amount of remuneration as regular

sergeants, and encouragement allowances for short-term NCOs were increased from


**3)**
Servicemembers’
salary increase in 2020
(compared to 2017)

-  Sergeant: KRW 216,000

→ KRW 540,900

-  Corporal: KRW 195,000

→ KRW 488,200

-  Private first class: KRW

176,400 → KRW 441,700

-  Private: KRW 163,000 →

KRW 408,100

**4)**
The Soldiers Preparing
for Tomorrow Installment
Savings offers highinterest rates of 5% and
tax exemptions, with
individuals allowed to save
up to KRW 400,000 per
month.


-----

KRW 2.5 million to KRW 5 million; thus partially mitigating the difficulty in hiring

NCOs. The MND also plans to gradually expand the current military service credit

of National Pension[5)], which recognizes only six months of military service, to cover

the entire period of military service for servicemembers on active duty and others

who suffer from delayed entry into civilian society due to military service.


**Improvement of Military** Since 2003, the MND has been pursuing programs

**Barracks** to modernize crowed and deteriorated military

barracks to improve the living conditions of

servicemembers and provide them with comfortable living environments. In order to

transform military barracks from a simple accommodation space to a residential and

living space, the MND has replaced floor-type barracks shared by a platoon (30-50

members) with bed-type quarters shared by a squad (8-10 members). In addition, the

living area per person has been expanded from 2.3㎡ to 6.3㎡, and all sanitary

facilities and amenities (washrooms, toilets, libraries, and gyms) have been

integrated into the barracks area and are being modernized. The modernization

project is expected to be completed in line with the finalization of unit reorganization

in 2026, under the yearly improvement plan linked to Defense Reform 2.0.

On the other hand, for units excluded from the modernization program pending

[Chart 7-5] Comparison between Before and After Modernization of Barracks


**5)**
Military service credit is
a system that recognizes
a six-month subscription
period for a person who
has joined the military
after January 1, 2008
and served for at least six
months, with all expenses
incurred paid by the state.

|Category|Col2|Before Modernization|After Modernization (Integrated Barracks)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Space allocation within barracks||• (Enlisted) Barracks • (Cadre) Company commander’s room, company administration section|• (Enlisted) Barracks, sanitary facilities, amenities, etc. • (Cadre) Company commander’s room, company administration section, office of battalion staff, etc.|
|Space for enlisted|Barracks|• Platoon-sized (30-50 members) floor- type structure 2.3㎡ per person|• Squad-sized (8-10 members) bed-type structure • 6.3㎡ per person|
||Sanitary facilities|• Located in separate buildings outside barracks No shower room or facilities for washing combat boots|• Modernized washrooms, toilets, and baths inside barracks • Shower room, facilities for washing combat boots newly installed|
||Amenities|• Located in separate buildings outside barracks No cyber knowledge information facilities, fitness centers, table tennis facilities, etc.|• Libraries, cyber information facilities, fitness centers, and other amenities newly installed or expanded inside barracks • Kiosks inside barracks|
|Space for cadre|Administration, operations and training facilities|• Only the company commander’s room and company administration section are located inside barracks • Battalion administration facilities are in separate buildings outside barracks|• Commander’s room, office of staff section, command and control room, communications office, meeting rooms inside integrated barracks|


-----

disestablishment or relocation, the MND is striving to address the residential

inconvenience of servicemembers by providing priority support for repairing aged

facilities in consideration of the period during which the facilities have been in use

and the conditions of each unit.


**Improving the Quality of** The MND continues to improve clothing and

**Clothing and Other** personal gears to maintain the combat mission

**Personal Gears** execution capabilities of servicemembers and

increase their satisfaction with their barracks life.

First, regarding combat clothing, the MND distributed 22,000 uniforms that

have been upgraded to a flame-resistant two piece uniform in order to ensure the

survivability of crew members and improve the wearing comfort for all tracked

vehicle crew members in 2019. To guarantee the conditions for combat missions

during hot season, a new patrol cap with a visor (Army) will be provided to replace

combat shirts and berets starting 2020 while combat goggles will be supplied to all

servicemembers.

In connection with clothing that servicemembers use and wear most frequently


**<Improved and Newly Distributed Combat Uniforms>**

Tracked vehicle crew uniform Flame-resistant navy

working uniform


Combat shirt Combat goggles


**<Quality Improvement for Clothes / Gears Suitable for Ordinary Life>**

Track shoes Padded jumper Sports cap Water bottle


during their military life, padded jumpers were supplied to front-line soldiers in 2019

and were further distributed to all enlisted servicemembers in the following year.

The MND also improved the quality of running shoes and sports caps, and expanded

the distribution of running shirts and underwear, considering the preference of

servicemembers. In addition, the MND plans to provide a variety of supplies which


-----

are used most frequently during military life, such as easy-wash water bottles

with enhanced thermal cooling functions and sleeping bags with improved filling

materials.

As for personal gears, in order to ensure that servicemembers in each battalion can

exercise their combat power to the fullest extent, the MND distributed a set of gears

including bulletproof vests and helmets, personal tents, and tactical backpacks and

vests across all GOP divisions (combat units) by 2015. It plans to supply the set to

all servicemembers by 2020. The MND is minimizing the overlapping of functions

between items caused by the practice of developing and improving items based

on single units, and is in the process of developing a clothing layering system[6)] to

enhance both thermal and convenience functions even if clothing and gears are worn

in layers.

The MND will continue its efforts to develop and improve clothing and personal

gears in a manner that reflects the future battlefield environment and improves the

welfare of servicemembers, and will enhance the combat power of the military by

distributing improved clothing and personal gears early on.

**Healthy and Safe Diet** The ROK Armed Forces provides safe, nutritious,

and balanced meals designed to maintain the health

and combat power of servicemembers. Considering the amount of daily activities

and energy consumption of servicemembers due to education and training, meals are

planned and provided based on a 3,000 kcal standard[7)], which is higher than the

regular adult standard of 2,600 kcal. In addition, the MND continues to raise the

basic meal expenses[8)] for servicemembers to provide them with high-quality meals

preferred by the new generation of servicemembers.

[Chart 7-6] Increase of Daily Basic Meal Expenses per Servicemember

(As of December 2019, unit: KRW, %)

|Year|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Unit price|7,190|7,334|7,481|7,855|8,012|8,493|
|Rate of increase|5.0|2.0|2.0|5.0|2.0|6.0|



Meals are planned based on servicemembers’ preferences as identified through

annual satisfaction surveys. In 2020, the MND increased the amount of food

preferred by servicemembers, such as pork, ginseng chicken soup, duck meat, and

beef ribs. In addition, more than 20 items, including sea eel, blueberry, and Shine

Muscat grapes, have been selected as new food items[9)] through tasting events or test


Military Meal
Upgrade Project

Meals and clothing
monitoring group
comprised of mothers

**6)**
Clothing layering system,
as the word "layering"
suggests, is a functional
clothing system that
prevents heat loss in
humans due to weather
(temperature, wind,
and rain) and physical
conditions (sweat,
breathing), among others.

**7)**
After referring to a research
conducted by KIDA,
the nutrition standards
for servicemembers
were reset from 3,100
kcal to 3,000 kcal after
considering the changes in
the physical conditions and
military living conditions of
servicemembers.

**8)**
Expenses purely incurred
by food including main
menus, side dishes, and
desserts.

**9)**
Seasoned and stewed
beef ribs, frozen fried rice
(japchae, whole shrimp),
beef bulgogi rice with
sauce, sweet and sour
pork, chicken tenders, 6
types of ramen with rice
(snacks), peeled chestnut,
shine muscat, blueberry,
honey, milk (side dish),
sea eel, freshwater snail,
cockle, scallops, trout,
Korean sandlance, dried
pollack head, sand lance
extract, wild seafood pack,
etc.


-----

meals, thus providing a wide variety of food to servicemembers.

In 2019, the scope of the Meal Innovation Project[10)]–which recorded high satis
faction among servicemembers–has been further expanded to provide brunch

services from two units to all units; the number of meals other than those provided

at military food halls (food trucks, dining out, etc.) has also been increased from

twice a year to four times a year. In 2020, units with reduced amount of food waste

were allowed to carry out additional Meal Innovation Projects. Civilian cooks are

stationed in all kitchens regardless of the size of the kitchen to improve the taste

of meals for servicemembers. This is expected to open up positions in the combat

service support field for the private sector thereby creating more jobs.

[Chart 7-7] Civilian Cooks in the ROK Armed Forces


(Unit: persons)


|Year|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total|1,547|1,586|1,721|1,767|1,841|1,903|1,982|1,987|
|Increase|74|39|135|46|74|62|79|5|
|Operating standards (No. of users)|140 or more|130 or more|120 or more|110 or more|100 or more|90 or more|80 or more||


Automatic mess tray Mess tray scanning Stewed ribs Stir-fried Shredded
scanning before and before and after meals 139g zucchini radish salad

after meals 198kcal 34g 29kcal 39g 18kcal

Cookies

36g 183kcal

Spinach soybean

paste soup

210g 37kcal

Accurate measurement Data Brown rice

of leftover foods per user processing 205g 298kcal

/ side dish and provision

Automatic meal measuring system Automatic meal measuring scanner

From 2019 to 2020, the MND operated a pilot "automatic meal measuring system",

capitalizing on artificial intelligence (AI) and 3D scanners, for the first time at a

single unit. The actual amount of consumption and the amount of leftover for nine

items, including rice, kimchi, and squid, were measured, and the standard amount

for each item was reset based on the data. This initiative contributed to the efficient

use of ingredients and improvement of meal satisfaction, and it is planned to be

expanded to more units in the future.

Furthermore, the MND has been implementing "allergy-inducing food labeling

system"[11)] since 2015 for the safety of servicemembers allergic to certain foods, with


**10)**
The project is
autonomously
implemented according
to the conditions of each
unit by means such as
providing brunches, meals
other than those provided
at military food halls (food
trucks, dining out, etc.),
and multiple and personally
selected menu items.

**11)**
Labeling required for:
eggs, milk, buckwheat,
peanuts, soybeans, wheat,
mackerel, crab, shrimp,
pork, peaches, tomato,
sulfuric acid, walnut,
chicken, beef, squid, and
shellfish


-----

alternative foods provided[12)] since 2020 to servicemembers with limited choice of

food due to various factors such as vegetarian diet and religion.

In 2014, the MND launched the "Mothers’ Monitoring Group", through which

mothers of servicemembers participate in joint hygiene inspections at plants that

manufacture food supplied to the military and review the quality of meals provided

to their children; thus contributing to raising the standard of military meals.

Mothers’ Monitoring Group visits the cafeteria and military meal supplier

As military meals are consumed by a large group of people at the same time, they

require safety and hygiene control at each stage–from supplier contracts to actual

servings. Therefore, companies certified with a Hazard Analysis Critical Control

Point (HACCP) are preferred, and military suppliers are subject to biannual hygiene

inspections and nonscheduled inspections in the summer, which are conducted in

collaboration with the Ministry of Food and Drug Safety. If any violation is found

during an inspection, punishment under the pertinent statutes such as corrective

action, fines, and suspension of business and reduction of points in the contract

bidding for the following year are enforced.


Chungcheong
Province Food

Distribution Center

(Daejeon, 2016)


Gyeongsang

Province Food

Distribution Center

(Daegu, 2017)


Gyeonggi Province

Food Distribution

Center

(Byeolnae, 2018)


Gangwon Province

Food Distribution

Center

(Sinnam, 2020)


Jeolla Province Food

Distribution Center
(Jangseong, 2012)


**12)**
2020 meal policy: For
servicemembers who
prefer vegetarian food and
those who are restricted
from eating certain foods
due factors such as religion
or food allergies, alternative
edible items among
available items such as
rice, seaweed, vegetables,
fruits, and (silken) tofu
may be provided during
meals in consideration of
the unit’s meal conditions;
soya milk may be
provided to vegetarian
servicemembers instead of
milk.


The MND also operates military food distribution centers furnished with

modern equipment to maintain the freshness of food ingredients and plans to

continue expanding the facilities so as to further reinforce food safety and hygiene

management.

Moreover, in 2019, the MND entered into a business agreement for the

development of military meals with the Ministry of Agriculture, Food, and Rural

Affairs and the Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries with an aim to expand consumption


-----

of quality agricultural, livestock, and fisheries products and reinforce the cooking

capabilities within the military through cooking classes for military cooks and

culinary competition for servicemembers. The MND will steadfastly strengthen its

cooperation in various fields to improve the quality and taste of military meals.

2. Expanded Self-Development Opportunities During Military Service


**Education Tailored to Each** To encourage the self-development of each

**Educational Attainment and** servicemember, the MND offers a variety of

**Acquisition of Certificate** opportunities such as providing education

tailored to each educational attainment and

supporting servicemembers’ acquisition of certificates. With tailored learning, the

MND provides "Distance Learning Course" and "credit recognition for military

service" for those who join the military while attending university. Distance

Learning Course allows servicemembers to take and earn credits from official online

courses of the universities that they attended before they began their service. As of

2020, 161 universities, including Seoul National University, are participating in this

initiative and 50% of the tuition has been subsidized since 2019 to increase the

attendance rate. The credit system for military service, on the other hand, recognizes

the educational experience of servicemembers obtained through education and

training during their military service as academic credits. Starting with 11

universities, including Kyungin National University of Education, in 2019, a total of

35 universities including Seoul National University are now participating in the

system. High school graduates are provided support to obtain a (professional)

bachelor̕s degree associated with the self-study system and e-MU[13)] universities, and


**13)**

-  Self-study system: In

order to offer self-taught
students an opportunity
to earn a bachelor’s
degree, the state awards
a bachelor’s degree to
those who pass the fourstage qualification exam
(general education →
basic core → advanced
core → comprehensive
exam).

-  Electronic-Military

University (e-MU): A
system for graduates
of military specialized
high schools to earn a
(professional) bachelor’s
degree from universities
that entered into an
agreement with the
military (6 universities)
from corporals to
salaried volunteer
servicemembers for a
limited term.



[Chart 7-8] Tailored Learning and National Technical Qualification Year-On-Year Report

(As of December 2020, unit: courses and persons)

|Category|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|No. of universities offering distance learning courses|134|141|145|154|161|
|No. of universities offering recognized credits for military service|-|-|-|17|35|
|No. of personnel with recognized educational attainments equal to those of high school graduates|1,838|492|258|117|89|
|Servicemembers who acquired a national technical qualification|20,653|19,436|19,530|17,920|5,690|


-  [No practical test held to acquire national technical qualification in the second half of 2020 due to COVID-19.]


-----

those with no high school diploma are provided with support for purchasing learning

materials and one-on-one learning instructors to obtain academic qualifications (a

pass in the GED test).

To help servicemembers acquire state-certified technical qualifications, the MND

offers biannual tests for 81 national technical qualification tests including the test

for industrial engineer information processing, and all-year-round tests for heavy

equipment (forklift and excavator) operator. Through these tests, around 18,000

servicemembers acquire national technical qualifications every year.


**Financial Support for** Since 2018, the MND has been implementing the

**Self-Development** self-development cost support system[14)] for enlisted

servicemembers to finance part of the cost required

for self-development so as to guarantee the self-development conditions for

servicemembers. Each servicemember receives up to KRW 100,000 a year to cover

language and qualification examination fees and costs for purchasing learning

materials. As such, the MND will continue to expand related budgets to guarantee

the self-development conditions.

3. Advancing Residential Support Programs for Career Servicemembers

Guaranteeing a stable residential environment is a crucial element that affects

the mission execution capabilities and morale of career servicemembers. To this

end, under the Framework Act on Military Welfare, the MND supports career

servicemembers by providing official residences and officer’s quaters and lease

support for civilian houses, and is implementing various residential support

policies such as preferential supply of civilian houses to servicemembers to raise

the percentage of homeowners among career servicemembers. In April 2020 in

particular, the military residential policy division was established under the MND’s

Military Installations Planning Bureau; thus laying the foundation for integrated

and systematic development of military housing. To increase servicemembers’

satisfaction with housing and to create conditions that allow them to focus on their

duties, the MND plans to implement a wide variety of policies to minimize the

burden on the national defense budget while reasonably improving the poor living

conditions of career servicemembers.


**14)**
The self-development
support system for
servicemembers began
in 2018 as a pilot project
(KRW 100 million budget,
annual support of KRW
50,000 per individual,
50% co-payment), and
its budget was expanded
to KRW 2 billion in 2019
(annual support of KRW
50,000 per individual, 50%
co-payment) and KRW
8 billion in 2020 (annual
support of KRW 100,000
per year, 20% co-payment).


-----

**Tailored Residential Support** In December 2018, the MND established a

tailored residential support plan in consi
deration of the regional characteristics of users and units in order to provide

residential support considering the demand of career servicemembers. As a result,

the MND is improving old official residences while undergoing intensive renovation

on accommodations to ensure stable service conditions for officers. Moreover, in

March 2020, the demand standards of official residences and accommodations for

cadres–which had been uniformly applied across the country–were improved to

match reality; based on this, the MND plans to provide housing suitable for each

regional characteristic. The MND is currently under consultation with relevant

agencies regarding matters on residential support such as improvements in

subscription system for long-term servicemembers to raise the percentage of

homeowners among career servicemembers and increasing the supply of land for

non-home-owning servicemembers, as well as improving the special supply system

for servicemembers to ensure that the actual demand and the housing supply are

more efficiently associated with each other.


**Diversification of** The MND plans to provide high-quality residential

**Housing Supply** support by diversifying the supply method of civilian

houses. In the past, houses for servicemembers were

supplied directly through construction, purchases, and Build-Transfer-Lease (BTL)

arrangements. However, these arrangements require massive financial resources,

and rapid deterioration of these houses may occur without proper maintenance. In

order to address these issues, the MND expanded the housing options of officers

through the supply of residential facilities based on civilian housing by means such

as covering the amount of deposit-based (jeonse) lease[15)] and establishing a monthly

rent-based lease support system in November 2019. The MND also seeks to

capitalize on public rental housing to address the inconveniences experienced by

servicemembers, as consumers, in using deposit-based and monthly rent-based lease

support systems such as securing leased properties, paying for the real estate agent

commission, and uncertainty in collecting deposit.


**Ensuring Professional** The MND is taking measures to ensure pro
**Management and Operation of** fessional management and operation of resi
**Residential Facilities** dential facilities to maintain their quality

and ensure their long-term use. Military re
sidential facilities deteriorate faster than civilian houses mainly because the facilities


**15)**
20% increase in the
amount of support for
deposit-based lease: KRW
138 million (2018) → 164
million (2019) on average.


-----

are managed by servicemembers and civilian military employees in each unit, who

are rather unprofessional, which results in inefficient management. Cognizant of the

need for efficient and professional facility management to maintain the quality and

ensure the long-term use of the residential facilities, the MND is currently seeking to

promote integrated management for each region through outsourcing to the private

sector. To this end, the MND launched a pilot program for the consigned

management of residential facilities in the 1st Corps region in January 2018, and

converted approximately 30,000 households to consigned management by 2019.

Also, the MND is gradually expanding consigned management of residential

facilities. In October 2018, to ensure the proper maintenance and repair of facilities,

the MND established the "standards of responsibilities for repairing military

residential facilities" to clarify the distribution of repair responsibilities between the

state and individuals. By maintaining residential facilities in good condition through

acceptable budget and responsibility distribution, the MND will continue to make

efforts to help servicemembers and their family members live in a more pleasant

environment.


-----

## 3 Reorganizing the Military

#### Medical System

The ROK Armed Forces is strengthening their military medical capabilities in essential

areas to build a military medical system trusted by both servicemembers and the public,

while actively capitalizing on civilian medical resources when providing medical services.

1. Improving the Military Medical System Geared Toward

Servicemembers


**Modernizing Military Medical Facilities** The MND plans to improve dete
riorated medical corps at division
level units and below as well as hospitals supporting forward corps to ensure that

servicemembers can receive treatment in a comfortable environment.

Of the total 75 division-level medical corps buildings, 24 buildings that are old

will be improved one after another by the end of 2025, while the renovation of 7 old

medical facilities in units scheduled to be disbanded or relocated were completed in

2020. Among the hospitals supporting forward corps, the Armed Forces Hospitals in

Hongcheon, Gangneung, Yangju, and Chuncheon will be modernized sequentially

by 2024 in connection with the Army̕s unit reorganization plan.


**Functional Adjustments and Specialization** In order to ensure higher levels

**of Military Medical Institutions** of medical services for ser
vicemembers by efficiently

utilizing limited military medical capabilities, the MND is making adjustments

towards specializing the functions of each military medical institution through

"selection and concentration".

16 military hospitals were specialized by area such as surgery, mental health,

outpatient, nursing, and medical checkup, and the equipment and personnel have

been reassigned in phases according to the level of treatment and available care

provided by each military hospital by end of 2020. The Armed Forces Busan


-----

Hospital was disbanded in October 2020, and the Armed Forces Capital Hospital will

open a trauma center to secure its own ability to provide complete medical treatment

for patients with military trauma such as gunshot wounds and blast injuries.

With regard to division-level medical corps, pilot projects to adjust functions with

the goal of reinforcing primary care functions of division-level and below medical

corps are being carried out at two divisions in 2019 and four divisions in 2020. In

addition, it plans to pursue the opening of division medical corps as clinic-level

medical institutions by strengthening the outpatient care function such as replacing

and upgrading old video and inspection equipment and assigning additional 3-5

short-term medical officers by 2022.


**Improving the Use of** As most servicemembers visit military hospitals using

**Military Hospitals** outpatient buses, a high concentration of patients

gather at a certain period of time, and the procedures

for servicemembers’ families to enter military hospitals for visits are complicated.

To resolve these issues, the MND is making efforts to improve the convenience of

using military hospitals.

First, the MND is increasing the number of outpatient buses, adjusting the work

hours of medical staff to match the visiting hours of servicemembers and opening

additional consultation rooms for departments in high demand to ensure that

servicemembers can receive satisfactory treatment through outpatient services.

With regard to medical access of servicemembers in the front line in particular,

the outpatient system for each region has been reorganized by more than doubling

the number of buses for hospitals supporting front corps. In 2021, the MND plans

to improve the conditions for utilizing military medical institutions by consigning

to the private sector the operation of outpatient buses which had been run by

servicemembers at division-level medical corps in some of the frontline areas with

poor traffic environment.

At the same time, for the Armed Forces Capital Hospital facilities located outside

the military installations protection zones that require access control, full entry of

family members of servicemembers has been allowed without any restrictions as in

civilian hospitals, and guide personnel has been assigned. Furthermore, the MND

plans to conduct further review to determine whether to apply the same scheme to all

other military hospitals.


**Improving the Emergency**

**Evacuation Capabilities**


If an emergency patient occurs in units in the

forward and remote areas without any medical


-----

personnel for first aid, rapid emergency evacuation is required. Accordingly, the

MND seeks to build an emergency evacuation system for all the entire ROK Armed

Forces so as to meet the golden hour for patient evacuation.

In order to provide on-site first aid at the earliest opportunity, the MND continues

to increase the number of "emergency medical technicians" primarily in the company

units in standing divisions. In addition, the MND is reinforcing the emergency

care function of hospitals supporting front corps and actively utilizing aeromedical

evacuation so that evacuation of critically ill patients to the Armed Forces Capital

Hospital can be completed within an hour and a half. In 2020, the MND field deployed

eight medevac helicopters capable of flying at night and in bad weather and at the

same time reinforced the functions and personnel of the General Medical Situation

Center[16)] of the Armed Force Medical Command (AFMC) to provide systematic

emergency care ranging from patient assistance to evacuation to hospitals. Going

forward, the MND plans to develop a "General Medical Situation Center integrated

control program" that is capable of integrating and controlling the entire military

emergency evacuation system encompassing both aviation and land routes.


**Enhancing the Capability to** Due to the group life characteristics of the

**Deal with Infectious** military, an outbreak of an infectious

**Diseases and Prevent Diseases** disease in the military has the potential to

generate a large number of patients, which

could have a fatal impact on combat readiness posture. As infectious diseases are

nonmilitary threats that impact national security, the military needs to take the

initiative in preparing for and countering infectious diseases.

The MND is expanding the scope of those who are vaccinated against diseases that

continue to occur inside and outside the military and cause death if complications

occur (such as hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome), and has reinforced the

preventive medical organizations and

functions of the AFMC to enhance

monitoring and response capabilities

against infectious diseases that occur

throughout the military. The MND

assigned military personnel and

resources when dealing with COVID
19 at the national level and played

key roles in various fields such as

New nursing officers providing medical support at

COVID-19 testing, sample collection, the Armed Forces Daegu Hospital (March 2020)


**16)**
As a department under
the Armed Forces Medical
Command, it plays a role
as a control tower similar
to the 119 Situation Center
in the event of a military
emergency patient and
provides one-stop support
for first aid, and evacuation
and treatment of
emergency patients round
the clock all year round.


-----

and treatment of confirmed patients. Moreover, the MND transformed the Armed

Forces hospitals in Daegu, Daejeon, and Goyang into national hospitals for infectious

diseases, and provided mobile medical clinics and mobile remote treatment

equipment.

To reinforce the ROK Armed Forces’ ability to deal with infectious diseases, the

MND plans to improve military hospital facilities for infectious disease treatment

and establish a medical response system centered around the AFMC, along with

other means such as obtaining supplies and equipment against epidemics and

enhancing medical training against disasters.

2. Enhancing Medical Accessibility and Expertise through Public–

Private Cooperation


**Enhancing Access to** Previously, servicemembers had to obtain a medical

**Civilian Hospitals** officer’s opinion and permission from the head of the

unit to use civilian hospitals. However, considering

the increase in preference for advanced technology used in civilian hospitals, the

approval process has been simplified for easier access.

After carrying out a series of two pilot projects from 2018 to June 2019, the

"Directive on Medical Treatment under the Health Insurance for Servicemembers in

Active Duty" was revised in December 2019, which allowed all servicemembers to

go off post and receive treatment from a civilian hospital with an approval of the unit

commander alone.

The MND also plans to introduce a military group insurance scheme, depending

on individual preferences, to finance the medical expenses previously paid by

servicemembers when using civilian hospitals instead of military hospitals. To

implement new scheme, the MND established pertinent statutory provisions by

revising the Military Service Act and the Enforcement Decree of the Military

Healthcare Act in 2020, and secured the relevant budget to implement the project

from 2021.

The MND will strive to increase the servicemembers’ civilian hospital accessi
bility and improve their treatment options of servicemembers, and ensure that the

state remains fully responsible for any servicemember who sustains any illness or

injury during his or her military service and provide appropriate medical services.


-----

**Acquiring Civilian Medical Workforce** To resolve the problem of medical

**and Enhancing the Expertise of** assistance being provided by unqua
**Military Medical Workforce** lified medics within military medi
cal institutions, the MND has hired

886 civilian medical personnel, including pharmacists, radiologists, and clinical

pathologists in military hospitals and division-level medical corps with civilian

workforce. Moreover, to prevent the deterioration of expertise and proficiency of

medical personnel due to the practice of primarily assigning short-term medical

officers and rotation of nursing personnel, the "Defense Personnel Management

Directive" has been revised to ensure that long-term medical officers in clinical

positions and nursing officers with specialization serve for a long period of time at

the Armed Forces Capital Hospital and surgery-intensive hospitals.

In association with public medical university, the MND plans to devise measures

for acquiring long-term medical officers, and secure budgets and improve the system

to expand the application of medical officers for long-term services. The MND also

seeks to provide night allowances so as to secure nursing personnel, which is in

manpower shortage.


**Establishing and Operating the** The ROK Armed Forces is gearing up to

**Armed Forces Trauma Center** open the "Armed Forces Trauma Center"

to secure their own treatment capacity for

traumas, such as gunshot wounds and blast injuries that usually occur only in the

military, according to choice and concentration.

Currently, the MND has acquired the facilities and equipment to meet MOHW

standards for designation of regional trauma centers, and, is preparing to allow

patients to receive high-quality trauma treatment in cooperation with the Seoul

National University Bundang Hospital.

To enhance the capabilities of the Korea Armed Forces Capital Hospital, the MND

has conducted consulting on development strategies for trauma centers and relevant

hospitals through external experts, and plans to continue its cooperation with the

private sector.


**Joint Operation of Government-Wide** In order to respond to emergency pati
**Air Ambulances and Reinforcement** ents in the military, the MND is en
**of Cooperation with Firefighters** hancing government-wide coopera
tion in relation to utilizing assets for

emergency patients medical evacuation and nurturing professional workforce.


-----

First, the MND has improved the air transport conditions of emergency military

and civilian patients by participating in the government-wide joint utilization

system of air ambulances. Furthermore, the MND revised the "Defense Security

Service Directive" to allow 119 paramedics to quickly enter military compounds

and devised a system for military medical personnel to participate in professional

first aid education provided by the National Fire Service Academy. The MND

plans to enhance the clinical experience of military emergency medical technicians

by introducing a duty exchange program between military emergency medical

technicians and 119 paramedics, and advance its cooperation with firefighters by

establishing a cooperative system between emergency operations centers and the

AFMC General Medical Situation Center.


-----

## 4 Reinforcing Human Rights

#### Protection for Servicemembers

The MND implements various policies aimed at seeking fundamental solutions for

accidents and human rights violations in barracks in order to reestablish the ROK Armed

Forces as a military that is aligned with the people and trusted by the people. In 2019,

it has introduced the alternative service program for conscientious objectors to military

service based on religion and other reasons to ensure the protection of the constitutional

and human rights of servicemembers. Moreover, to guarantee servicemembers’ right to

stand trial, the MND has transferred the jurisdiction over appellate trials to civilian courts

and improved the punishment system for servicemembers; thus implementing military

justice reforms.

1. Improving Human Rights Protection for Servicemembers


**Establishing a Comprehensive Plan** The MND has established the 2019
**for Human Rights Policies in the** 2023 Comprehensive Plan for Human

**Defense Domain** Rights Policies in the Defense Domain

with an aim of fostering a human rights

-friendly military culture and amplifying intangible combat power as a result. This

comprehensive plan is a guideline for the mid- to long-term direction for human

rights policies in the military, consisting of 35 detailed tasks for promotion including

5 major tasks, establishment of the military human rights protection office (military

ombudsman), expansion of public defender service for servicemembers, and use of

mobile phones for servicemembers after working hours.


**Establishing the Military Human** As part of the effort to improve human

**Rights Protection Office** rights situations in the military aimed at

preventing violations of human rights of

servicemembers and improving human rights in the military for damage relief, the

MND will offer its full cooperation with the establishment of the military human

rights protection office within the National Human Rights Commission of Korea and

provide full support for the activities carried out by the office. For a prompt revision

of the National Human Rights Commission of Korea Act, which stipulates the


-----

establishment of the military human rights protection office, the MND will actively

work together with the relevant authorities in the legislative process. A mutual

cooperation system will be established with the military human rights protection

office to guarantee its authority such as visits to military units and investigation

rights, thereby strengthening the human rights protection function for service
members.


**Reinforcing Human Rights** The goal of human rights education in the

**Education for Military Personnel** military is to raise awareness of service
members regarding their rights and res
ponsibilities as "citizens in uniform" and spread a barracks culture driven by respect

for human rights. To this end, the MND as well as each military service and the

National Human Rights Commission of Korea have been implementing systematic

education policies based on close cooperation. Specific policies include: human

rights education tailored to individual service cycles and individual units;

invitational lectures by human rights experts for commanding officers; on the job

training for human rights workers and instructors in the healthcare, investigation,

correction, judge advocate, and discipline sectors; promotion of online human rights

education; and development and distribution of human rights education contents that

involve the participation of servicemembers. In particular, the MND plans to develop

and distribute tailored teaching plans in cooperation with the National Human

Rights Commission of Korea to use them for human rights education of

servicemembers in each unit. Through these efforts, the MND plans to foster a

barracks culture that respects the dignity and rights of military personnel.


**17)**
It is an integrated
national defense human
rights system where
servicemembers can
apply for human rights
counseling and file a
petition for investigations.
Servicemembers are
allowed to request
counseling or investigation
with regard to any
human rights violation or
discrimination and confirm
the progress and results
thereof.

-  How to apply for
counseling and
investigation: Use the
"Military Human Rights
Guardian" linked through
the MND website on the
Internet or Intranet

-  Internet (currently

available in Korean
only): MND website
→ Go straight to Key
Information → Military
Human Rights Guardian
→ Click "Apply for Human
Rights Counseling and
Investigation"

-  Intranet: National Defense

Hub → Counseling/
Proposal → Military
Human Rights Guardian
→ Click "Human
Rights Counseling and
Investigation"


**Improving Human Rights Protection** In keeping with the changes in how

**Systems for Servicemembers** servicemembers regard human rights,

the MND, while pursuing cooperation

with civil society, strives to revise relevant statutes and improve the human rights

protection system that is currently in place. A human rights impact assessment,

which had been conducted only when statutes and administrative rules related to

human rights were revised, has been further expanded to cover policies and systems.

As such, the Military Human Rights Guardian[17)] system was launched to allow

servicemembers to easily request human rights counseling and file a petition for

investigation. To eliminate blind spots, the MND runs the National Defense Human

Rights Monitoring Group and conducts surveys on the human rights status of

servicemembers, and promotes the improvement of human rights policies in line


-----

with public standards through consultation with external experts such as the military

advisory committee of the MND and the headquarters of each service and through

the military human rights advisory lawyer system for division-level units.

Henceforward, the MND will unwaveringly lay the foundation for promoting and

protecting human rights for servicemembers in keeping with the development in the

human rights situation in the ROK.


**Institutional Reforms for Probes** By providing fundamental solutions

**into and Fundamental Resolution of** for deaths that occur during military

**Unsolved Deaths in the Military** service and where bereaved family

members raise doubts on the cause

of death, the MND is striving to resolve the bereaved family members’ suspicions

and regain the trust of the people. Especially on April 11, 2019, the MND began

operation of a government appointed attorney system for bereaved families of deaths

in the military, allowing them to receive legal support in the process of dealing with

the death, and revised the Framework Act on Military Status and Service on May

2020 so as to clarify the legal grounds thereof.

In accordance with the Special Act on Ascertaining the Truth of Military Accidents

Resulting in Death, the MND launched the Presidential Truth Commission on

Deaths in the Military in September 2018 to allow independent committee to carry

out objective investigations on the allegations raised by the bereaved family members

with regard to deaths in the military, thus making efforts to recover damages

sustained by the relevant parties and repair its impaired reputation.

Henceforward, the MND will continue to exert efforts to expand the respon
sibilities of the nation toward, and ensure the best treatment for, servicemembers

who sacrificed their lives in the course of their service, thereby regaining the trust

of the public in the military and contributing to promotion and protection of human

rights for servicemembers.


**18)**
"As all types of the current
military service infringe
upon the conscience of
military service objectors
based on religious beliefs,
etc., as they presuppose
military training, Article 5
(1) of the Military Service
Act, which does not
stipulate an alternative
service program for military
service objectors under
the freedom of conscience
pursuant to Article 19 of
the Constitution of the
Republic of Korea, runs
counter to the Constitution;
thus, it shall be temporarily
applicable until December
31, 2019."


2. Introduction of Alternative Service Program for Conscientious

Objectors to Military Service Based on Religious Beliefs, Etc.

In accordance with a Constitutional Court decision on June 28, 2018 that Article 5 of

the Military Service Act runs counter to the Constitution[18)], three agencies–MND,

MMA, and Ministry of Justice–promoted on July 9, 2018 the introduction of an

alternative service program for conscientious objectors to military service based on


-----

religious beliefs, etc.

On December 28, 2018, to develop a reasonable alternative service program that

strikes a balance between the "obligation to serve in the military" and the "freedom

of conscience", the MND prepared an alternative service legislative bill that includes

36 months joint training at correction facilities and submitted the bill to the National

Assembly on April 2019. Subsequently, on December 31 of the same year, the Act on

the Assignment and Performance of Alternative Service ("Alternative Service Act")

was promulgated, taking effect on January 1, 2020.

In June of the same year, after completing the enactment and revision of statutes

at the lower hierarchical levels such as the Enforcement Decree of the Alternative

Service Act and the organization of a review committee for alternative service, the

committee began its review on July 15 and determined 730 people for assignment to

alternative service by November. In 2020, a total of 106 people have been assigned

to alternative service, and they are currently serving in corrective facilities such as

Daejeon Prison.

3. Military Justice System Reform


**Building a Military Justice** The MND is pursuing military justice system

**System that Guarantees** reform to protect servicemembers’ human

**Independence and Fairness** rights and right to a fair trial, and to improve

the independence and fairness of military

courts and prosecutors. As such, it announced the tasks for military judicial reform

on February 12, 2018.

To substantially guarantee servicemembers’ right to a trial, the MND decided to

transfer the jurisdiction over appellate trials to civilian courts. The first-instance

military courts will be located in five areas, and they will report directly to the

MND; the local military courts will be helmed by civilian legal practitioners.

In addition, a decision was made to abolish the convening authorities’ right to

confirmation of judgments[19)] and the appointment of field officers as lay judges[20)]. To

ensure the independence of military judges, the MND plans to establish a personnel

management committee dedicated to military judges for the handling of promotion

recommendations and reappointment reviews and prohibition of military judges

from taking other legal positions such as judge advocate or military prosecutor. As

such, the MND is promoting the revision of the Military Court Act so as to legislate

such measures for military judicial reform.


**19)**
Convening authorities
are commanders of the
units where military courts
are set up (Article 7 of
the Military Court Act).
They are given the right to
confirm the decisions of
military courts and reduce
stipulated sentences by
up to one-third in cases
wherein the accused
committed crimes in
the course of actively
performing their duties,
such as operations,
education, and training,
with due diligence (Article
379 of the Military Court
Act).

**20)**
A unique feature of a
military trial wherein
field officers who are not
qualified as judges get
appointed as lay judges
and try cases along with
military judges.


-----

[Chart 7-9] Goals and Key Tasks of Military Judicial Reform

**Ensuring Fair Trial and Protecting Human Rights through**

**Military Judicial Reform**


|Improvement of Military Courts|Col2|Improvement of Investigation Systems|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Organization|Trial|Prosecution|Judicial Police and Others|
|• Transfer jurisdiction over appellate trials to civilian courts. • Set up military courts that directly report to the MND. • Appoint civil legal practitioners as heads of local military courts.|• Abolish convening authorities’ rights to confirm decisions and reduce sentences. • Prohibit military judges from taking other legal positions. • Protect the status of military judges. • Abolish the appointment of field officers as lay judges. • Conduct circuit courts. • Implement participatory trial with servicemembers.|• Set up a military prosecutor’s office in each service. • Abolish the commander’s right to approve detention warrant requests. • Provide military prosecutors with the right to object. • Introduce restrictions on the supervision of military prosecutors.|• Separate military police in charge of investigations and those in charge of military operations. • Implement measures to enhance the human rights practices by civilian police. • Provide legal basis for the power of the military judicial police. • Prohibit the appointment of servicemember as assistant military judicial police officers. • Introduce public defenders for victims of military crimes.|


**Developing Transparent,** The MND is developing a transparent,

**Reasonable Investigation Practices** reasonable investigation system by

reinforcing the independence of inves
tigative agencies. First, to enhance the independence of military prosecutors, the

MND decided to set up a prosecutor’s office in the headquarters of each service–in

lieu of the common prosecutor’s division at division-level units or higher–and to

abolish the commanders’ right to approve requests for detention warrants[21)]. As for

expertise reinforcement of the military judicial police, the MND is seeking to

separate the organizations and functions of the military police in charge of

investigations and those in charge of military operations, and prohibit the

appointment of servicemembers as assistant military judicial police officers[22)]. The

MND also reflected such improvements to the investigation system in the revised bill

for the Military Court Act. Meanwhile, with the legislative bill for the Act on the

Duty Performance of Military Police passing the plenary session of the National

Assembly as the legal basis for administrative police activities of the military police,

the MND laid the foundation for legal control over authority actions such as police

administration.


**21)**
A military prosecutor needs
the approval of the head
of the affiliated unit when
requesting a detention
warrant (Article 238 of the
Military Court Act).

**22)**
The military judicial
police is an auxiliary
investigative body that aids
investigations under orders
of the military prosecution
or military judicial police
(Article 46 of the Military
Court Act). Currently,
enlisted members serving
in the military judicial
police serve as military
police officers or handle
security works at the
Military Security Support
Command (Article 46 of the
Military Court Act).


-----

**Enhancing Human Rights Protection** Since 2009, the MND has enacted

**in Investigative Procedures** and implemented the "Directive on

the Protection of Human Rights in

the Military Investigation Procedures" in order to strengthen the level of ensuring

human rights in military investigation procedures.

Starting in July 2018, the MND reinforced the rights of suspects, even during

interviews without any report written, to defend themselves by allowing them to

seek legal counsel and to minimize the shock experienced by families and friends

of suspects during arrests, detentions, seizures, and searches. In addition, the MND

clarified the standard for rests provided to suspects, requiring investigators to let

suspects rest for at least 10 minutes every two hours, and also introduced the legal

basis for allowing victims of military crimes to select and request public defenders as

legal counsel.

In 2020, the MND revised all directives to ban pretext investigations[23)] and

unnecessary delays in investigations aimed at putting pressure on suspects, and

restricted investigations exceeding 12 hours or late-night investigations starting at

9:00 p.m. or later. Meanwhile, the MND allowed not only suspects but also other

parties subject to investigation, victims, and witnesses to request the participation of

legal counselors and to record the investigation without any particular restriction.


**Improving the Servicemember** In response to the argument regarding the

**Disciplinary System** constitutionality of confinement facilities[24)]

in the military and its possible violation of

the constitutional requirement of warrants, the MND has improved the service
member disciplinary system to protect the human rights of servicemembers. The

Military Personnel Management Act and the Military Service Act were revised to

replace confinement facilities, among the types of disciplinary actions, with

disciplinary training, and newly established the system of wage cuts and reprimand.

For discipline training in particular, the days of disposal will no longer be included in

the service period to maintain the punitive effect of the confinement facilities.

Unlike confinement facilities, discipline training is a human rights-friendly

training oriented toward compliance and human rights education based on under
standing of the characteristics of military communities. The training is expected to

be provided at units above divisions or brigades to promote servicemembers’ human

rights while firmly establishing discipline within.


**23)**
A method of investigation
wherein, during the
process of clarifying the
charges for a certain
crime, an investigative
agency investigates a case
unrelated thereof to clarify
the criminal charges of its
original purpose.

**24)**
Warrants issued by
a judge through due
procedures should be
presented when imposing
compulsory procedures
during criminal procedures
(arrest, detention, seizure
or search) (Constitution,
Article 12 (3).)


-----

[Chart 7-10] Improved Disciplinary System for Servicemembers

|Before After Demotion Demotion Confinement facility Disciplinary training Pay cut Leave restriction Leave cut Probation Probation Reprimand|Note|
|---|---|
||Same as before|
||Confinement facility abolished / Newly inserted|
||Newly inserted|
||Same as before (terminology changed)|
||Same as before|
||Newly inserted|


-----

## 5 Reinforcing Support for

#### Discharged and Retiring Servicemembers, and Privileges for War Veterans

In order to support all servicemembers leaving the ROK Armed Forces in their efforts

to find a place in the civilian society, the ROK Armed Forces is making improvements

in providing various kinds of employment support, including setting career paths and

cultivating job skills during military service, preparing a system for military service to lead

to quality jobs, and increasing the number of suitable jobs internally and externally. The

MND exerts various efforts to honor the sacrifices and endeavors of war veterans.

1. Reinforcing Employment Support for Servicemembers Preparing

for Discharge


**Enhancing Career Paths and** As part of the Plan for Employment and Busi
**Employment Support** ness Startup of Young Servicemembers, the

**for Servicemembers** MND has been implementing the Young

Servicemember SOS Project[25)] since 2018 to

provide step-by-step support during the entire cycle of military service from

enlistment and service to discharge.

The first phase of the plan supports young servicemembers in setting their career

paths through education and counseling and runs the "Career Assistance Education"

and "One-on-One Employment Counseling" to assist servicemembers with job

competencies in getting a job immediately after discharge. Career Assistance

Education is offered by civilian professional counselors who pay personal visits

to each unit for the convenience of servicemembers, in which servicemembers

can then select either the Career Instruction Course or the Employment Support

Course based on their preference. The courses consist of joint education on

career exploration and designing as well as the government’s youth employment

policies, followed by tailored education specific to each course. The One-on-One

Employment Counseling, also offered by civilian professional counselors who

pay personal visits to each unit, provides professional counseling to address the

concerns of servicemembers with regard to their career paths and employment after


A job fair for
servicemembers
nearing discharge
held in 2019

**25)**
As part of the plan aimed at
facilitating the employment
and business startup of
young servicemembers,
and as a joint project with
the Ministry of SMEs and
Startups and the Ministry of
Employment and Labor, it
enhances the employment
and business capabilities of
servicemembers until they
are matched with SMEs
and venture companies.
SOS here means "Soldiers
on SMEs and Startups".


-----

they are discharged from the military.

The counseling is aimed at matching

servicemembers with job competencies

and the desire for employment with

jobs suitable for their desired occupa
tional category.

The second phase of the plan involves

professional education on each desired Grand Prize in the 2019 Government-wide Startup

Competition

field in collaboration with the Ministry

of Employment and Labor and Ministry of SMEs and Startups, among others,

so as to enhance the capabilities of servicemembers who lack employment and

startup capabilities. The education is provided at training centers located outside

each unit for more than 5,000 servicemembers per annum, and the number of

trainees is expected to increase. In addition, the MND is implementing "field visits

to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)" to improve the servicemembers’

perception toward SMEs which offer many quality jobs and allow servicemembers

to experience the actual workplace of their desired occupational category in advance.

The third phase involves the operation of the "Startup Academy", which is a

tailored employment course for young servicemembers who have completed the

first and second phases in collaboration with associated government agencies and

enterprises that give preference to military veterans. The MND also operates the

"Business-Tailored Employment Course" and the "Visiting Recruitment Fair",

which allow companies to directly train servicemembers with the practical skills

required by the companies before hiring them; thus providing support for more

servicemembers to get a job.

The MND also provides a variety of support in phases which include the establish
ment of a support system to foster young servicemembers as entrepreneurs in

association with government policies.

In the first phase, servicemembers who are interested in starting their own business

organize a "startup club" in their respective unit to study the startup items they are

interested in and exchange opinions during weekends and public holidays. In the

second phase, professional counselors related to startups pay a visit to each unit and

provide professional counseling for the items studied by each startup club. In the

third phase, startup competitions are held by each military and the MND, as well as

a government-wide competition to create a startup boom and enhance further the

startup capabilities of the teams with outstanding startup items. As the last phase, in

collaboration with the Ministry of SMEs and Startups, the MND provides additional


-----

counseling, technology, and funds to teams with excellent items to help them achieve

actual commercialization. This policy of fostering startup talents continues to

contribute to developing potential startup capabilities of young servicemembers and

making military service more productive.


**Employment Support for** The MND is improving its tailored support for

**Medium-and Long-Term** mid-to long-term servicemembers who have ser
**Servicemembers** ved for five years or more. Improvements are

made in the education system for career change

and the duration of support for career change is being expanded. Starting in 2019, the

scope of personnel entitled to receive education on military service planning

education was extended beyond captains and sergeants first class to cover second

lieutenants and staff sergeants to help servicemembers understand the overall lives

of military personnel and design their own initiative-driven military careers.

Since 2020, the MND has operated the "tailored basic education for career change"

course for each future career goal of cadres preparing for discharge to help them

prepare for their career change systematically and reliably, and has opened and

operated additional intensive courses for applicants who have completed basic

education.

On the other hand, since 2017, to help medium-term servicemembers find

employment opportunities, the MND has granted transition periods of one to three

months depending on each servicemember’s number of years in service and has

allowed all medium-term servicemembers to prepare for career change early through

mandatory career education 2 years prior to their discharge.

Long-term servicemembers who have served for 10 years or more are provided

with career planning education during service and career education two years prior

to discharge. They are also offered with basic education and a variety of tailored

professional education during a 10- to 12-month period of support for career change,

thus giving them sufficient opportunities to get a job based on enhanced employment

competencies.


**Securing Jobs for Retiring** In conjunction with the government’s job policy,

**Servicemembers** the MND is seeking to increase jobs in the

defense domain by finding employment posi
tions in and out of the military and developing jobs for servicemembers nearing their

discharge to utilize their occupational capabilities and military career.

First, under Defense Reform 2.0, the MND continues to find and secure positions


-----

in the military, such as noncombatant positions replaced by civilian workforce,

including administration and education. Meanwhile, in conjunction with the

government’s job creation policy for the public sector, the MND, in cooperation with

police, fire, and coast guard agencies, continues to secure non-military jobs in the

fields of police, aviation maintenance, and special force (tactics) as well as fire and

rescue fields by easing employment requirements and improving the relevant system.

The MND increased the number of "job fairs for servicemembers nearing their

discharge", which supports employment by connecting the servicemembers nearing

their discharge with companies seeking to hire at the job fair, from once a year to

twice a year considering the demand of servicemembers since 2019. Going forward,

the MND will steadfastly expand its non-face-to-face (online) employment matching

program in line with changes in the job market. In addition, to encourage more

companies to employ soldiers upon discharge, the MND awards commendations and

certificates of appreciation signed by the Minister of National Defense to excellent

companies that hire discharged servicemembers. To foster such culture in the job

market, the MND plans to keep holding meetings with corporate CEOs and HR

personnel.


**Job Standardization** Job competency-oriented recruitment based on the

**Based on NCS** National Competency Standards (NCS)[26)] is taking

root in public institutions and private companies. Even

though most of the jobs performed in the military are similar or identical to those

covered by NCS, the former has yet to be standardized, thus making it difficult for

servicemembers to have their military experience recognized as work experience

outside the military after their discharge.

Therefore, the MND will systematize the jobs performed in the military according

to NCS to ensure that servicemembers have their military experience and expertise

recognized in the same field outside the military after their discharge and reflect

the job experience associated with NCS on the military career certificate, in order

to allow the corresponding career to be recognized in academic institutions and

corporations as college credits and work experience, respectively. Starting with

two units in the Army in 2018, the duties of each service have been standardized in

line with NCS, and the project is expected to be completed by 2022, including the

revision of pertinent laws and regulations to improve military career certificates.


**26)**
NCS refers to the national
standards that systematize
and standardize the
knowledge, skills, qualities,
and other elements
required for various jobs
performed at industrial
sites in different sectors at
different levels.


-----

[Chart 7-11] Plans on the Use of Military Career Certificate Outside the Military

Job performance Ministry of Education

Military

career

based on NCS certificate Ministry of Labor and


Use

outside

the

military


Ministry of Education

(college credits)

Ministry of Labor and

Employment, Ministry of

SMEs and Startups

(recognized by companies)


Education and

Job performance
training

Military experience

based on NCS

Self-development Barracks life


2. Pension System That Reflects the Characteristics of Military Service


**Meaning and Characteristics of the** The military pension system is aimed

**Military Pension System** at fostering stable living conditions and

improving the welfare benefits for

servicemembers and their families by providing proper remuneration to service
members in retirement after years of faithful service or to their family members in

case of the servicemember’s death. Servicemembers perform duties that pose risks

to their lives such as taking part in battles and dangerous exercises, and most live and

work in remote or forward areas under harsh working conditions that involve

military operations and long periods of standby duty. As they have to retire at the age

set for each rank, however, most retire between the ages of 45 and 56 when the level

of living expenses tends to be highest due to the expenditure on education for their

children, etc.

The military pension system, which reflects such unique circumstances of military

service, not only serves the basic purpose of a pension system as a social insurance

that ensures income for one’s later years but also works as a national program that

guarantees stable livelihood for servicemembers retiring early and compensates

those who sacrifice themselves for the country.

Military pension plays an important role in helping career servicemembers

focus on their duties without having to worry about their life after retirement.

Other developed countries also provide more preferential benefits to military

pension compared to other public pension programs in consideration of the unique

characteristics of military pension.


**Improving the Military** In December 2019, the Military Pension Act was

**Pension System** revised to introduce the "Pension Split" provision

that–to protect the livelihood of divorced spouses in

their twilight years–grants a divorced spouse a pro-rata part of his or her spouse’s


-----

pension corresponding to the actual marriage period. In addition, in consideration of

national financial burdens and equity with other occupational pensions, the revision

includes a provision that discontinues payment of the retirement pension or the

pension for wounds when the beneficiary is elected as a public official or employed at

an organization entirely funded or financed by the nation or a local government.

In September 2019, the Enforcement Decree of the Military Pension Act was revised

to reinforce the personal information management of military pension beneficiaries

residing in a foreign country and prevent pensions from being used as escape funds

for criminal suspects. The MND has also made it mandatory for a military pension

beneficiary residing in a foreign country for more than a year to submit new personal

information notification every year commensurate with those who have foreign

citizenship or permanent residency, and to withhold payment of half of the retirement

pension for anyone who is undergoing investigation or trial due to a criminal offense

committed while serving in the military and is on the wanted list or received a cri
minal designation decision because his or her whereabouts are unknown.

In July 2019, in order to protect the right to receive military pension and guarantee

the beneficiary’s basic right to livelihood, a bank account dedicated to preventing

seizure was introduced to prevent seizure of pensions within the minimum cost of

living (KRW 1.85 million) from being garnished.

3. Reinforcing Privileges and Social Compensation for Military Service


**Recovering Korean War Remains[27)]** The MND recovers the remains of the

fallen soldiers during the Korean War

to pay tribute to those who sacrificed their lives for the nation, and to also address the

long-held wishes of the families as well as honoring them and cultivating their pride.

Launched in 2000 as part of the 50th anniversary of the Korean War, the recovery

project has been expanded by establishing the MND Agency for Killed in Action

Recovery and Identification (MAKRI) in 2007.

By 2019, a total of 12,181 sets of remains have been recovered, with DNA samples

received from 53,341 family members. Particularly in 2019, the MND began

recovery operations in DMZ in compliance with the CMA and 630 remains were

recovered, which includes 261 inside the DMZ. This is the largest recovery in

the past 5 years, providing an opportunity to gain public support and trust, as no

remains were ever recovered for over 70 years after the armistice and 8 remains were

identified and returned to their families.


**27)**
A national project to search
for the unfound remains
of about 130,000 soldiers
who died during the Korean
War and return them to
their bereaved families.


-----

Recovering the remains at Arrowhead Hill Prime Minister visiting the excavation site in DMZ

Furthermore in 2019, recovery and family outreach personnel considerably

increased[28)]. The Enforcement Decree of the Act on the Korean War KIA Remains

Recovery was also revised to include provisions to pay prescribed rewards[29)] to those

participating in DNA samples collection and also to the families when the remains

have been identified. Consequently, DNA sampling more than doubled since 2018.

In December 2020, the MND completed the construction of the Identification

Center which will improve remains management and the systematic and scientific

process of identification.

[Chart 7-12] Remains Recovered by Year

(As of December 2019, unit: sets)

|Category|Total|2000- 2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Remains recovered|12,181|5,599|1,387|1,041|736|913|622|429|448|376|630|
|ROK military personnel and police officers|10,607|4,705|1,300|989|671|809|561|387|420|362|403|



*[ ][Cumulative total of recovered remains: 12,181 sets in total / including 261 sets of remains found in DMZ (Arrowhead Hill). ]

** [The recovery results for 2019 are subject to change depending on the final identification results.]

[Chart 7-13] DNA Sampling of Bereaved Families and Identification of KIAs during

Korean War
(As of December 2019, unit: cases, persons)

|Category|Total|2000- 2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|DNA sampling|53,364|13,572|4,252|4,765|4,005|2,645|2,921|4,041|4,072|4,155|8,936|
|Identity verification|139|61|7|11|5|17|8|9|9|4|8|



The MND is also redoubling efforts on remains recovery international cooperation.

Annual meetings and joint remains recovery is conducted in cooperation with the


**28)**
Excavation personnel was
increased from 8 teams to
12 teams, and personnel
inquiring with bereaved
families was increased from
1 team to 4 teams.

**29)**
A reward of KRW 10,000
is given to each sample
provider, KRW 100,000 is
awarded to a person who
is found to be a bereaved
family member, and KRW
10 million is given for
those who have provided
samples and once the
identity of the excavated
remains is verified.
(Article 12 of the Act on the
Excavation of the Remains
of Soldiers Killed in the
Korean War and attached
Table 3 of its Enforcement
Decree)


-----

US and the MND briefs the progress of remains recovery to the families at these

meetings which facilitates the alliance between the two nations. In particular, as

agreed at the 2019 annual meeting, a repatriation ceremony was held in June 2020 for

the believed to be ROK remains to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the Korean

War at custody of the Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency (DPAA).[30)]


Repartiation of the remains of ROK soldiers from the
US DPAA (June 2020)

Council of Organizations Related to the Remains
Recovery Project (October 2019)


Return of remains of Chinese soldiers (September
2020)

MOU signed between the MND and the National
Agricultural Cooperative Federation (December 2019)


DNA sampling of
bereaved families of KIAs
during Korean War

**30)**
As a US agency
specializing in identifying
military personnel killed
in action, it is engaged
in activities around the
world in search of missing/
unrecovered fallen in past
wars involving the US


Since 2014, the MND also cooperates with China on remains recovery. Based on

international law and humanitarian spirit, the two nations agreed to repatriate the

recovered remains, starting with 437 remains until 117 in 2020, a total of 716 Chinese

remains were repatriated up to date.

Remains recovery becomes more difficult by the day as the terrains of the

battlefields continue to change due to land development and also because family

members pass away. Moreover, despite the large number of the recovered remains,

only 1.3% have been identified due to lacking DNA samples and difficulties in

collecting samples.

Public interest and participation is desperate, so the MND redoubles its best

endeavors to raise awareness by cooperating with associated agencies through the

annual Council of Organizations Related to the Remains Recovery Project.[31)] In


**31)**
Under the Prime Minister’s
Directive No. 647, it is a
consultative body launched
since 2009 participated
in by high officials from 12
government agencies each
year such as the Ministry of
Interior and Safety.


-----

2019 especially, six veterans hospitals nationwide under the Korean Veterans Health

Service agreed to collect DNA samples from families to expand the channels for the

public to participate, and the MND signed an MOU with the National Agricultural

Cooperative Federation to establish the foundation to promote remains recovery to

the public through NongHyup Bank and Hanaro Mart branches nationwide.


**Enactment of Military Accident** In December 2019, Military Accident

**Compensation Act and Enhanced** Compensation Act was enacted to place

**Military Death Benefits** more responsibility on the nation for

injuries, diseases, disabilities, and deaths

of military personnel, and to rationalize the level of accident compensation through

means such as raising compensation for disabilities, pensions for bereaved families

of those who have been killed on duty, and compensation for death. Furthermore, the

MND has newly established special provisions in connection with the expiration of

the right to claim for compensation in order to honor those who have been killed on

duty and to protect the rights of bereaved families. Details are as follows:

First, the MND has raised the level of compensation for general disabilities

for servicemembers as well as compensation for war wounds of cadres and

servicemembers, and disabilities caused by injuries arising from special duties. As

of 2019, compensation for general disabilities of servicemembers ranged from KRW

5.77 million to KRW 17.32 million, but has been raised to a minimum of KRW 15.9

million up to KRW 47.7 million. In addition, in the case of war wounds where cadres

and servicemembers have been injured due to engagement with the enemy, the MND

has made a revision to pay 2.5 times the compensation of general disabilities. As for

an injury caused by special duty while performing a dangerous duty such as search

and reconnaissance of contact areas and counterterrorism operations, it is mandatory

to pay 1.88 times the compensation of general disabilities, thus differentiating these

disabilities from general disabilities.

Second, the compensation for death has been made consistent with the Public

Officials’ Accident Compensation Act. The total amount of compensation for death

in war has been adjusted from 57.7 times to 60 times the average monthly income

for all public officials, and 44.2 times to 45 times the average monthly income for

death caused by special duty. The compensation for general death on duty has also

been adjusted from 23.4 times the monthly income of the corresponding military

personnel to 24 times the average monthly income for all public officials.

Third, in order to better ensure the livelihood of bereaved families of military

personnel who died on duty, the payment rate of the pension for bereaved families


-----

has been merged to 43%, with the additional point system for bereaved families

newly established. Before, if a soldier dies after serving for less than 20 years, 35.75%

of the standard monthly income of the soldier and 42.25% of the monthly standard

income after 20 years of service were differentially paid. With the enactment of

Military Accident Compensation Act, however, the payment rate was increased to

43% regardless of the period of service. Furthermore, the MND has strengthened the

nature of supporting the livelihood of bereaved families by establishing an additional

point system for bereaved families, thus adding 5% and up to 20% to the payment

rate per bereaved family.

Fourth, in April 2019, the Military Pension Act was revised to protect the rights of

bereaved families who are unable to receive related benefits due to the expiration of

the right to claim benefits even though death on duty has been recognized through

an reexamination by the Committee for the Examination of Killed or Wounded in

Action and Death or Injury in the Line of Duty (Review Committee), thus modifying

the date when the computation of the duration to file a claim for benefits begins

for those who have been reclassified as having died on duty. Since the prescribed

duration to file a claim for benefits is five years from "the day the cause of benefits

arose", if five years pass from the date of death, even if death on duty is determined

through a reexamination by the Review Committee, the bereaved families were

unable to file a claim for benefits, such as pension for the bereaved families of those

who have died on duty, compensation for death, and retirement allowances due to

the expiration of the duration to file the claim. In order to address such issues, a

special provision of prescription was newly established to make the request effective,

through reexamination by the Review Committee, from the "decision date on death"

rather than the "death date" of the soldier who died on duty.


-----

##### Chapter
# 8

## Military Support for the Settlement of Peace on the Korean Peninsula

Section 1 Inter-Korean Military Confidence Building and Arms Control
Section 2 Military Assurance for Inter-Korean Exchanges and Cooperation

and Resolution of the ROK POW Issue


-----

-----

## 1 Inter-Korean Military

#### Confidence Building and Arms Control

At the summit in Pyongyang held subsequent to the inter-Korean summit in Panmunjom

in April 2018, the ROK and North Korea signed the "Agreement on the Implementation

of the Historic Panmunjom Declaration in the Military Domain" (also referred to as

Comprehensive Military Agreement (CMA)) as an annex to the Pyongyang Joint

Declaration in September. Military authorities of the ROK and North Korea effectively

developed conditions to ease military tensions and build trust between the two Koreas

through the conclusion and implementation of the CMA. Going forward, while sincerely

implementing the CMA, the ROK will further expand inter-Korean military confidence
building and arms control measures to achieve a permanent peace on the Korean

Peninsula.


1. Easing Military Tensions and Building Confidence between the

Two Koreas


**Promoting the Korean** The ROK government is consistently promoting

**Peninsula Peace Process** the "Korean Peninsula peace process" to elimi
nate the risk of war at its source and to achieve

complete denuclearization and permanent peace on the Korean Peninsula. To this

end, the government is making a wide variety of efforts, including holding three

inter-Korean summits in 2018 and paving the way to two US-North Korea summits.

At the Panmunjom inter-Korean summit on April 27, 2018, the leaders of

the two Koreas declared the beginning of a "new era of peace" through the

"Panmunjom Declaration for Peace, Prosperity and Reunification of the Korean

Peninsula ("Panmunjom Declaration")"[1)] and vowed to promote an all-out and

dramatic improvement in inter-Korean relations, an easing of military tensions

and compliance with mutual non-aggression agreements, and the complete

denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and establishment of a peace regime. The

third inter-Korean summit was held in Pyongyang on September 18-20, 2018 and

the two leaders agreed to the Pyongyang Joint Declaration, which contains practical

measures to develop and improve inter-Korean relations based on the trust built

during the implementation of the Panmunjom Declaration. In addition, as an annex


**1)**
President Moon Jaein and Kim Jong-un,
Chairman of the State
Affairs Commission,
announced the agreement
at the inter-Korean summit
at the Peace House in
Panmunjom on April 27,
2018 to realize a nuclearfree Korean Peninsula,
declare the end of the war
within the year, establish
a joint inter-Korean liaison
office in Kaesong, and hold
the reunion of separated
families and relatives.


-----

to the Pyongyang Joint Declaration, the

Agreement on the Implementation of

the Historic Panmunjom Declaration in

the Military Domain (Comprehensive

Military Agreement ("CMA")) was

adopted, thereby agreeing on the

practical measures to ease military

tensions and reduce the risk of war Signing of the CMA (September 2018)

between the two Koreas.

Such development in inter-Korean relations led to the improvement of US-North

Korea relations and progress in the denuclearization issue, resulting in two US-North

Korea summits.

The US and North Korea held their first summit in Singapore on June 12, 2018,

agreeing to the establishment of a new US-North Korea relationship, complete

denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula, and establishment of a peace regime.

Nonetheless, the failure to reach an agreement between the two countries at the

second summit held in Hanoi, Vietnam (February 27-28, 2019) caused a deadlock in

relations not only between the US and North Korea but also between the two Koreas.

Despite this stalemate, the ROK government, as a party directly involved in the issue,

continues to communicate and cooperate closely with the international community,

including the US, to maintain the promotion of the "Korean Peninsula peace process"

with the support of the international community. In particular, "the meeting among

the leaders of the two Koreas and the US" was held for the first time in history in

Panmunjom on June 30, 2019 as a result of the ROK government’s dedicated efforts

to break the deadlock in dialogue between the US and North Korea. As seen through

such efforts, the ROK government continues to make various efforts to improve both

"inter-Korean relations" and "US–North Korea relations and the denuclearization

issue" in a manner tantamount to a virtuous cycle.


**Signing and** Article 2 of the Panmunjom Declaration agreed

**Implementing the CMA** upon by the leaders of the two Koreas stipulates

"ceasing all hostile acts", "transforming the DMZ

into a peace zone", and "turning the area of the Northern Limit Line (NLL) in the

West Sea into a maritime peace zone" as effective measures to reduce military

tensions and eliminate the risk of war.

In order to implement Article 2 of the Panmunjom Declaration, the military

authorities of the ROK and North Korea coordinated on a draft for a comprehensive


-----

military agreement to implement the

Panmunjom Declaration through the

8th inter-Korean general officer-level

talks on June 14, 2018, 9th inter-Korean

general officer-level talks on July 31,

and 40th inter-Korean working-level

talks from September 13-14. Finally,

on September 19, 2018, the Defense 8th inter-Korean major general-level talks (June 2018)

Ministers of the two Koreas signed

and concluded the CMA as an annex to the Pyongyang Joint Declaration before the

leaders of the ROK and North Korea.

With the conclusion of the CMA, the military authorities of the two Koreas are

faithfully implementing the cessation of all hostile acts, demilitarization of the Joint

Security Area (JSA), pilot withdrawal of guard posts (GP) by both parties in the

DMZ, joint recovery of remains, and joint use of the Han River estuary. The CMA

effectively contributes to putting an end to the military confrontation between the

two Koreas, which has lasted over 70 years, and eliminating the risk of war and

accidental armed conflict on the Korean Peninsula.

In particular, the military situation around the border area between the two Koreas

has been stable due to the cessation of mutual hostility in maritime, ground, and air

buffer zones, which has been in force since November 1, 2018.

On the ground, both the ROK and North Korea ceased artillery fire and outdoor

military maneuvers (regiment level and above) in buffer zones, each of which is an

area that spans 5 kilometers north and south from the Military Demarcation Line

(MDL). At sea, both the ROK and North Korea placed covers over the muzzles and

gun barrels of naval and coastal artillery, shut down gunports, and ceased live-fire

exercises and maritime maneuver training. In the air, no-fly zones were established

for each type of aircraft around the MDL, and flights not announced in advance

are not carried out between the two Koreas. However, the ROK Armed Forces

has dispatched a total of 180 helicopters in no-fly zones to extinguish forest fires

and transport emergency patients in a normal manner, and continues to share the

pertinent details with the North Korean military authorities pursuant to the CMA.

The military authorities of the two Koreas have organized a "three-way con
sultative body of the two Koreas and the United Nations Command (UNC)" under

the CMA and completed the demilitarization of the JSA as of October 27, 2018. For

the first time since the signing of the Armistice Agreement in 1953, the two Koreas

and the UNC jointly inspected and confirmed the completion of demilitarization


-----

measures by fully opening all posts

and facilities, including underground

facilities in the JSA. In addition, mea
sures were enforced to ensure mutual

transparency, such as adjusting and

rearranging the surveillance equip
ment of both parties in the JSA and es
Meeting of the leaders of the ROK, North Korea and tablishing a video information sharing
the US in Panmunjom (June 2019)

system. The ROK Armed Forces resu
med tours on the southern side on May 1, 2019 in preparation for the freedom

of movement inside the JSA; as of September 30, 2019, a total of 24,000 visitors

has toured Panmunjom, which has been transformed into a place of "peace and

harmony". In particular, the demilitarization of the JSA immediately led to the

meeting among the leaders of the two Koreas and the US in Panmunjom on June 30,

2019.

As a pilot project on December 12, 2018, the military authorities of the ROK and

North Korea withdrew 22 GPs that are within 1km of each other inside the DMZ.

Since then, active duty military personnel from both sides have visited the others

side’s GPs and conducted joint field inspections. The withdrawal of GPs from the

DMZ has been cited by the United

Nations as a prime example of military

confidence building and conventional

arms control. In association with the

pilot project, the ROK government

gradually opened DMZ Peace Trail in

Goseong, Cheorwon, and Paju from

April 2019, allowing around 15,000

people to visit and experience the peace Recovery of remains on Arrowhead Hill in DMZ

created in the border area.

On December 7, 2018, the military

authorities of the ROK and North

Korea completed their conditions

shaping initiative by removing mines

and explosives from Arrowhead Hill

inside DMZ to conduct joint inter
Korean remains recovery operations

Conveyance of the nautical chart of the Han River

and opening an inter-Korean road estuary (January 2019)


-----

passing through the MDL. However, as inter-Korean relations stalled following the

US–North Korea summit in Hanoi, joint inter-Korean remains recovery operations

were first carried out in the southern side of Arrowhead Hill from April to the end

of November 2019. As a result, the ROK Armed Forces was able to recover 260

remains (approximate) and 67,000 artifacts. In addition, from April to November

2020, in preparation for joint inter-Korean remains recovery operations, the ROK

Armed Forces removed landmines and conducted recovery on the southern side of

Arrowhead Hill to recover additional 140 sets of remains (approximate) and 17,000

artifacts.

In relation to the joint use of the Han River estuary, an inter-Korean joint waterway

survey was conducted in the estuary from November 5 to December 9, 2018.

Through the survey, the two Koreas found more than 20 reefs and confirmed various

kinds of information on the section spanning 600 kilometers where the survey

was conducted. Taking into account the results of the inter-Korean joint waterway

survey, the ROK Armed Forces laid the foundation for the freedom of navigation of

civilian ships in the Han River estuary by making a nautical chart of the estuary and

providing this chart directly to North Korea on January 30, 2019.

At the 10th inter-Korean general officer-level talks held on October 26, 2018,

the military authorities of the ROK and North Korea agreed to draw up a "plan

to organize and operate the Inter-Korean Joint Military Committee" under the

"Agreement on the Composition and Operation of the Inter-Korean Military

Committee" agreed upon by both parties in May 1992. As a high-level military

consultative body, the Inter-Korean Joint Military Committee will be headed by a

vice ministerial-level official or higher, and the agenda subject to discussion will

include various pending military issues that require discussion between the military

authorities of the two Koreas, including those specified in the CMA.

While maintaining a robust military readiness posture, the ROK Armed Forces

will shape the conditions for the CMA to be effectively implemented in order to

reduce military tensions and build confidence between the two Koreas, thereby

continuing to contribute to the momentum behind the "Korean Peninsula peace

process".


-----

2. Establishment of a Peace Regime on the Korean Peninsula and

Arms Control

**Establishment of a Peace Regime**


Since the conclusion of the Armistice

Agreement in 1953, many confronta
tions and tensions have caused insta
bility on the Korean Peninsula. Without

peace, neither security nor the econo
my is guaranteed. Therefore, "peaceful President Moon’s keynote speech at the UN

General Assembly (September 2019)

coexistence" is a vision and task that

needs to be achieved as a top priority.

President Moon Jae-in, through the "Berlin Initiative" in July 2017, declared the

pursuit of a complete denuclearization and the conclusion of a peace treaty as a

comprehensive approach towards the North Korea nuclear issue and a peace regime.

With North Korea responding to the ROK government’s willingness to establish a

peace regime, the leaders of the two Koreas agreed in the Panmunjom Declaration

on April 27, 2018 to "cooperate actively in building a permanent and stable peace

regime on the Korean peninsula". Afterwards, while the leaders of the two Koreas

and the US continued their discussions on establishing a peace regime and achieving

denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula through a series of talks, President Moon

proposed the "transformation of the DMZ into an international peace zone"[3)] through

a keynote speech delivered before the UN General Assembly on September 24,

2019. At the UN General Assembly Plenary, President Moon emphasized that the

ROK government will cooperate closely with the international community to pave

the way for complete denuclearization and a permanent peace regime on the Korean

Peninsula by ceasing hostile activities in the border areas and transforming the

DMZ into a symbol of peace. This signifies the commitment to transform the DMZ,

a symbol of cold war confrontation, into a zone of true peace and reconciliation

together with the international community through efforts to build trust between the

two Koreas and participation and support of the international community.

Amid these efforts towards a transformation to a peace regime on the Korean

Peninsula, the MND is managing the military situation on the Korean Peninsula

in a stable manner by complying with the Armistice Agreement in good faith,

maintaining a robust ROK–US military alliance, and implementing the CMA.

The establishment of military trust between the two Koreas through the faithful


**2)**
The state wherein the
armistice agreement is
replaced by a peace treaty
and sufficient mutual trust
is built to ensure solid
peace legally, institutionally,
and realistically

**3)**
In connection with the
"transformation of DMZ
into an international peace
zone" set forth in the CMA,
the ROK proposed that the
international community
make efforts and provide
assurance for building
confidence between the
ROK and North Korea
through the participation
of specialized international
organizations, in addition
to the two Koreas, for mine
removal.


-----

implementation of CMA will greatly contribute to the ROK government’s efforts to

establish lasting peace on the Korean Peninsula.

**Arms Control** In the Panmunjom Declaration, the ROK and North Korea

agreed to a disarmament in stages as military tensions are

eased and effective measures for building military confidence are enforced. This was

a reaffirmation by the leaders of the two Koreas of the resolve to implement the

agreed measures related to existing inter-Korean military confidence building that

are included in the July 4th North-South Korea Joint Statement, the Agreement on

Reconciliation, Nonaggression and Exchanges and Cooperation, the June 15th

North-South Joint Declaration, and the 2007 North-South Summit Declaration.

In order to thoroughly implement the Panmunjom Declaration in from a military

perspective, the military authorities of the two Koreas adopted the CMA and

reached an agreement to enforce various measures for mutual confidence building.

Therefore, both parties agreed to actively promote measures to prevent accidental

clashes and build military confidence, creating a new momentum for easing tensions

on the Korean Peninsula.

The MND continues to make efforts for arms control so as to create conditions

for the complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and establish a lasting

peace regime and enhance military stability on the Korean Peninsula. First, while

continuing consultations with North Korea to ensure an early launch of the Inter
Korean Joint Military Committee, which was agreed upon by both parties to

discuss various military issues, the MND is seeking to enforce realizable measures

to implement effective arms control considering the changes in the security

environment and progress in the measures for building military confidence between

the two Koreas. In addition, the MND is striving to steadfastly promote measures to

prevent accidental clashes and build military confidence by genuinely transforming

the DMZ into a peace zone, turning the area of the NLL in the West Sea into a

maritime peace zone, building a consultative regime available at all times for the

military authorities of the two Koreas, and installing hotlines. Based on the progress

on easing military tensions and building confidence as a result of a favorable

response from North Korea, the MND will promote operational arms control[5)] by

stages such as limiting and controlling major military activities and limiting and

adjusting the deployment of military forces. Furthermore, based on the progress

made on the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and establishment of a peace

regime, the MND will gradually promote structural arms control[6)] in stages to

substantially guarantee peace.


**4)**
Stabilization of the arms
race between two potential
enemy states; in other
words, all efforts toward
increasing security by
eliminating or minimizing
the risks and burdens of
war through operational
and structural arms control
(military forces, weapons)
of military force and
imposition of sanctions
against any violation of the
agreed-upon terms.

**5)**
Operational arms control
reduces and prevents the
risk of surprise attacks and
war by constraining the
operations and deployment
of military forces without
changing the structure or
scale of military forces.

**6)**
Any measures adopted to
maintain the stability and
balance of the military by
structurally constraining
or reducing military forces
and weapons systems as
practical elements of forces
including their scale and
organization.


-----

In addition, the MND has continued

to publish the "Arms Control Policy"

since 1991 to develop its arms control

policies and provide the basic direction

and guidelines for the implementation

of arms control. The Arms Control

Policy is an objective plan for realizing

the national defense policy direction Arms control session at the 2020 SDD (September

2020)

presented in the "National Defense

Strategy Guidelines" and the "National Defense Policy" in terms of arms control.

The policy was revised and published on January 2020 after reflecting the changes

in the security situation on the Korean Peninsula and surrounding areas. Meanwhile,

the MND is also striving to reinforce its capabilities to develop arms control policies

by holding seminars to gather opinions from security experts at home and abroad

and publish a collection of data related to arms control.

While establishing a robust defense readiness posture and stably managing the

military situation, the MND will continue to pursue arms control policies thoroughly

based on the principle of reciprocity.


-----

## 2 Military Assurance for Inter
#### Korean Exchanges and Cooperation and Resolution of the ROK POW Issue

To invigorate inter-Korean exchanges and cooperation as agreed upon by the two

leaders in the Panmunjom Declaration and the Pyongyang Joint Declaration, the ROK

Armed Forces has been supporting the government’s efforts to guarantee security on

inter-Korean traffic on the ground, at sea, and in the air, and carry out military assurance

measures by utilizing military communication lines. Furthermore, with regard to

humanitarian assistance, the ROK Armed Forces is striving to solve the ROK POW issue

and support their settlement in the ROK.

1. Military Assurance for Inter-Korean Exchanges


**Overview** Through the Panmunjom Declaration and the Pyongyang Joint

Declaration, the two Koreas agreed to devise substantive measures

and military assurance measures to invigorate inter-Korean exchanges and

cooperation in a variety of fields and to encourage visits and contacts. To this end,

the two Koreas opened a joint liaison office in Kaesong and promoted inter-Korean

railway and road connections and modernization projects. However, North Korea

has refused to accept any inter-Korean talks since the collapse of the US–North

Korea summit in February 2019, unilaterally shutting down military communication

lines in June 2020 under the pretext that ROK civilian groups launched balloons

filled with propaganda leaflets over the DMZ to North Korea. The ROK Armed

Forces will continue to make preparations to provide immediate military support in

the event inter-Korean exchanges and cooperation resume in the future.


**Military Assurance for** Direct traffic between the two Koreas occurs mostly

**Inter-Korean Traffic** by ground, with sea and air routes used only occa
sionally. Ground traffic has been carried out on

roads and railways in the Joint Administrative Areas in Transportation Corridors

East and West, but rail traffic has been suspended since December 2008. Most of the

ground traffic was carried out through Transportation Corridor West to enter the


-----

Kaesong Industrial Complex, only to

be suspended in February 2016 follow
ing the closure of the complex. Thanks

to the progress in relations between the

two Koreas, however, ground traffic

resumed with North Korean delega
tions consisting of officials, athletes,

and cheering squads traveling to the Ground vehicles escorted across the joint

administrative area (West Transportation Corridor)

ROK via roads to participate in the

PyeongChang Olympics and Paralympic Winter Games in February 2018. As a

result, ground traffic through the Donghae and Gyeongui lines has been active due

to a separated families reunion event in Mt. Kumgang in August 2018, joint survey

on the roads of the Gyeongui and Donghae lines conducted in August and December

2018, and joint survey on the railways of the Gyeongui and Donghae lines conducted

between November and December 2018. Regular daily traffic was resumed in the

Joint Administrative Area in Transportation Corridor West as the two Koreas

opened the "Inter-Korean Liaison Office" in the Kaesong Industrial Complex on

September 14, 2018 according to the Panmunjom Declaration. In late January 2020,

however, as the operation of the Joint Liaison Office was temporarily suspended due

to COVID-19, ground traffic on the Gyeongui line was also suspended. If inter
Korean ground traffic begins in earnest through improved inter-Korean relations and

invigorated exchanges and cooperation, the ROK Armed Forces will provide

military assurance in consultation with the UNC and the military authorities of

North Korea and continue to guard and escort inter-Korean traffic within the DMZ.

Maritime traffic was suspended in 2010 when North Korean vessels were banned

from operation in ROK waters as a result of the May 24 measures[7)]. However,

maritime traffic was temporarily resumed in February 2018 when the Man Gyong

Bong 92 ferry that departed from Wonsan Harbor, carrying a North Korean art

troupe sent to participate in the PyeongChang Olympics, was allowed to enter the

port of Mukho. Once maritime traffic is fully resumed, the ROK Armed Forces will

take the necessary military actions to guarantee the safety of vessels.

Air traffic has been mainly carried out via a direct route opened on a temporary

basis over the West Sea. A North Korean high-level delegation visiting the ROK

in February 2018 and a ROK delegation and an art troupe visiting North Korea

in March 2018 as well as the delegation visiting North Korea for the inter-Korean

summit in Pyongyang in September used the temporary direct route over the West

Sea. A direct route opened on a temporary basis over the East Sea, on the other hand,


**7)**
Sanctions imposed by the
ROK government against
North Korea in response
to the sinking of the ROKS
Cheonan, announced
on May 24, 2010, which
included prohibiting North
Korean ships from sailing in
ROK waters, halting interKorean trade (excluding
the Kaesong Industrial
Complex), banning visits by
the ROK citizens to North
Korea, suspending new
ROK investments in North
Korea, and all aid projects.


-----

was used by ROK athletes participating in joint training activities at the Masikryong

Ski Resort in North Korea in January 2018 and by a press corps visiting North Korea

to cover the decommissioning of a nuclear test site in Punggye-ri in May 2018. In

situations where it is necessary for a flight to be carried out via a temporary direct

route over the East Sea or West Sea, the ROK Armed Forces provides military

assurance for a safe flight through aerial surveillance and military readiness posture.


**Operation of Inter-Korean** The ROK Armed Forces operates military

**Military Communication Lines** communication lines inside the Joint Ad
ministrative Areas of Transportation Co
rridors East and West as a direct communication channel between the military

authorities of the ROK and North Korea in order to reduce military tensions and

provide military assurance for exchanges and cooperation. Following the agreement

to install hotlines linking military situation rooms at the 8th inter-Korean military

working-level talks in September 2002, a communication line was set up in

Transportation Corridor West on September 24, 2002 and in Transportation Corridor

East on December 5, 2003. However, as the military communication line in

Transportation Corridor East was destroyed in a forest fire in November 2010, and

North Korea severed the communication line in Transportation Corridor West

subsequent to the closure of the Kaesong Industrial Complex in February 2016, the

military communication lines between the ROK and North Korea remained cut off

for two years. In this situation, on January 9, 2018, the two sides held inter-Korean

senior-level talks and agreed to resume communications through the communication

line in Transportation Corridor West and thus the Transportation Corridor West

communication line was temporarily reconnected the next day. Subsequently, on

June 14, 2018, during the 8th inter-Korean general officer-level talks, the two sides

agreed to normalize the military communication lines in Transportation Corridors

East and West. And on 25 June, the two sides agreed on the detailed measures for the

restoration of military communication lines at an inter-Korean communication

working-level contact. The military authorities of the two Koreas completed the

restoration of the military communication lines in Transportation Corridors West

and East on July 16, 2018 and August 15, 2018[8)], respectively, thereby normalizing all

functions. Since then, the military authorities on both sides have made regular calls

twice a day as well as unscheduled calls whenever necessary through the restored

military communication lines in Transportation Corridors East and West. In

addition, for the restoration and implementation of the June 4 agreement[9)] aimed at

preventing accidental disputes in the West Sea, the two Koreas resumed regular


**8)**
As part of the steps
toward the normalization
of military communication
lines, the ROK government
provided North Korea with
the necessary equipment
and supplies, which was
exceptionally approved
by the UN Security
Council (UNSC) Sanctions
Committee on North Korea
on July 14, 2018 to restore
the military communication
lines between the two
Koreas

**9)**
The "agreement on the
prevention of accidental
naval clashes in the West
Sea, the cessation of
propaganda activities at
the Military Demarcation
Line, and the elimination
of propaganda tools"
was adopted on June 4,
2004 during the 2nd interKorean major generallevel talks. Provisions to
prevent accidental naval
clashes as contained in this
agreement include:
① utilizing the international

vessel communication
network,

② establishing and using

rules on marine signal
flags and lights,

③ exchanging information

on illegal third country
fishing boats, and

④ setting up a

communication liaison
office in the West Sea.


-----

communication between ROK and

North Korean patrol ships using the

"international vessel communication

network" on July 1, 2018 as well as

through "exchanges of information on

illegal fishing boats of third countries"

on November 2. Although North Korea

unilaterally severed the military com- Inter-Korean working-level talks on communication

(June 2018)

munication lines on June 9, 2020, the

ROK Armed Forces remains ready to resume contact at any time upon any

improvement in inter-Korean relations. By utilizing the military communication

lines, the ROK Armed Forces has provided seamless support for various exchange

and cooperation projects which include the establishment and operation of the Joint

Liaison Office, separated families reunion events, and inter-Korean railways and

roads connection and modernization projects. Accordingly, the MND, making the

most of the military communication lines, will continue to play a pivotal role in not

only facilitating military assurance for inter-Korean exchanges and cooperation but

also effectively contributing to easing military tensions and building confidence.

2. Resolution of the ROK POW Issues


**ROK POWs: Whereabouts,** Following the return of the late First

**Family Reunions, and Repatriation** Lieutenant Cho Chang-ho in 1994, the

ROK government enacted a new law on

the ROK POWs detained in North Korea titled the "Act on the Repatriation,

Treatment of the Republic of Korea Armed Forces Prisoners of War" while preparing

government-wide measures to repatriate and support the POWs. Through inter
Korean dialogue, the ROK government has continuously urged North Korea to assist

in its effort to determine the number of POWs who are still alive and repatriate them,

stressing that this is the foremost issue that needs to be addressed for the

reconciliation of the two sides and humanitarian concerns. As North Korea has

consistently denied the existence of POWs since the conclusion of the Armistice

Agreement, however, it is not easy to fundamentally resolve this issue.

Against this backdrop, 80 ROK POWs escaped North Korea on their own from

1994 to 2010. After 2011, however, there has been no return of ROK POWs due

to the old age of POWs and enhanced surveillance of North Korean authorities to


-----

[Chart 8-1] Repatriated POWs

(As of November 2020, unit: persons)

|Year|Total|1994|1997|1998|1999|2000|2001|2002|2003|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|POWs|80|1|1|4|2|9|6|6|5|


|Year|2004|2005|2006|2007|2008|2009|2010|2011 - 2020|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|POWs|14|11|7|4|6|3|1|-|



prevent their escape. As of the end of November 2020, it has been confirmed that 21

repatriated POWs are still alive.

The ROK government is making every effort to ensure the safe repatriation of

POWs and their families who escape from North Korea to a third country. When

a POW and his family members are known to have escaped from North Korea, a

government-wide POW task force is formed to guarantee their personal safety as part

of the protection extended to citizens abroad and to carry out tasks for their speedy

repatriation. In 2015, the "Act on the Repatriation, Treatment of the Republic of

Korea Armed Forces Prisoners of War" was revised to enable the ROK government

to assist in the repatriation of the remains of fallen POWs.

During the inter-Korean ministerial talks and Red Cross talks held following

the inter-Korean summit in June 2000, the two sides agreed to start discussing

and seeking solutions for the POW issue along with the separated family issue. In

February 2006, during the 7th inter-Korean Red Cross talks, the two sides agreed

to negotiate on and solve the issue of verifying whether those who went missing in

action and after the war are still alive in connection with the separated family issue.

This principle was reaffirmed during the 20th inter-Korean ministerial talks held in

February 2007 and the 8th inter-Korean Red Cross talks in April. So far, information

on 56 POWs (whether they are alive or have passed away) have been confirmed, and

18 of them have been reunited with their families. The ROK government continues

to make efforts to address the issue of POWs by including them in the scope of

separated families via the "3rd Master Plan for the Promotion of Exchanges Among

Separated Families in the Two Koreas" formulated in December 2019.

Going forward, the MND will continue to reinforce its cooperation with third

countries and relevant agencies to ensure the safe repatriation of POWs and their

families if they defect from North Korea, while resolving fundamental issues such

as verifying whether the POWs are alive and their repatriation through various inter
Korean talks.


-----

**Supporting the Resettlement of**

**the Repatriated ROK POWs**

The MND supports repatriated POWs

to settle down and spend their lives in

their homeland in an early and stable

manner pursuant to the Act on the

Repatriation, Treatment of the Re- A special event organized for repatriated POWs

(June 2019)

public of Korea Armed Forces Prison
ers of War. The MND has also made it possible for repatriated family members of a

POW who died in North Korea to register as family members of a prisoner of war

from the place of detention and to receive separate benefits for each generation in

addition to treatment and support as North Korean defectors.

Since 2012, the MND has selected private sector firms with the appropriate

specializations to assist in the settlement process of repatriated POWs in the form

of house visits, psychological and legal counseling, etc., thereby actively carrying

out the project to provide support for their settlement in the ROK. In 2013, the ROK

government revised the relevant law to help repatriated POWs settle down in a more

stable manner by providing compensation in the form of pension and rental housing

unit. In addition, the MND invites POWs to a wide variety of events, including

Armed Forces Day events, and provides support for burial if a POW dies.

The MND will continue to lead government-wide efforts to improve policies for

the stable resettlement of repatriated POWs and cooperate with associated agencies.


-----

-----

## Appendix

**Special Appendix**

1. Significance and Results of the Comprehensive Military

Agreement

2. 70th Anniversary of the Korean War Project
3. Introduction of Alternative Service Program for Military
Service Objectors Based on Religious Beliefs, Etc.

4. Use of Mobile Phones for Servicemembers After Work

5. COVID-19 Response of the ROK Armed Forces

**Appendix**

1. Force Posture of Neighboring Countries

2. Comparing Defense Budgets Around the World
3. Annual Defense Budget
4. Force Posture of the Two Koreas
5. Comparing the Economic Indicators of the Two Koreas
6. UNSC Resolutions on Sanctions Against North Korea

7. Key Denuclearization Agreements Regarding the North

Korean Nuclear Issue

8. Status and Assessment of North Korean Nuclear and

Missile Development

9. Agreement on the Implementation of the Historic

Panmunjom Declaration in the Military Domain

10. Chronicle of Inter-Korean Military Relations
11. Chronicle on North Korea’s Infiltrations and Local

Provocations against the ROK

12. Combined·Joint Exercises and Training
13. Joint Communiqué of the 51st ROK–US Security

Consultative Meeting

14. Future ROK–US Alliance Defense Vision
15. Joint Communiqué of the 52nd ROK–US Security

Consultative Meeting

16. Guiding Principles Following the Transition of Wartime

Operational Control

17. Direct and Indirect Financial Support for the Stationing

of USFK

18. Status of Defense Industry Cooperation Agreements

with Foreign Countries

19. Defense Cooperation Agreements with Foreign

Countries

20. International Disarmament and Non-Proliferation

Agreements and Organizations

21. Status of the Overseas Deployment of ROK Armed

Forces

22. Changes in Enlisted Servicemembers Salaries
23. Changes in Mandatory Military Service Period
24. National Defense Organizations
25. Modification of Laws and Regulations Under the

Jurisdiction of the Ministry of National Defense

26. Organization and Major Activities of the National

Defense Committee of the National Assembly


72nd Armed Forces Day ceremony (September 2020)


-----

Special

Appendix01 **Significance and Results of the Comprehensive Military Agreement**

**1. Significance**

The Comprehensive Military Agreement (CMA) is

an addendum to the Pyongyang Joint Declaration.

It was signed and concluded by the defense

ministers of the two Koreas in Pyongyang on

September 19, 2018 in the presence of the leaders

from both sides to fulfill the historic Panmunjom

Declaration in detail.

CMA aims to remove the risk of war on the Conclusion of the CMA (September 2018)

Korean Peninsula through the reduction of military

tensions and confidence building between the two Koreas. The agreement includes measures to militarily

support the spirit of the Panmunjom Declaration and the Pyongyang Joint Declaration.

CMA still remains binding on both sides as the most effective and ground-breaking agreement since

the Armistice Agreement signed in July 1953.

Unlike the ten other military agreements signed by the military authorities of the two Koreas in the past,

CMA goes beyond the declaratory meaning and clearly contains actual implementation measures for

military tension reduction and confidence building between the ROK and North Korea, such as measures

to prevent accidental clashes at contact areas. The agreement also specifies the verification procedure

for each issue that have been agreed to thereby enabling the implementation and verification of the

agreement in a sound manner.

Since the conclusion of the CMA, the ROK and North Korean military authorities have ceased hostile

activities against each other and completed the reciprocal withdrawal of guard posts (GP) inside the

DMZ and the demilitarization of the Joint Security Area (JSA), and continues to make efforts to fulfill the

agreed-upon issues such as the joint recovery of remains and joint use of the Han River estuary.

Especially, the military authorities of both sides have remained faithful in implementing the measures to

cease hostile activities against each other, thereby reducing military tensions; as a result, the military

situation in the contact areas on the ground, at sea, and in the air has been kept stable.

In addition, through the JSA demilitarization measures, the first-ever meeting among the leaders of the

ROK, North Korea and the US was made possible at Panmunjom on June 30, 2019, and the withdrawal

of GPs in the DMZ has been selected by the UN as a leading example of military confidence-building and

conventional arms control.

As such, the CMA lays the foundation for transforming the long-standing hostility and confrontation on

the Korean Peninsula into a new order of peace and cooperation. This has been made possible by the


-----

ROK citizens’ desire to establish lasting peace on the Korean Peninsula over the past 70 years, relentless

efforts of previous administrations to realize such goal, and the strong readiness posture of the ROK

Armed Forces to support with strength.

**2. Key Achievements**

| Cessation of Mutual Hostilities | The implementation of measures by the two Koreas to cease all

mutual hostilities in the contact areas on the ground, at sea, and in the air to prevent accidental clashes

could be acknowledged as the biggest achievement of the CMA.

Both sides created a buffer zone stretched over 10km on the ground (5km north and south from the

MDL) to pave the way for reducing military tensions, and have agreed to suspend all artillery firing and

field training exercises of regiment-level or higher units in the buffer zone so as to fundamentally eliminate

the risk of any accidental clashes along the MDL.

The North Korean military had previously continued to conduct multiple artillery firing and field training

exercises within 5km of the MDL, but none of them have been carried out after the CMA. In addition,

after the conclusion of the CMA, no military tension arose in the DMZ, where more than hundreds of

shootings and shelling provocations had occurred, except for the shooting at the ROK GP in the central

front in May 2020[1)].

To preclude any possibility of armed conflicts at sea, the two Koreas designated the area surrounding

the NLL as a maritime buffer zone to prohibit artillery firing and marine training exercises within the area,

and agreed to specific measures such as the installation of covers over muzzles and gun barrels as well

as closure of gunports.

The North Korean military had previously con
ducted countless live-fire exercises in the mari
time buffer zone. After the CMA, however, like

the ROK Armed Forces, it has not carried out any

live-fire or marine training exercises in the buffer

zone except for the coastal artillery firing drill off

the coast of Changlin Island in November 2019[2)]

and has not conducted military provocations to Lighthouse on Yeonpyeong Island lit up for the first time in

45 years

date with no North Korean naval ships intruding

**1)** The ROK Armed Forces regarded this incident as a clear violation of the CMA and expressed its concern, urging North
Korea to immediately suspend its act through a notice in the name of ROK’s senior representative to the inter-Korean
general officer-level military talks.

**2)** The ROK Armed Forces regarded the incident as a clear violation of the CMA and expressed its concern, strongly urging
North Korea to prevent the recurrence of similar incidents.


-----

the NLL.

As such, military tension between the two Koreas has been drastically abated as the West Sea—which

had been subject to tensions and conflicts due to armed conflicts caused by North Korea’s provocations

such as the Battle of Yeonpyeong, Battle of Daecheong, sinking of ROKS Cheonan, and Artillery Battle

on Yeonpyeong-which has transformed into a sea of peace after the conclusion of CMA.

As a result, the ROK government obtained additional fishing area that is 84 times (245㎢) the area of

Yeouido in addition to the existing fishing area near the five West Sea islands, and allowed extended

night fishing hours by one hour in 2019 for the first time since night fishing was prohibited in 1964. The

government also lit up the lighthouse on Yeonpyeong Island for the first time in 45 years since 1974,

guaranteeing the safe passage of ROK ships navigating the waters near Yeonpyeong Island. Such

expansion of fishing area and extension of fishing hours have dramatically increased the catch of

fishermen around the five West Sea islands, thereby contributing to increase in revenue.

In the air, no-fly zones have been established for each type of aircraft around the MDL to fundamentally

preclude any possibility of accidental clashes between the two sides. In the past, North Korean UAV had

intruded the ROK’s airspace more than 10 times, but the two Koreas have not made any unannounced

flights within the no-fly zone, with no cases of North Korean operation of UAV for reconnaissance and

surveillance purpose since the CMA. Under the CMA, however, the ROK Armed Forces has deployed a

total of 180 helicopters in the no-fly zone to extinguish forest fires and transport emergency patients after

notifying North Korea.

Since the conclusion of the CMA, military stability has been maintained on the ground, at sea, and in

the air thanks to the faithful implementation of measures to cease all mutual hostilities at the contact

areas.

Accordingly, while maintaining a firm military readiness posture, the ROK Armed Forces will steadfastly

work hard to prevent any military personnel and citizens of the ROK from falling victim to armed conflicts

in the contact areas of the two Koreas.

| Pilot Withdrawal of GPs from Both Sides | The withdrawal of GPs inside the DMZ under the CMA is

a military measure to transform the heavily armed DMZ into an actual demilitarized zone, thereby fulfilling

the purpose of the Armistice Agreement in 1953. The two Koreas agreed to withdraw all GPs inside the

DMZ and, as a pilot measure, concurred to withdraw their GPs that are within a kilometer of each other.

In accordance with the agreement, in November 2018, the two Koreas withdrew 11 GPs inside the DMZ

on a trial basis, and each side agreed to preserve one GP on each side without completely destroying it

considering the historical symbolism and preservation value. In December of the same year, an inter
Korean joint verification group was organized for the first time in history to visit each GP where troops

**3)** No-fly zones by type of aircraft and region: fixed-wing aircraft (20km to the west and 40 km to the east), rotary-wing
aircraft (10km), UAV (10km to the west and 15km to the east), and hot-air balloons (25km).


-----

Mutual verification of pilot withdrawal of GPs


Preserved GP in the ROK (Goseong-gun, Gangwon-do
Province)


had been withdrawn so as to inspect and verify the withdrawal status.

Although some GPs inside the DMZ have been withdrawn, by operating mutually overlapping

surveillance systems to complement any security gaps in the surveillance of GPs through scientific

security systems such as unmanned surveillance cameras (CCTVs), mid-range surveillance cameras,

and thermal observation devices (TODs) that are set up along fence lines of nearby GPs and general

outposts (GOPs), the ROK Armed Forces maintains its readiness posture to ensure that there are no

gaps in security operations.

The ROK’s preserved GP in the Goseong area was registered as a cultural asset in June 2019, and the

withdrawn GPs in Goseong, Cheorwon, and Paju became available for public to access as part of the

"DMZ Peace Trail", attracting over 15,000 visitors between April and September 2019.

| Demilitarization of JSA | Since the JSA has been established to implement and comply with the

Armistice Agreement, the two Koreas concurred on promoting the demilitarization of the JSA to fulfill and

justify the purpose. Originally, the JSA was the only place inside the DMZ where guards could freely

travel between the two Koreas under the Armistice Agreement; however, the Panmunjom axe murder

incident on August 18, 1968 led to the establishment of the MDL and suspension of free travel inside the

JSA. Since then, the JSA has been considered the most dangerous place in the DMZ, with heavily

armed guards from both sides sharply confronting each other at the closest range.

Meeting of the leaders of the ROK, North Korea and the US Visit to the Foot Bridge at Panmuwnjom
in Panmunjom (June 2019)


-----

As a "tripartite consultative body consisting of the ROK, North Korea, and the United Nations

Command" became active under the CMA with a series of measures completed in October 2018 to

demilitarize the JSA, the JSA has now transformed into a place of peace and harmony where 35

completely unarmed guards without a single pistol perform their respective duties.

These measures laid the foundation for the first-ever meeting among the leaders of the two Koreas and

the US to be held at Panmunjom in June 2019. In addition, as people were allowed to access the

southern side of the JSA from May to September 2019, over 24,000 visitors experienced the

transformation of the JSA as a symbol of peace and harmony.

| Inter-Korean Joint Recovery of Remains in DMZ | Under the CMA, the ROK Armed Forces conducted

demining and remains recovery operations in the southern part of Arrowhead Hill within the DMZ from April

2019 to November 2020, recovering over 400 remains and 85,000 relics of the deceased.

Recovered among the remains were not only those of ROK soldiers killed in action (KIA) but also the

remains of soldiers of the UN forces (estimated) and a number of Chinese soldiers. Among them, the

remains of 9 ROK soldiers were identified and returned to their family members.

During the Korean War, 137,000 ROK soldiers were killed, and 124,000 of their remains have yet to be

found, accounting for over 90%. Many of them are believed to be inside the DMZ, where the fiercest

battles took place during the war.

Going forward, insofar as North Korea agrees, the ROK Armed Forces will organize a joint agency for

the recovery of remains and discuss ways to expand the areas in which remains will be sought.

Furthermore, the ROK Armed Forces will examine ways to involve other belligerents of the Korean War,

such as the US and China, in association with promoting the "DMZ into a peace zone" initiative.

Demining in the southern part of Arrowhead Hill Recovery of remains in Arrowhead Hill in the DMZ

| Peaceful Utilization of the Han River Estuary | The Han River estuary is a military area where both

sides have effectively banned any access except for a few special exceptions since the Armistice

Agreement was signed, even though the Agreement guarantees free navigation of civilian vessels in the

area. To jointly utilize the space where free access had been limited due to military tensions and create a

new momentum to restore the area as another peace zone, the two Koreas agreed to seek ways to


-----

provide military assurance for the joint utilization of the Han River estuary.

From November 5 to December 9, 2018, the two Koreas conducted a joint waterway survey on the

estuary and identified essential information for safe navigation of vessels by finding over 20 reefs in a

section stretching over 600km where hydrographic survey was conducted. The ROK conveyed to North

Korea through working-level contacts the nautical chart, survey report, and tidal observations among

others, which were created based on the joint waterway survey results.

The joint waterway survey was the first maritime survey conducted in the neutral waters of the Han

River estuary, where access had been restricted for the two Koreas since the Armistice Agreement,

allowing the provision of navigation information necessary for the free navigation of civilian vessels.

In 2019, the ROK held two pilot navigation events in the estuary to publicize the importance of the Han

River estuary and create an opportunity for continued navigation and peaceful utilization in neutral waters

of the estuary.

Going forward, the ROK Armed Forces will formulate various preparatory procedures to ensure the free

navigation of civilian vessels through working-level consultations, and provide military support during

discussions with North Korea for carrying out a precise waterway survey to devise a comprehensive plan

for the joint utilization of the Han River estuary and a comprehensive survey on marine resources and

ecology and environment.


Inter-Korean joint waterway survey on the Han River estuary

**3. Future Plans**


Conveyance of a nautical chart of the Han River estuary
(January 2019)


While maintaining a firm readiness posture to achieve peace through strength, the ROK Armed Forces

will actively create peace by continuing to implement the CMA and resolutely safeguard that peace. To

this end, the ROK Armed Forces will strive to maintain military stability in the contact areas by faithfully

implementing the agreed measures of the respected CMA.

As for the issues regarding free travel between the two Koreas in the JSA, withdrawal of all GPs inside

the DMZ, joint recovery of remains, and assurance of free navigation of civilian vessels in the Han River

estuary, which are yet to be agreed by North Korea, the ROK Armed Forces remains fully ready to


-----

immediately pursue these issues insofar as North Korea concurs. The ROK Armed Forces will also

provide active military support for inter-Korean cooperation and transforming the DMZ into an

international peace zone promoted by the government.

In addition, as both parties agreed to organize and operate an Inter-Korean Joint Military Committee

based on the CMA, the ROK Armed Forces will continue to make efforts to organize an Inter-Korean

Joint Military Committee as early as possible and make thorough preparations to discuss not only the

issues specified in the CMA but also more diverse military issues related to the settlement of peace on

the Korean Peninsula.

Going forward, while maintaining a firm military readiness posture, the ROK Armed Forces, based on

great strength, will support the ROK government’s efforts for complete denuclearization and settlement

of a permanent peace on the Korean Peninsula by actively implementing the CMA.


-----

Special

Appendix02 **70th Anniversary of the Korean War Project**

**1. Overview**

The ROK government undertakes projects every

year to commemorate the Korean War and

publicize the value of peace, and plans to hold a

large-scale government-wide event every 10

years. Considering the fact that the average age

of ROK veterans who have survived the war is 90

as of 2020, the 70th Anniversary Project just may

be the last such event in their lifetime. Therefore, Inauguration ceremony of the 70th Anniversary Project team

for the Korean War (January 2020)

the 70th Anniversary of the Korean War Project

holds more significance than ever.

In January 2020, the government launched the 70th Anniversary of the Korean War Commemoration

Committee with the Prime Minister as the Chairperson, and the MND organized a separate committee[1)]

to promote a 70th anniversary project of its own in conjunction with the government’s Commemoration

Committee.

**2. Purpose and Direction**

| Purpose | The 70th Anniversary of the Korean War Project aimed to commemorate and appreciate the

devotion and sacrifice of the ROK and foreign war veterans, instill a sense of national security among the

citizens, and develop a consensus outside the country on peace and prosperity on the Korean

Peninsula.

| Direction | The direction of the project is set toward conveying a message to the people that robust

national security shapes peace and prosperity and expressing gratitude to war veterans for their

sacrifices and dedication in safeguarding the peace of the ROK. It also aims to inspire an awareness of

national security in servicemembers and youth alike.

The Commemoration Committee decided on "Remembrance, Solidarity, and Peace" as the main

theme, while the MND chose "Flame of Memory! Torchlight of Peach and Prosperity!" is the slogan for

**1)** Organization of the project team: Stage 1 (September 11 - December 31, 2019 / 5 members); Stage 2 (January 1 October 31, 2020 / 16 members); Stage 3 (November 1, 2020 - June 30, 2021 / 5 members)


-----

the 70th anniversary of the Korean War. The

"Flame of Memory” symbolizes a sense of

gratitude for war veterans and the resolve to

remember their sacrifices, whereas the

"Torchlight of Peace and Prosperity" represents

hope that a small flame would turn into a large

torchlight, transforming the wounds of war into

peace and prosperity.

**3. Organization**


Government emblem marking the 70th anniversary of the
Korean War


The 70th Anniversary of the Korean War Project is divided into Victory Events, Events for Patriots and

Veterans, Culture/Arts Events, and Peace Experience Events, with a total of 15 project tasks. In detail,

the Victory Events primarily consist of celebrating the three victories[2)] and hands-on experience of major

battles through virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR), whereas the Events for Patriots and

Veterans are composed of the following four tasks: a memorial ceremony for the fallen heroes (return of

the remains); local appreciation events for UN war veterans; a memorial exhibition for female war

veterans and commemorative events; and events for the remembrance and appreciation of the ROK–US

alliance. The Culture/Arts Events consist of six tasks: a special exhibition on the Korean War, academic

conferences, literary activities for national defense, a production and performance of an original military

musical, a production of 70th-anniversary badges, and storytelling hologram performance of the Korean

War. Meanwhile, the Peace Experience Events have three tasks: Footsteps of the Youth Toward Peace,

a survival competition, and a ROK–US Taekwondo event.

**4. Major Projects**

| Victory Event | Victory Events were held to commemorate the victory in three major battles of the

Korean War that tipped the balance on the battlefield. These events were planned alongside local

festivals to express gratitude to war veterans. However, with the restriction on social gatherings due to

COVID-19, the events were replaced by informal events primarily focused on ceremonies and paying of

respects (pagodas and stone monument for the fallen). The victory ceremony was also replaced with a

commemorative video clip of commanders from foreign militaries that fought in the Korean War, which

**2)** Three major victory events: Incheon Landing (September), Nakdong River Defense Line Battle (October), and Battle of
Chuncheon (November)


-----

was aired online as well.

In addition, Fixed and Mobile Experience Zones

were set up to allow hands-on experiences of

major battles through VR and AR. The Fixed

Experience Zone is installed in the War Memorial

of Korea, and the Mobile Experience Zone was

supposed to help participants develop an

awareness on national security at Victory Events Victory event commemorating the Incheon Landing

(September 2020)

and military cultural festivals, but was restricted

due to the pandemic. Nonetheless, they will come in useful at many events in the future as the Mobile

Experience Zone was built to be utilized at various events in the future.

| Events for Patriots and Veterans | The Events for Patriots and Veterans are meant to fulfill the nation’s

duty to those who have devoted their lives to the nation, including the repatriation of ROK soldiers’

remains, local appreciation events for UN war veterans, and memorial exhibition for female war veterans,

as well as commemorative events. First, the event for the repatriation of ROK soldiers’ remains was held

at Seoul Air Base with the families of the deceased, government officials, and key military figures in

attendance to bring home the remains of ROK soldiers who died in North Korea during the Korean War,

but were later recovered and kept at the Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency (DPAA).

The events were meaningful in that they contributed to fostering a perspective on national security by

honoring the souls of the fallen heroes and paying respect for their noble sacrifices. It was particularly

meaningful as some of the repatriated remains were identified and returned to the families of the

deceased. In addition, a documentary titled "Returning Home After 70 Years" that portrayed the process

of repatriating the remains was aired[3)], touching the hearts of the public.

Local appreciation events for UN war veterans were aimed at expressing gratitude for their sacrifices


Repatriation of remains (June 2020)

**3)** Broadcast on SBS on July 5, 2020


Expressed gratitude to the embassies of the participating
countries (October 2020)


-----

and devotion by paying visits to the seven nations of the UN Sending States during the Korean War[4)], in

connection with other events such as naval cruise trainings. Due to COVID-19, however, physical visits

were restricted; thus, CDs containing commemorative videos of gratitude and souvenirs (face masks,

miniature of Statue of Brothers, and business card holders) were delivered to the embassies of 22

nations that participated in the Korean War.

Furthermore, in order to commemorate the 70th anniversary of female servicemembers who became

part of the military for the first time during the Korean War, an exhibition of photographs and relics

showing the activities of female servicemembers was held, along with souvenirs delivered to female

veterans through a female veterans’ organization in place of a thank-you luncheon and a memorial

performance.

| Culture/Arts Events | Designed to facilitate an accurate

understanding of the Korean War and instill a sense of security,

Culture/Arts Events ranging from a special exhibition, academic

conferences, literary activities for national defense, to a production/

performance of a military original musical, production of badges, and

storytelling hologram performance.

First, the special exhibition on the 70th anniversary of the Korean

War displayed historical data related to the Korean War, and the

Victory Events, which is attended by a large number of participants,

attracted broad public attention through a tour exhibition. An A military original musical (September

2020)

international academic conference shed new light on the significance

of the Korean War for future generations, thanked the nations that participated in the war, and publicized

the development of the ROK as a nation. A UCC (user created content) and webtoon (online comics)

contest sparked the interest in the Korean War among the younger generation and reminded them of the

importance of a nation. In the contest, 32 outstanding works were selected and used as educational

materials for servicemembers and youths.

Moreover, an original military musical was

produced for both the war generation who had

experienced the Korean War and the postwar

generation, allowing them to empathize and

communicate with each other; the performance

was broadcast live online, drawing favorable

reviews from many audiences. The storytelling

hologram performance is a magic show that Storytelling hologram performance (June - July 2020)

**4)** Local visit (Canada, Belgium, France, and UK), cruise trainings (Thailand, Australia, and New Zealand)


-----

depicted the process of overcoming the scars of the Korean War in a storytelling format. Although the

show was supposed to be held primarily around June 25, it had to be replaced with a tour for military

units in July due to COVID-19. Also, by promoting the show online, it contributed to enhancing the

public’s understanding of and interest in the Korean War.

Badges commemorating the 70th anniversary of the Korean War were awarded to active-duty officers

and NCOs to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the Korean War and boost their pride and self
esteem. Inscribed on the badge is "Powerful ROK Force", a phrase symbolizing the 70th anniversary of

the Korean War.

| Peace Experience Events | Footsteps of the Youth Toward Peace, a centerpiece of the Peace

Experience Events where participants visit historical battlefields and security sites (DMZ and Ganghwa

Island) to establish a sense of national security among future generations, was to be held through a

collaboration with the Ministry of Unification and the Ministry of Education, by publicly recruiting

participants and organizing them into seven groups. The event was canceled due to COVID-19,

however, and uniforms with souvenirs were distributed to participants instead.

In addition, the ROK–US Alliance Remembrance and Appreciation Event was held to create an

opportunity to reinforce the ROK–US alliance and express gratitude to one another. The event was held

at the US Army Garrison–Humphreys (Pyeongtaek) under the auspices of the Minister of National

Defense, inviting 70 special guests who contributed to the alliance.

However, other events such as a survival contest where ROK civilian clubs, active-duty soldiers, US 8th

Army, and local residents have a chance to experience scientific equipment, along with the ROK–US

Taekwondo Event, to reinforce mutual harmony and alliances were canceled due to COVID-19.


ROK–US Alliance Remembrance and Appreciation Event
(October 2020)


Promotional materials for Footsteps of the Youth Toward
Peace (June 2020)


-----

**5. Way Ahead**

The 70th Anniversary of the Korean War Project led to various achievements, showing appreciation for

the UN veterans and the public for their devotion and remembering how the country overcame the scars

of the war. These objectives will certainly be reflected in the Korean War commemoration projects that

will continue to be held each year to ensure that the memory and sacrifice of the Korean War are not

forgotten.


-----

Special

Appendix **Introduction of Alternative Service Program for**

**Military Service Objectors Based on Religious Beliefs, Etc.**

## 03

**1. Background and Progress**

In the ROK, more than 500 people on average each year refuse to serve in the military due to their

religious or personal beliefs. Thus, social controversy has continued as they were sentenced to

imprisonment by the court in criminal proceedings.

<Previous Status of Conscientious Objectors due to their Religious Beliefs>

2001 - June 2018 (Unit: year, persons)

**2001** 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

|379|825|561|755|828|781|571|375|728|721|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|



2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 **Total**

|633 598|623|565|493|557|461|71|10,525|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|



 99.3% for belief as Jehovah’s Witnesses (10,454) and 0.7% for personal beliefs (71)
 After the Constitutional Court’s decision in June 2018, those who refused to serve in the military have had their enrollment

postponed until the enforcement of the program.

On June 28, 2018, the Constitutional Court of Korea declared that provisions related to Article 5 (1)

(Categories of Military Service) of the Military Service Act are nonconforming to the Constitution[1)] in the

judicial review of the constitutionality and adjudication on a constitutional complaint, and on July 16,

2018, led by MND, three institutions-MND, MMA, and the Ministry of Justice-organized an Alternative

Service Task Force to formulate an alternative service program. To design a reasonable alternative

service program that harmonizes "duty of military service" and "freedom of conscience", the TF

First public hearing (October 2018) Second public hearing (December 2018)

**1)** "As the current categories of military service violate the conscience of objectors due to their religious beliefs, etc. as they
all premise military training, Article 5 (1) of the Military Service Act, which does not prescribe any alternative service
programs for conscientious objectors pursuant to the freedom of conscience under Article 19 of the Constitution of the
Republic of Korea, does not conform to the Constitution; thus, the relevant articles shall be applicable provisionally until
December 31, 2019."


-----

conducted status checks on the actual conditions of military service areas such as social welfare,

correctional, and firefighting facilities, public polls on topics such as service period, public hearings for

the public, and consultation with experts.[2)]

As a result, on December 28, 2018, the MND announced its plan to introduce an alternative service

program stating that "those who are entitled to engage in alternative service will serve 36 months in

correctional facilities, and an alternative service review committee will be established under the MND".

**2. Basis**

On April 25, 2019, the MND submitted the alternative service legislation bill to the National Assembly

after making a pre-announcement of the legislation[3)] twice from December 2018 to April 25, 2019. On

July 3 of the same year, the bill was introduced to the National Defense Committee of the National

Assembly; on September 19, the Committee led a public hearing on the alternative service bill. A

decision was made on November 13 that the MMA would establish an alternative service review

committee under the resolution of the Bill Review Subcommittee of the National Defense Committee.

Subsequently, the Act on the Assignment and Performance of the Alternative Service ("Alternative

Service Act") was promulgated on December 31 after being passed by a plenary session of the National

Assembly on December 27, entering into force on January 1, 2020.

The purpose of the Alternative Service Act is to achieve harmony between the constitutional freedom of

conscience and the constitutional duty of military service by establishing systems related to assignment,

screening and service in alternative service in lieu of active duty service, reserve service, or

supplementary service on grounds of freedom of conscience. Key contents of the Alternative Service Act

are as follows.

**2)** Factual survey on the service categories/fields of alternative service (July to August 2018), Advisory Committee on the
introduction of alternative service program (August to December 2018 on 6 occasions), meetings among the political
parties, government, and Cheong Wa Dae (September to November 2018), public hearings on the introduction of
alternative service program (First hearing: October 4, 2018 / Second hearing: December 13, 2018)

**3)** First : December 28, 2018 - February 7, 2019 / Second : April 9, 2019 - April 15, 2019


-----

<Key Contents of the Alternative Service Act>

|Classification|Main Contents|
|---|---|
|Establishment of categories of military service|Establishment of alternative service|
|Service period|36 months|
|Fields of service|Institutions prescribed by the Presidential Decree, such as correctional facilities|
|Service type|Camp training|
|Eligibility|Those who are subject to active duty, social service, and reserve forces|
|Service management|Head of the competent central administrative agency and Commissioner of MMA (granted the right to investigate actual conditions)|
|Alternative service for reservist duty|Service in the field of correction until the 8th year after service expiration (within 30 days per year)|
|Committee member|Commissioner of MMA|
|Rank of the Chairperson|Senior public official with a fixed term|
|Number of members / standing members|29 persons / less than 5 persons|
|Organizations that recommend members|National Human Rights Commission of Korea, Ministry of Justice, MND, MMA, National Assembly, and Korean Bar Association|
|Membership qualification|Professors, legal professionals, medical doctors, public officials, non-profit organization employees, etc.|
|Secretariat|Establishment of secretariat to handle committee affairs|



**3. Implementation Status**

To ensure a smooth implementation of the alternative service program, the alternative service screening

committee was organized and the statutes at the lower hierarchical levels such as the Enforcement

Decree of the Alternative Service Act were enacted or amended as of June 2020. On the other hand, to

ensure the independence of the alternative service screening, the screening committee consists of 29

members recommended by six organizations: National Human Rights Commission of Korea, Ministry of

Justice, MND, MMA, National Defense Committee of the National Assembly, and Korean Bar

Association. After hearing applicants’ opinions to determine whether the applicant hasn’t made any false

statements conducting fact-finding surveys through written, on-site, and face-to-face investigations,

eligibility for alternative service is screened and determined by the alternative service screening

committee based on their findings from a preliminary screening.

The alternative service assignment screening has been available for application since June 30, 2020,

and the review by the alternative service screening committee began on July 15 with 730 people being

assigned to alternate service by November. In 2020, a total of 106 people were assigned to alternative

service. They were trained at the alternative service training center for three weeks and were assigned to

the Daejeon Prison to carry out their alternate service.


-----

Special

## 04Appendix Use of Mobile Phones for Servicemembers After Work

**1. Background and Significance**

| Background | In line with Defense Reform 2.0, the MND reviewed the use of mobile phones after work

(including public holidays) to acknowledge the independent personalities of and relieve their sense of

isolation, promote self-development, and encourage them to make the best out their leisure time. As a

result, the policy was introduced as it was determined that the "use of mobile phones for

servicemembers after work" would contribute to open defense operations through civilian–military

convergence as well as the establishment of an advanced military culture of respect for human rights.

| Significance | The use of mobile phones is directly related to the people’s right to pursue happiness,

rights to equality, and freedom of communication as the basic rights guaranteed under the Constitution.

Therefore, allowing the use of mobile phones by servicemembers is part of the effort to guarantee the

basic rights of servicemembers who are "democratic citizens in military uniform" under the Constitution

and to connect the military and society by strengthening the former’s interaction with society.

**2. Promotional Details**

| Progress | In April 2018, a pilot operation of allowing mobile phone use after work (18:00 - 21:00) and

during public holidays (08:30 - 21:00) commenced for four units under the direct control of the MND. In

April 2019, the pilot operation was expanded to cover all units except for GPs and servicemembers in

<Progress on the Introduction of the Use of Mobile Phones for Servicemembers After Work>


(February 2020) (July 1, **2020)**


(April 2018) (December 2018)


Installation of the

security control

system

(February 2020)


Full

implementation

(July 1, **2020)**


Pilot operation

on 4 units

under the control

of the MND

(April 2018)


Military service

policy

review committee

(2018 - 2nd)

(December 2018)



Open forum
participated

by citizens

(November 2018)


Pilot operation

at all units

(April 2019)


Military service

policy review

committee

(2020 - 1st)

(June 26, 2020)


-----

training after which various regulations and systems were updated including the development of a

security control system (defense mobile security app) to prepare for the full implementation of the

program. As various positive aspects were identified through an analysis of the pilot operation that was

implemented for 27 months, the MND commenced full implementation of the program on July 1, 2020

after carrying out a military service policy review committee[1)](June 26, 2020).

| Regulation and System Updates | The regulations described below were enacted and revised to

embed a healthy mobile phone usage culture and minimize adverse effects. The enacted and revised

regulations require servicemembers to use and manage mobile phones autonomously and under their

responsibility, and take appropriate responsibility in case incidents or accidents occur due to mobile

phone usage.

<Regulations and Guidelines Related to the Use of Mobile Phones>

|1. Established "Guidelines" for the use of mobile phones by servicemembers|4. Revised the "Defense Security Affairs Directive"|
|---|---|
|2. Revised the "Guide for Servicemembers on their Use of Social Media"|5. Established the "Instruction on Disciplinary Action against Violations of Mobile Phone Use by Servicemembers"|
|3. Revised the "Integrated Management Directive for Defense Cyber Disciplines"|6. Installation of the defense mobile security app, a security control system|



**3. Performance and Evaluation**

| Changes in Command Conditions | The use of mobile phones has boosted mutual communication

and reports on unreasonable behaviors in military barracks, thus improving the unity and combat power

of unit members. The psychological and emotional stability ensured by the use of mobile phones has

contributed to intangible military strength, thereby generating positive outcomes in maintaining combat

power. It has also contributed to the improvement of transparency and rationality of command activities,

such as elimination of coercive instructions, and ensured command conditions by helping

servicemembers maintain their combat power through a reduction in psychological anxiety in noncombat

emergency situations such as the COVID-19 pandemic.

**1)** Under Article 8 of the Framework Act on Military Status and Service, the military service policy review committee
discusses and reviews matters in relation to the guarantee of basic rights and duties of military personnel, establishment
of basic policy paper on military service, and improvement of systems pertaining to military service. It is composed of 12
members, including the Minister of National Defense as the Chairperson, Chairman of the JCS, Chief of Staff of each
service, and Commander of the Marine Corps and civilian commissioners (6).


-----

<Analysis on the Effects of Changes in the Command Conditions Before and After the Pilot Use of

Mobile Phones (1)>

April 2019 February 2020


100

80

60

40

20


89.2


**21.2%P** 7.8%P 15.7%P 18.8%P

93


88.6 85.2 87.4

73.5

67.4 68.6


Communication between Report of unreasonable Unity of units Maintenance of combat force

servicemembers and cadres behaviors

 Source: Korea Institute for Defense Analyses (KIDA), Survey target and period: the enlisted / February 2020

| Changes in Barracks Life | The use of mobile

phones invigorates self-development activities,

such as getting enrolled in Internet lectures and

obtaining real-time information, and communi
cation with the outside world. This relieves

feelings of depression, isolation and stress and

leads to psychological stability and even helps

servicemembers to develop personal relation- Use of mobile phones after work (Army)

ships, resulting in the facilitation of service
members adjusting to military service. Mobile phones are expected to contribute to the establishment of

a military culture based on autonomy and responsibility in the long run.

<Analysis on the Effects of Changes in the Command Conditions Before and After the Pilot Use of

Mobile Phones (2)>

April 2019 February 2020

100 96.8 98.4 92.9 96.9

**13.1%P** 32.6%P 4.0%P

98.4

83.7

80

65.8

60

40

20

0

Self-development Communication with the outside world Satisfaction with military life

 Source: Korea Institute for Defense Analyses (KIDA), Survey target and period: the enlisted / February 2020


-----

| Increase in Personal Convenience | As it is now possible to make unlimited calls and use unlimited

data with the same cost as using other communication means (such as public phones) due to the

introduction of a tailored mobile communication pay plan tailored to servicemembers for the purpose of

reducing communication expenses, the overall communication expenses have been relative reduced.

Also, mobile phone use has contributed to increasing convenience in booking public transportations and

cultural events as well as engaging in online activities.

| Efforts to Prevent Adverse Reactions | Before allowing mobile phone use after work, there were

concerns over some adverse reactions such as online illegal gambling, game addiction, and viewing of

obscene materials.

In response, the MND continues to make active efforts in collaboration with outside professional

institutions such as the Korea Communications Commission (National Information Society Agency),

National Gaming Control Commission (Korea Center on Gambling Problems), and Ministry of Culture,

Sports and Tourism (Korea Creative Content Agency) to provide preventive education through

professional instructors, create and utilize content tailored to the military, and train professional military

instructors. In particular, in order to prevent security accidents, the MND has established a security

control system through efforts such as developing and installing a defense mobile security app that

blocks the camera function on mobile phones, and is achieved effective results.

Verification at the field where the defense mobile security A meeting on mobile phone use by servicemembers
app is used

| Overcoming COVID-19 | As long-term leave, off-post activities, and staying out overnight were

restricted due to the spread of COVID-19, servicemembers began to suffer from Corona Blue[2)] such as

service fatigue and intensifying stress. Under these circumstances, the use of mobile phones played a

major role in overcoming Corona blues among servicemembers by allowing them to search information

related to infectious diseases, attend online religious services, receive remote psychological counseling

**2)** Corona Blue is a newly coined term combining "COVID-19" and "blue" meaning depression or lethargy caused by the
spread of COVID-19.


-----

with barracks life professional counselors, and make video calls with their family members and friends.

“The use of mobile phones plays a significant role in knocking down Corona Blue with a single blow”

Thanks to the temporary use of mobile phones, amid the spread
of COVID-19, Corporal Yang ○○ of the Army Division ○○ was
able to send a video message of support to his sister who was
taking care of patients with COVID-19 while working as a nurse
at the Chungju Medical Center, a hospital designated to treat
infectious diseases.
In addition, Sergeant Lee ○○, who joined the Army Division ○○
two months after marrying his French wife, made a video call to
his wife in Dijon, France for the first time in nine months, allowing
him to check in on his wife whom he had been worried about as
they were a great distance away from each other.


| Development of Mobile App: Youth Dream, the Armed Forces Dream | Despite the full

implementation of mobile phone usage in the barracks, there was no defense mobile platform for self
development and administrative support of young servicemembers. Accordingly, the MND launched the

"Youth Dream, the Armed Forces Dream" mobile app on January 1, 2020 to enable servicemembers to

use their mobile phones more efficiently and productively for self-development and adaptation to military

life. The mobile app supports the "Youth Dream, the Armed Forces Dream"[3)] policy on mobile, consisting

of a variety of contents including welfare benefits, employment/start-up, learning, health, and leadership.

In particular, the app increased convenience through features such as mobile vacation pass and railroad

reservation for servicemembers on leave and through integration of features necessary for healthy military

service as well as grievance counseling and communication services such as sexual violence reports and

counseling, counseling on maladjustment to barracks life, and mental and physical health test sites. In the

future, a grievance counseling platform will be developed to let servicemembers receive counseling easily

through their mobile phones, and various online welfare benefits will also be provided to further improve

the app to provide various high-quality contents as a guide to barracks life.

**3)** A government-wide policy aimed at motivating servicemembers with productive military service and enhancing their
competencies, thereby improving national competitiveness after their discharge. It includes the expansion of universities
recognizing the military service as academic credits, provision of subsidies to cover the cost of self-development of
servicemembers, and career assistance programs and startup promotion contest.


-----

Special

## 05Appendix COVID-19 Response of the ROK Armed Forces

**1. COVID-19 Response System of the ROK Armed Forces**

| Response System of the MND and Each Service | Recognizing the COVID-19 incident as a "war-like

situation", the ROK Armed Forces focused all of their efforts to overcome the national disaster by means

such as preventing the inflow and spread within the military and providing support for the government
wide response to the pandemic.

In January 2020, as the health authorities elevated the crisis alert level from Yellow to Orange, the MND

immediately activated the MND Countermeasures Headquarters for 24/7 operations as the infectious

disease control tower. In February when the alert level was elevated to Red due to mass infections in

Daegu and Gyeongsangbuk-do Province, the Headquarters was further expanded and reorganized into

the "MND COVID-19 Countermeasures Headquarters". Later, in July, the "COVID-19 Emergency

Response Team" was formed as an official organization to control the situation in a stable manner in

recognition of the need for a rapid, professional response to urgent issues with the pandemic persisting

over a long period of time. Each service and the Armed Forces Medical Command (AFMC) also launched

their own headquarters for epidemic control to contain the inflow and spread of COVID-19.

The MND held meetings twice a day (morning and afternoon) to identify the status of response against

<MND COVID-19 Countermeasures Headquarters>


Director

Minister

Vice Director

Vice Minister

Deputy Director

Deputy Minister for

Personnel and Welfare

COVID-19 Emergency

Response Team

Director General, Health and

Welfare Bureau (adjunct)

Personnel Mobilization Education and Training
Health Group Logistics Support Group Public Relations Group

Group Group


Health and Welfare Logistics Management
Policy Planning Bureau Office of Spokesperson

Bureau Bureau

(Installations Planning Bureau)


Personnel Planning

Bureau


-----

The 5th Emergency ROK Armed Forces Senior Leaders Seminar (November 2020)

COVID-19 in the military and share and analyze the status of confirmed cases at home and abroad as

well as the trend in key government measures. In particular, where a major development related to the

pandemic was made, the "Emergency ROK Armed Forces Senior Leaders Seminar" organized by the

MND and attended by major commanders and heads of agencies was convened to closely monitor the

countermeasures against COVID-19 and reaction posture in all directions.

| Cooperation System with Foreign Countries | The MND COVID-19 Countermeasures Headquarters

communicated with the central and local governments through meetings with the Central Disaster and

Safety Countermeasures Headquarters (CDSCHQ). In addition, to facilitate coordination with health

authorities, government officials and military personnel were dispatched to the CDSCHQ, Central

Accident Investigation Headquarters, and Central Disaster Management Headquarters, thereby

establishing a cooperation network.

Furthermore, the MND continued to consult with civilian, public, and military experts on the response to

COVID-19. In April 2020, a video conference with COVID-19 countermeasure experts involving civilian

epidemics prevention, quarantine, and medical experts was held in April 2020 to forecast the outbreak

trend through an analysis of the pandemic outbreak; in-depth discussion was conducted on the policy

direction of social distancing in the military. In addition, while COVID-19 has spread throughout the

globe, the AFMC led a meeting on international medical cooperation in the military with the US,


Video conference of COVID-19 countermeasure experts
(April 2020)


ROK–Uzbekistan conference on medical cooperation in the
military (June 2020)


-----

Uzbekistan, and more. In the meeting, the participants shared their respective military medical systems

and status of the outbreak and response regarding COVID-19 and sought ways to cooperate in the

future.

**2. Fight Against the Inflow and Spread of Infections in the Military**

| Preventive Isolation and Active Diagnostic Tests | Since the military is vulnerable to infectious

diseases due to its group-oriented environment and the spread of infections directly affects the military’s

combat power, the ROK Armed Forces applied further intensified standards of "preventive isolation"

compared to the standards of health authorities and minimized the inflow and spread of the pandemic

through active diagnostic tests.

According to the MND’s "Guidelines for COVID-19 Related Isolation and PCR Tests **[1)] for**

Servicemembers", any person who has come into secondary contact with and who has been in the

same place as coronavirus patients have been added to those who are subject to preventive isolation.

As for those who are subject to preventive isolation, each person is, by default, required to stay in an

isolated space away from others; if there is a shortage of isolation facilities, groups of patients are

separated through cohort isolation.[2)]

<Self-Isolation Standards for COVID-19>

Isolation Standards of the Health Authorities Self-Preventive Isolation Standards of the MND

|① A person who has tested positive for COVID-19 ② A person who has come into contact with coronavirus patients ③ A patient suspected to have the coronavirus ④ A person with symptoms awaiting to receive a test ⑤ A person who has arrived in the ROK less than 14 days ago from abroad|① Self-quarantine standards of the health authorities ② A person who has come into secondary contact with coronavirus patients ③ A person who has been in the same place as coronavirus patients ④ Among those with symptoms but have tested negative for COVID-19, any person who has been instructed to go into self-isolation by the health authorities or deemed to be required to go into self-isolation at the discretion of the medical staff ⑤ A person who has come into contact with anyone who had arrived in the ROK less than 14 days ago from abroad|
|---|---|



To preemptively prevent the inflow and spread of infectious disease, the ROK Armed Forces widely

conducted PCR tests. In addition to those subject to isolation under the standards of health authorities,

**1)** A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test is a test method employed to collect RNA from swab samples such as saliva or
phlegm of a patient suspected to have the coronavirus. It determines positive infection if a certain percentage of it
matches the RNA of a coronavirus patient.

**2)** Measures against pandemics enforced by locking down a certain group or building as a whole to prevent the inflow or
spread of infectious diseases.


-----

tests were conducted for those who are subject to preventive isolation under the MND’s own standards,

thereby rapidly identifying coronavirus patients and effectively preventing the spread of the infection

within the military. Furthermore, PCR tests were conducted for all new military personnel in cooperation

with the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency from May 2020, testing a total of 160,000 people

by November. Any troops returning home from units deployed overseas were tested with a first PCR test

and isolated for two weeks after their arrival in the country. Afterward, they were tested for a second

PCR test before the isolation measure was lifted so as to prevent the inflow of the virus from overseas.

| Response to Confirmed Cases | Upon recognition of any confirmed cases within a unit, the unit was

required to report to the MND and AFMC, and then file a report with the local health center. The unit was

also restricted from moving any of its troops inside and outside its compound. The AFMC and the

medical units of each service assigned military central epidemiological investigators (contact tracers) and,

depending on each situation, jointly conducted contact-tracing together with the relevant regional health

centers to identify places where the coronavirus patient and those who have come into contact with him/

her have been. Furthermore, those who have come into contact were categorized, and other measures

such as PCR tests, epidemic control, and disinfection were carried out to identify the routes of infection,

thereby precluding additional spread throughout the military and the local community. Coronavirus

patients were admitted to military medical institutions, civilian hospitals, or residential treatment centers,

and the ROK Armed Forces continued to monitor their health conditions until they were discharged and

returned to their units. The MND especially provided vigorous psychological support to relieve depression

and sense of isolation among coronavirus patients due to long-term hospitalization and preventive

isolation, including thorough education for servicemembers to address anxieties and discrimination of

recovered patients.

| Flexible Unit Management | The ROK Armed

Forces controlled leaves, off-installation activities,

and movements of cadres in line with each social

distancing level of the health authorities,

established basic principles of unit management

for staff dinners and private gatherings, religious

activities, and visits to crowded facilities, and

allowed field commanders to implement detailed e-Sports competition of the ROKAF 20th Fighter Wing

(March 2020)

measures at their discretion.

When the first confirmed case arose in the military on February 21, 2020, the MND banned all

servicemembers from taking leave, carrying out off-installation activities, staying out overnight, and

receiving visitors starting from February 22. These were special measures implemented one month

ahead of the reinforced social distancing of health authorities considering the unique nature of the


-----

military. Since then, the MND has flexibly adjusted unit management guidelines on restrictions on leave

and off-installation activities in line with the trend of the COVID-19 outbreak in the ROK and the social

distancing level announced by the health authorities. Various measures were also enforced to relieve

stress among servicemembers amid the prolonged outbreak of COVID-19, such as offering sports and

other activities to facilitate unity in the barracks, providing active support for psychological counseling,

and allowing servicemembers to make video calls using their mobile phones.

| Practicing Epidemic Control in Daily Lives | What matters most

in a situation where no vaccine or treatment has been developed is

compliance with epidemic control in daily lives through the voluntary

participation of servicemembers. In April 2020, the MND established

the "guidelines for routine distancing in daily life of servicemembers",

which contained detailed guidelines for each field of work, daily life,

and leisure in addition to the basic guidelines. In addition, the "3·6·5

Campaign for Smart Barracks Life" was conducted to elicit a

consensus among servicemembers on practicing key guidelines Card news for the "3·6·5 Campaign

for Smart Barracks Life"

regarding the countermeasures for units (3), for public places (6), and

for individuals (5) throughout the year in order to maintain normal body temperature of 36.5℃.

<Overview of the Guidelines for Routine Distancing in Daily Life of Servicemembers>

To maintain health (normal body temperature of 36.5℃) by practicing routine distancing in daily life throughout the year


Epidemic control

of public places (6)

① Ventilate and disinfect every day
② Place and use hand sanitizers
③ Maintain a healthy distance

(1-2 m)

④ Check the temperature of

anyone who enters the unit

⑤ Stay thoughtful toward your

colleagues

⑥ Refrain from using crowded

facilities

Daily life (7)

① Barracks
② Military housing facility
③ Means of transportation
④ Barracks cafeteria, etc.
⑤ Barracks library, etc.
⑥ Medical institution
⑦ Religious facility


Epidemic control

of individuals (5)

① Make wearing a mask part of

your daily routine

② Make washing your hands for

30 seconds part of your daily
routine

③ Observe cough etiquette
④ Use your own things
⑤ If you feel ill, report immediately

Leisure (10)

① Military accommodations facility
② Commissary, etc.
③ Outdoor activity ④ Hairdresser’s
⑤ Bath / shower
⑥ Performance / movie
⑦ Karaoke room
⑧ Indoor sports facility
⑨ Cyber knowledge room, etc.
⑩ Visitor’s room


Epidemic control of units (3)

① Designate an epidemic control

manager

② Schedule flexible daily tasks
③ Build a verification system for

visitors

Work (7)

① General (office work,

administration, work, etc.)

② Conference hall
③ Command and control, training,

and guard activities

④ Civil affairs ⑤ Event venue

⑥ Training center
⑦ Exam venue


Basic
Guidelines

Detailed
Guidelines


-----

| Adoption of Pooled Sample Testing Strategy | Due to the surge in the number of confirmed cases in

Daegu and Gyeongsangbuk-do Province, the Armed Forces Medical Science Research Institute sought

to conduct rapid large-scale tests without affecting the accuracy of the test, which led to the application

of a pooled sample testing strategy. In general, the method of collecting samples and pooling them gave

rise to the issue of diluting samples and reducing accuracy, but the pooled sample testing strategy

adopts the way of pooling swabs in a single culture plate at the sampling stage and restricts the number

of swabs placed inside the culture plate to a maximum of five to ensure accuracy.

Since March 2020, the ROK Armed Forces has implemented the pooled sample testing strategy for

those who are likely to test negative among servicemembers, in which it has resulted in a three to four
fold increase in the amount of samples tested while reducing the number of tests. Although there were

concerns both inside and outside the military at the beginning of its adoption, the Korea Disease Control

and Prevention Agency verified the validity of the testing strategy with 650 evaluations and tests. In April,

the Agency also adopted the strategy as the formal diagnostic test method for COVID-19, which was

used for collective testing at nursing hospitals and similar institutions.

| Adjustment of Education and Training | In 2020, the training of

reserve forces were not conducted for the first time since the reserve

forces training was introduced, in light of the national crisis alert level

and spread of the pandemic in the ROK. However, the MND still

provided non-face-to-face remote training to replace the traditional

method.

Accordingly, all the reservists required to undergo training in 2020

were deemed to have completed their training, and remote training

based on voluntary participation consisting of introductory education Remote training system for reserve

forces

tasks including CBRN and other combat skills and reserve forces

duty was carried out starting from November.

Despite the COVID-19 situation, various kinds of education and training were offered through flexible

adjustment considering the essential elements of education and training and circumstances of each unit.

The MND set basic principles for unit training, recruit training, school education, invitation of outside

lecturers, field trips and training, and combined overseas exercises for each level of social distancing,

and allowed field commanders to flexibly implement detailed measures at their discretion.

During education and training, contact with outside lecturers and civilians was minimized, and indoor

education was adjusted to a small scale while strictly observing preventive measures against the

epidemic. In addition to operability assessment, the guidelines were enhanced to ensure that the

COVID-19 impact evaluation is carried out for combined overseas exercises.


-----

| Development of COVID-19 App | As a small

step to help the world suffering from the

pandemic, the AFMC developed a COVID-19

app and released it for anyone to use for free.

In March 2020, a medical officer on active duty

developed several mobile apps related to the

pandemic, namely the "COVID-19 Patient

Severity Classification" app, a self-diagnostic app Captain Huh Joon-nyeong develops the COVID-19

Checkup app

that determines whether one needs to be tested

for COVID-19, the "COVID-19 Checkup" app and the "Our Health

Protection" app to record health conditions such as body temperature and

share such record with designated people.

Among them, the "COVID-19 Checkup" app was listed as a COVID-19

solution for the World Health Organization’s DHA project[3)]. Since then, the

AFMC improved all app services related to COVID-19 and developed an

integrated version of the "COVID-19 Checkup" app, which is widely used

at home and abroad. COVID- 19 Checkup app

screen

**3. Support for Government-wide Response to COVID-19**

| Defense Rapid Support Team | The ROK

Armed Forces has maintained a solid military

readiness posture in the face of a national

disaster caused by COVID-19, providing active

support for the government-wide response to the

pandemic by mobilizing all available resources as

the "military for the people". The MND has

continued to operate the Defense Rapid Support Daily situation evaluation meeting of the Defense Rapid

Support Team (March 2020)

Team since March 2020 to effectively deal with

COVID-19, which shows different aspects from previous disasters such as a rising transportation

demand throughout the nation. To enhance the efficiency of support, the Defense Rapid Support Team

integrated the support system for civil authorities and established five dedicated teams (epidemic control,

supplies, transportation, facilities, and welfare) and regional dedicated units for permanent operations,

**3)** Digital Health Atlas is a project that finds solutions around the world to provide help to the medical field with the latest
digital technology and offer them to the world.


-----

thereby building a system for immediately providing available personnel, equipment, and supplies. The

dedicated teams divided the country into four regions (Seoul/Gyeonggi-do, Daegu/Gyeongsangbuk-do,

Daejeon/Chungcheong-do, and others) for effective management, while regional dedicated units

dispatched "cooperation officers for rapid military support" to provinces and cities nationwide so as to

identify and provide the required support in a timely manner before local governments request any

support. The Defense Rapid Support Team managed the situation systematically by inspecting the

required military support, outcomes, and plans for each dedicated team on a daily basis.

| Medical Personnel and Bed Support | As the lack of medical personnel and beds emerged as an

issue due to the wide spread of the virus, the ROK Armed Forces has dispatched over 41,000 medical

officers and nurses to quarantine stations, hospitals, temporary living facilities, and screening clinics from

January to November 2020. In February in particular, the ROK Armed Forces adjusted the military

training period of 742 new public health doctors in Daegu/Gyeongsangbuk-do and appointed them early

to be deployed as field personnel. Furthermore, among candidates who were scheduled to be trained as

medical officers, the ROK Armed Forces reduced the military training period of 96 candidates who

volunteered to provide medical support in Daegu/Gyeongsangbuk-do and dispatched them to the field.

The ROK Armed Forces also moved up the graduation ceremony and commission ceremony of the

Korea Armed Forces Nursing Academy and deployed all 75 new nursing officers to the military hospital

in Daegu as soon as they were commissioned, thereby actively contributing to the treatment of patients.

Military medical personnel performed tasks such as collecting samples, conducting diagnostic tests,

contact-tracing, and treating coronavirus patients at the forefront.

In addition, 424 negative pressure rooms in military hospitals were provided for the treatment of

coronavirus patients, contributing to the resolution of the shortage in hospital beds. The Armed Forces

Capital Hospital, which had previously provided state-designated negative pressure rooms (9 beds) for

patients with mild to intermediate symptoms, is providing support by converting the negative pressure

rooms for patients with severe symptoms, and its trauma center offers negative pressure rooms (40

beds) for patients with mild to intermediate symptoms. The Armed Forces Daegu Hospital (303 beds)


Support for collecting samples from the AFMC (May 2020)


Inpatient treatment training for coronavirus patient in a
negative pressure room at the Armed Forces Trauma Center
(September 2020)


-----

and Armed Forces Daejeon Hospital (72 beds) were designated as national infectious disease hospitals

in February to contribute to the treatment of coronavirus patients in Daegu and Gyeongsangbuk-do

Province.

In particular, to rapidly acquire negative pressure rooms, the ROK Armed Forces, with a posture

equivalent to a military operation, deployed up to 100 military engineers a day to the Armed Forces

Daegu Hospital to convert 98 general rooms into 303 negative pressure rooms and helped hospitalize

300 coronavirus patients in seven days.

| Support of Manpower and Facilities | From

January to November 2020, the ROK Armed

Forces carried out a variety of tasks by providing

around 220,000 personnel to operate newly

established facilities due to the spread of

COVID-19 such as residential treatment centers,

temporary living facilities, and screening clinics.

First, the ROK Armed Forces carried out tasks to Counseling support of mental health counselors against the

pandemic in Daegu and Gyeongsangbuk-do Province (April

improve the convenience of coronavirus patients 2020)

such as delivering food and sorting goods at

residential treatment centers which are operated for patients with mild symptoms and temporary living

facilities for short-term residents who are foreign nationals and overseas Koreans. In Daegu and

Gyeongsangbuk-do Province, 13 barracks life counselors who volunteered from all over the country

were dispatched as "mental health counselors against the pandemic" to provide psychological

counseling for 2,000 hours to approximately 8,000 citizens who suffered from psychological anxiety.

In addition, as overseas Koreans returned from Wuhan, Hubei Province in China in February, the Korea

Defense Language Institute was assigned as their temporary living facility during their isolation period,

considering the overall accessibility from the airport and medical institutions, size, and amenities.

| Support for Quarantine and Epidemic Control | From January to November 2020, the ROK Armed

Forces provided more than 100,000 quarantine personnel and interpreters to 20 quarantine stations at

airports and ports nationwide to forestall the inflow of infections from overseas entrants. The Capital

Corps and the 9th Special Forces Brigade played a leading role in operating a field command post at

Incheon International Airport to which the largest number of quarantine personnel had been assigned
thereby building a seamless cooperative system with the government-wide support team within the

airport-and systemically managed various matters such as allocating personnel to each quarantine desk,

assigning duties and conducting education, and providing operations support. Furthermore, the forces

checked the health conditions of each servicemember at all times and strictly observed the quarantine

guidelines, thus completing all duties safely without a single case of infection.


-----

ROK Armed Forces’ quarantine support at the Incheon
International Airport (June 2020)


Implementation of precise measures against the pandemic
using special equipment from the ROK CBRN Defense
Command


The "outreach epidemic prevention" support was provided primarily to places that are vulnerable to

infection such as roads, public facilities, crowded facilities, nursing facilities, and schools, with 33,000

personnel as well as 24,000 pieces of equipment, including sterilizers and decontamination vehicles,

deployed from February to November. As the demand for epidemic control soared in Daegu and

Gyeongsangbuk-do Province in March, the ROK CBRN Defense Command, Army 7th Corps, and Army

Missile Command assumed the leading role in deploying more than 1,000 personnel and 300 equipment

to high-risk areas, including cohort isolation facilities. Since then, the CBRN Defense Command has

actively deployed military personnel and equipment to places where measures against the pandemic are

needed to provide support for epidemic control by various means such as conducting precise epidemic

control using special equipment applied in CBRN operations.

| Transportation Support | The ROK Armed Forces established a transportation team for emergency

situations-such as transportation of anti-epidemic supplies for COVID-19 and return of overseas

Koreans-and provided the means of transportation by assigning military transport aircraft, a presidential

aircraft, and Multi Role Tanker Transport (MRTT). While the supply of face masks remained far short of

the surging demand in February 2020, the ROK Armed Forces mobilized over 360 vehicles and

transported anti-epidemic supplies (13 million face masks and 810,000 sets of personal protective

equipment (PPE)) as well as various relief supplies, including bottled water, to the Central Accident

Investigation Headquarters, Central Disaster Management Headquarters, Ministry of Food and Drug

Safety, and local governments to rapidly deliver anti-epidemic and relief supplies provided by the

government throughout the nation. In March, close cooperation was performed among the MND,

Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and ROK Embassy in Myanmar for the urgent deployment of Air Force

transport aircraft in carrying 80,000 sets of PPE manufactured in Myanmar within 21 hours, thus

supplying PPE to the ROK medical staff in a timely manner.

The ROK Armed Forces also provided support for Korean nationals based abroad and their safe return.

When a mass infection occurred on the Japanese cruise ship Diamond Princess in February, seven

Korean nationals on board the ship returned home safely using a presidential aircraft. In May, an air


-----

charter was deployed to support the return of 60 Korean nationals residing in Africa during the rotation

between the 11th and 12th dispatches of Hanbit Unit, which had been dispatched to South Sudan in

Africa. In July, an MRRT was deployed for the first time for the safe return of 293 construction workers in

Iraq who had been exposed to the risk of infectious diseases.

Transport of anti-epidemic supplies from Myanmar with Air Support for the transport of Korean nationals aboard a
Force transport aircraft (March 2020) Japanese cruise ship (February 2020)

| Support for Agricultural Activities | Rural

areas suffered difficulties due to a lack of work

personnel caused by the suspension of foreign

worker inflow and the decrease in volunteers

based on social distancing guidelines in the

COVID-19 environment.

In response, the ROK Armed Forces deployed

24,000 personnel to support agricultural activities ROK Army’s support for the cultivation of oats (May 2020)

in rural areas from April to November 2020. Each

service gave support for rice planting, repair of agricultural machinery, and hand pollination of pear

flowers to the extent that their performance of operations and duties were not affected, thereby helping

farmers significantly.

To ensure the safety of servicemembers during the process, the safety level of each area was

examined in advance to determine whether to provide support or not, and thorough safety education

was also provided. In addition, a sufficient amount of personal protective supplies such as face masks

were provided during the work, and servicemembers were required to observe anti-epidemic guidelines

such as properly wearing a face mask and keeping their distance with each other.

| Group Blood Donation | As the COVID-19 pandemic continued, the balance between blood supply and

demand became unstable[4)] throughout the nation, with the nation’s blood reserves falling below three days

**4)** An adequate blood reserve should satisfy the demand for 5 days at least.


-----

of supply. In response, the ROK Armed Forces

practiced warm sharing of life by conducting

280,000 group blood donations at 5,300 units

between January and November 2020 through

various campaigns such as the "Blood Donation of

Love" and "Blood Donation Relay". To ensure the

safety of servicemembers during the blood

donation process, the MND organized a blood ROK Army’s Blood Donation of Love Campaign (September

2020)

collection team and the blood collecting staff was

required to get tested for COVID-19 in advance. Their health conditions were monitored twice a day, and

the blood collecting staff and donors were strictly monitored in wearing a face mask.

**4. Maintaining a Firm Military Readiness Posture in the Face of the COVID-19**

**Pandemic**

The ROK Armed Forces implemented highly intensive epidemic control measures and flexibly conducted

various operations and drills to maintain a firm military readiness posture even in the face of a national

crisis brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic. First, the ROK Armed Forces implemented unique and

differentiated anti-epidemic measures for key military installations such as command and control rooms

and emergency waiting rooms and assigned preliminary installations to ensure that command and

control and standby for emergency were kept stable even if the existing installations were to be

contaminated. Thorough measures were formulated in advance to ensure the normal operation of other

standby forces, even if the force employment became limited due to infections or any other causes, by

separating the time and space for key forces such as emergency standby forces and surveillance and

response forces.

During the period when the number of confirmed cases in the ROK soared, operational activities were

selectively adjusted and implemented. Training activities against infiltrations and local provocations were

conducted at the military post while thoroughly observing preventive guidelines against infections, and

the timing, size, and method varied to match the circumstances of each unit. Unit patrol and inspection

activities for each level were carried out primarily by commanders to minimize the movement of

personnel, and such activities were gradually expanded by devising anti-epidemic measures to the

extent that no contact is made with civilians.

COVID-19
Response of the
ROK Armed Forces


-----

-----

Appendix

1


###### Force Posture of Neighboring Countries

**Overview**

|Classification|United States|Russia|China|
|---|---|---|---|
|Troops|1,373,050|900,000|2,035,000|
|Army|481,750|280,000|975,000|
|Navy|337,100|150,000|250,000|
|Air Force|325,900|165,000|395,000|
|Others|Marine 186,300 Corps Coast 42,000 Guard|Airborne 45,000 Strategic Missile 50,000 Command 180,000 Support Railroad 29,000 Forces Special 1,000 Forces Paramilitary 554,000|Rocket 120,000 Forces Strategic 175,000 Support Forces Others 120,000|



**Army**


Anti-tank

guided weapons


617

68

111
795

340
172

99

1,105

SP 37


|United States|Russia|China|
|---|---|---|
|10 MBT 5,689 IFV 4,931 RECCE 2,545 APC 18,547 1,339 998 600 2,507 SP 1,133 1,183 3,875 211|9 (98 brigades) 13,000 13,660 2,700 12,100 12,565 5,870 4,082 4,130 GUN 2,526 1,520 - -|Army Groups 13|
|||5,850 5,800 350 (Light tanks) 3,950|
|||2,484 2,140 1,570 2,800|
|||SP 1,000 RCL 3,966 GUN 1,788|
|||524|
|||1,015|
|||10|


-----

**Navy**

|Col1|United States|Russia|China|
|---|---|---|---|
||53 14 11 24 67 19 84 11 2 / 32 131 12 716 692|39 10 1 4 13 15 118 43 20 28 269 157 198|55 4 2 - 28 52 209 54 49 67 148 318 113|
|Marine divisions|Marine Expeditionary Force 3|Brigades 3|Brigades 7|
|Tanks Infantry combat vehicles Assault amphibious vehicles Armored personnel carriers Reconnaissance vehicles Field artillery Anti-tank guided missiles UAV·ISRs Fighters Tiltrotors Helicopters|447 488 1,200 207 2,579 1,452 106 180 432 309 435|300 1,061 - 400 - 383 - - - - -|75 10 152 - - 40 - - - - -|



**Air Force**

**Classification** **United States** **Russia** **China** **Japan**

aircraft

control aircraft

|139 - ISR 40 4 FTR·FGA·ATK 1,383 TPT 331 TKR/TPT 237 AWE&C·EW 31 TRG 1,126 136 International/Domestic civil aircraft 553 ELINT 22|138 - 58 11 888 442 15 9 227 822 - 34|176 794 51 5 899 336 13 13 1,012 53 - 18|
|---|---|---|



*[Source: The Military Balance 2018 (Center for Strategic and International Studies, February 2020)]


21

- 

- 

- 

40
11

6

25

3
8

18

- 

122

- 

- 

14

- 

338

57

6

18

247

54


-----

Appendix

2


###### Comparing Defense Budgets Around the World

As of 2019

|1,646.3|42.5|2.43|579|
|---|---|---|---|
|22,440|684.6|3.19|1,380|
|5,150|48.6|0.94|247|
|14,100|181.1|1.28|2,035|
|1,640|48.2|2.94|900|
|586|10.9|1.87|163|
|2,740|54.8|2.00|148|
|2,710|52.3|1.93|204|
|3,860|48.5|1.26|181|
|388|19.3|5.82|170|
|302|3.4|1.54|439|
|779|78.4|10.06|227|
|1,380|25.5|1.85|57|
|744|8.1|1.09|355|
|365|3.3|0.91|113|
|529|7.1|1.34|361|
|363|11.3|3.11|51|
|2,300|18.7|1.08|67|


**Defense Budget** **Defense Budget-** **Troops** **Per-Capita Defense**
**Country** **GDP (USD billion)**

**(USD billion)** **GDP Ratio (%)** **(thousand)** **Budget (USD)**


-  [Source: The Military Balance 2018 (Center for Strategic and International Studies, February 2020), the ROK’s data is derived from government statistics.]


-----

Appendix

3


###### Annual Defense Budget


|Main|Supple mentary|Main|Supple mentary|Main|Supple mentary|Main|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|7,452.4|7,476.4|3.07|3.08|27.4|23.8|12.3|
|8,410.0|8,410.0|3.03|3.03|25.1|25.1|12.8|
|9,215.4|9,215.4|2.92|2.92|24.2|24.2|9.6|
|10,075.3|10,075.3|2.70|2.70|23.3|23.3|9.3|
|11,074.4|11,074.4|2.53|2.53|21.3|21.3|9.9|
|12,243.4|12,243.4|2.49|2.49|21.1|20.8|10.6|
|13,786.5|13,786.5|2.54|2.54|20.4|20.7|12.6|
|14,627.5|13,800.0|2.72|2.57|20.8|18.3|6.1|
|13,749.0|13,749.0|2.32|2.32|17.2|16.4|△6.0|
|14,439.0|14,477.4|2.22|2.22|16.7|16.3|5.0|
|15,388.4|15,388.4|2.18|2.18|16.3|15.5|6.6|
|16,364.0|16,364.0|2.09|2.09|15.5|14.9|6.3|
|17,426.4|17,514.8|2.08|2.09|15.6|14.8|6.5|
|18,941.2|18,941.2|2.09|2.09|16.0|15.8|8.7|
|20,822.6|21,102.6|2.17|2.20|15.5|15.6|9.9|
|22,512.9|22,512.9|2.24|2.24|15.5|15.3|8.1|
|24,497.2|24,497.2|2.25|2.25|15.7|15.7|8.8|
|26,649.0|26,649.0|2.31|2.31|15.2|14.8|8.8|
|28,532.6|28,980.3|2.37|2.40|14.5|14.2|7.1|
|29,562.7|29,562.7|2.24|2.24|14.7|14.7|3.6|
|31,403.1|31,403.1|2.26|2.26|15.0|15.0|6.2|
|32,957.6|32,957.6|2.29|2.29|14.8|14.8|5.0|
|34,345.3|34,497.0|2.29|2.30|14.5|14.3|4.2|
|37,705.6|35,705.6|2.28|2.28|14.4|14.4|4.0|
|37,456.0|37,555.0|2.26|2.27|14.5|14.3|4.9|
|38,799.5|38,842.1|2.23|2.23|14.5|13.9|3.6|
|40,334.7|40,334.7|2.20|2.20|14.7|14.2|4.0|
|43,158.1|43,158.1|2.27|2.27|14.3|14.2|7.0|
|46,697.1|46,697.1|(2.43)|(2.43)|14.1|14.0|8.2|
|50,152.7|48,378.2|(2.62)|(2.52)|14.1|12.4|7.4|


**Defense Budget-**

**Defense Budget** **Defense Budget-GDP** **Defense Budget Increase**

**Government Finance**

**(KRW billion)** **Ratio (%)** **Rate (%)**

**Year** **Ratio (%)**

**Supple** **Supple** **Supple** **Supple**
**Main** **Main** **Main** **Main**

**mentary** **mentary** **mentary** **mentary**


-  [GDP: recalculated based on the 2015 national accounts of the Bank of Korea.]

-  [The 2020 data is based on the nominal GDP preliminary estimates of the Ministry of Economy and Finance (Economic Policy Direction of the Ministry of ]

Economy and Finance, December 2020)

※ Nominal GDP: calculated by applying the prices of the relevant year to production in the same year.


-----

Appendix

4


###### Force Posture of the Two Koreas

As of December 2020

Approx. 50 Approx. 350

3.1 million 7.62 million

(including officer candidates, (including Reserve Military

service personnel) and Red Youth Guard))


Troops

(peace time)

Major

Forces

|Col1|Col2|Col3|South Korea|
|---|---|---|---|
||||420,000|
||||70,000 (including 29,000 Marine Corps)|
||||65,000|
||||-|
||||555,000|
|Units Army Equipmen||Corps|(including Marine Corps) 13|
|||Divisions|(including Marine Corps) 37|
|||Brigades (independent brigades)|(including Marine Corps) 34|
|||Tanks|(including Marine Corps) Approx. 2,130|
|||Armored vehicles|(including Marine Corps) Approx. 3,000|
|||Field artillery|(including Marine Corps) Approx. 6,000|
|||MLRS/MRLs|(including Marine Corps) Approx. 270|
|||Ground-to-ground guided weapon|Approx. 60 launchers|
|Navy|Surface Vessels|Combatants|Approx. 100|
|||Amphibious ships|Approx. 10|
|||Mine countermeasures vessels (mine sweeper)|Approx. 10|
|||Auxiliary ships|Approx. 20|
||Submarines||Approx. 10|
|Air Force||Fighter aircraft|Approx. 410|
|||Surveillance and control aircraft|(including those belonging to the Navy) Approx. 70|
|||Transport aircraft (including AN-2)|Approx. 50|
|||Trainers|Approx. 190|
|Helicopters (Army/Navy/Air Force)|||Approx. 660|
||||3.1 million (including officer candidates, wartime labor call, and secondment and alternative service personnel)|



-  [Units and equipment of the other services are included in the number of units and equipment of the Army to compare military strength between the two Koreas.]

-  [The number of North Korean field artillery do not include 76.2 mm guns that are infantry regiment-level artillery.]

-  [The table above only provides a quantitative comparison between the military force of South Korea and North Korea. A more meaningful comparison ]

requires qualitative assessment based on comprehensive consideration of the relevant factors such as performance level and years-in-service of the
equipment used by the two sides, levels of training, and operational concepts of joint forces.

-  [As for army brigades, independent brigades organized under corps or higher-level echelons such as artillery, engineering, and aviation brigades are ]

included. Therefore, the 14 brigades under the command of the two North Korean mechanized corps were not included in the figures of the North
Korean brigades as the corps have been modified into divisions.

-  The KPA Special Operations Force of North Korea is included in the Army, Navy, and Air Force.


-----

Appendix

5


###### Comparing the Economic Indicators
 of the Two Koreas

|2018|2019|2018|2019|2018|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|1,905.8|1,935.7|35.9|35.6|53.1 times|
|3,693.0|3,743.5|142.8|140.8|25.9 times|
|2.9|2.0|-4.1|0.4|-|
|1,140.06|1,045.58|2.84|3.24|400.9 times|
|51,607|51,709|25,132|25,250|2.1 times|


**South Korea** **North Korea** **South Korea / North Korea**

**Classification**

**2018** **2019** **2018** **2019** **2018** **2019**


-  [Source: Bank of Korea ]

-  [Gross National Income (GNI): Since 1993, major countries and international organizations, such as the UN and IMF, have replaced GNP with GNI ]

(GNI≒GNP).


-----

Appendix

6


###### UNSC Resolutions on Sanctions Against North Korea




**Classification** **Background** **Major Details (summary)**

Resolution North Korea’s

-  Demands member states to prevent and monitor the transfer of materials,

1695(July 15, long-range missile

technologies, and financial resources related to WMD and missile activities

2006) launch (July 5, 2006)

Resolution North Korea’s 1st

-  Embargo, shipment inspection, asset freezing, and travel control

1718 (October nuclear test (October

-  Sets up sanctions committee on North Korea under the UN Security Council

14, 2006) 9, 2006)

Resolution -  Complete embargo against arms imports with an exception to small arms

North Korea’s 2nd

1874 -  Ban on all financial services and support that could contribute to North Korea’s WMD

nuclear test

(June 12, and missile activities

(May 25, 2009)

2009) -  Sets up an expert panel to support the sanctions committee on North Korea

Resolution North Korea’s -  Pursues introduction of standards to strengthen search activities of suspicious vessels

2087 long-range missile in open waters

(January 22, launch -  Reinforces "catch-all" export control against North Korea

2013) (December 12, 2012) -  Urges enhanced monitoring of all activities involving North Korean financial institutions

Resolution North Korea’s 3rd -  Expands embargoed items related to nuclear weapons and missiles

2094 (March nuclear test -  Reinforces financial sanctions (suspension of activities of North Korean banks violating

7, 2013) (February 12, 2013) the resolution)

North Korea’s 4th -  Prohibits cooperation with North Korean military and police

Resolution nuclear test (January -  Introduces mandatory search of shipments to and from North Korea and prohibits

2270 6, 2016) / North entry of sanctioned vessels or vessels suspected of involvement in illegal activities

(March 2, Korea’s long-range -  Demands closure of overseas branches and offices of North Korean banks within 90

2016) missile launch days

(February 7, 2016) -  Introduces import ban on North Korean minerals (coal, iron, gold, etc.)

-  Prohibits scientific and technological cooperation with North Korea

-  Prohibits rental of aircraft and vessels and provision of crew to North Korea; States

Resolution

North Korea’s 5th mandatory search of travel baggage to and from North Korea

2321

nuclear test -  Closes foreign financial institutions in North Korea

(November

(September 9, 2016) -  States additional mineral items that are banned for export (silver, copper, zinc, and

30, 2016)

nickel) and bans the export of sculptures

-  Caps North Korea’s coal export

Resolution North Korea’s launch

2356 of IRBM (May 14, -  Expands the scope of sanctions

(June 2, 2017) 2017)

-  Adds WMD and conventional weapon dual-use control items

Resolution -  Grants the committee authorities to designate vessels involved in prohibited activities

North Korea’s launch

2371 and requires member states to deny entry of suspected vessels

of ballistic missiles

(August 5, -  Restricts member states’ employment of North Korean workers

(July 4 and 28, 2017)

2017) -  Bans North Korea’s export of coal, iron, and iron ores

-  Bans North Korea’s export of lead, lead ores, and seafood

-  Adds WMD and conventional weapon dual-use control items

Resolution

North Korea’s 6th -  Urges search of vessels suspected of carrying banned items with the consent of flag state

2375

nuclear test -  Bans granting a work permit to North Korean workers

(September

(September 3, 2017) -  Bans North Korea’s textile export

11, 2017)

-  Restricts fuel supply to North Korea

-  Capture, search, and seizure of vessels suspected or involved in the transportation of

banned items or prohibited activities within territories and territorial waters

-  Repatriates North Korean works to North Korea within 24 months

Resolution North Korea’s

-  Restricts fuel supply to North Korea

2397 launch of

-  Bans North Korea’s export of food, agricultural products, machinery, electronics,

(December Hwasong-15

minerals, soil, stone, wood, and vessels

22, 2017 (November 29, 2017)

-  Bans export of industrial machinery, means of transportation, iron, and other metals to

North Korea

-  Expressly bans trading of fishing rights


-----

Appendix

7


###### Key Denuclearization Agreements Regarding
 the North Korean Nuclear Issue


**Agreement** **Major Details (summary)**

-  Agreed to cooperate in replacing graphite-moderated reactors with light-water reactors

① Geneva Agreed -  Agreed to work toward the complete normalization of political and economic relationship between

Framework North Korea and United States

(October 21, 1994) -  Agreed to cooperate for peace and security on the denuclearized Korean Peninsula

-  Agreed to cooperate for the consolidation of the nuclear non-proliferation regime

-  Reaffirmed verifiable denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula

② September 19 Joint -  Pledged to promote economic cooperation in energy, trading, and investment

Statement -  Pledged to take joint efforts for permanent peace and stability in Northeast Asia

(September 19, 2005) -  Agreed on phased implementation of the agreement

-  Agreed on the closure and sealing of nuclear facilities in North Korea, return of IAEA inspectors to

North Korea, and preparation of a list of all nuclear programs

③ February 13 Agreement -  Began bilateral talks for the normalization of US-North Korea and North Korea–Japan relationships

(February 13, 2007) -  Agreed to provide economic, energy, and humanitarian aid to North Korea

-  Agreed to convene a separate forum with directly concerned parties to negotiate a peace regime

for the Korean Peninsula

-  Agreed to disable all existing nuclear facilities and to declare all nuclear programs in a complete,

accurate manner

④ October 3 Agreement

-  Reaffirmed North Korea’s pledge not to transfer nuclear materials, technologies, or knowledge

(October 3, 2007)

-  Agreed to provide economic, energy, and humanitarian aid to North Korea corresponding to 1

million tons of heavy fuel oil

-  North Korea agreed to take preliminary measures for denuclearization

-  The United States agreed to provide 240,000 tons of nutrition aid

⑤ February 29 Agreement

-  The United States confirmed that it does not have any hostile intention toward North Korea

(February 29, 2012)

-  Agreed to improve US-North Korea relations and expand civilian exchanges in culture, education,

and sports

-  Mutual prosperity and self-reliant unification

⑥ Panmunjom Declaration -  Mitigation of military tension

(April 27, 2018) -  Establishment of a permanent, stable peace regime on the Korean Peninsula

-  Achieve a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula through complete denuclearization

-  Agreed to establish a new US-North Korea relationship

⑦ US-North Korea Joint -  Agreed to make joint efforts to build a permanent, stable peace regime on the Korean Peninsula

Statement -  North Korea reaffirmed the Panmunjom Declaration and agreed to make efforts for the complete

(June 12, 2018) denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula

-  Agreed to recover the remains of POWs and MIAs and repatriate the identified remains

-  Agreed to cease military hostility and expand exchanges and cooperation

⑧ Pyongyang Joint

-  Agreed to dismantle the Dongchang-ri missile engine test site and launch platform

Declaration

-  Agreed to dismantle the nuclear facilities in Yongbyon as the United States takes reciprocal

(September 19, 2018)

measures


-----

Appendix

8


###### Status and Assessment of North Korean Nuclear
 and Missile Development

**1. Status and Assessment of Nuclear Development**

| Construction of Nuclear Infrastructure | Immediately following the Korean War, North Korea began

the groundwork for the use of nuclear energy, such as basic research and workforce cultivation, while

carrying out postwar restoration efforts. The physics department of Kim Il-sung University opened a

nuclear physics course in 1955, followed by the launch of a nuclear physics lab in the Academy of

Sciences of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (formerly known as the "National Academy of

Sciences") in 1956. That same year, North Korea signed a nuclear cooperation agreement with the

Soviet Union and sent scientists to the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna, establishing the

foundation for acquiring advanced technologies and training experts. In 1959, North Korea signed a

nuclear cooperation agreement with China as well. North Korea obtained research reactors with the help

of the Soviet Union in 1963, with which it began the construction of a large-scale nuclear complex in

Yongbyon, North Pyongan Province in 1965. At the same time, North Korea developed uranium mines

and built uranium refineries in Pyongsan, Suncheon, and Bakcheon. Subsequently, North Korea built a

series of additional nuclear facilities capitalizing on its rich uranium reserve.

| Full-fledged Nuclear Development | In the 1980s, North Korea

launched full-fledged nuclear development efforts by building

production facilities for weapons-grade nuclear materials, training

nuclear experts, and expanding its infrastructure for nuclear weapon

development including nuclear test sites. The Yongbyon Nuclear

Complex saw the construction of key plutonium production facilities

including nuclear reactors, reprocessing facilities, and nuclear fuel

rod fabrication facility. North Korea developed a 5 MWe graphite
moderated reactor on its own, which was completed and activated

in 1986. In 1985, it built a radiochemical laboratory capable of

reprocessing spent nuclear fuel, which was fully activated in 1989. 5 MWe reactor located in Yongbyon

At the same time, North Korea began the construction of a 50 MWe

graphite-moderated reactor in the Yongbyon complex with 1995 as the target year and established a

plan to build a 200 MWe graphite-moderated reactor in Taechon.

In 1989, North Korea came under suspicion when the Yongbyon Nuclear Complex was discovered by


-----

a French commercial satellite. Under pressure from the international community, North Korea signed a

safeguards agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in 1991, followed by a

dispatch of an investigation team from IAEA the following year. However, the inspection fueled the

suspicion of North Korea’s nuclear development as the team identified material inconsistencies in the

nuclear activities declared by North Korea. The IAEA requested a special inspection for further

verification, which resulted in North Korea’s withdrawal from the Nuclear non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).

The Clinton administration considered all options, including military actions, but the nuclear issue came

to a dramatic resolution[1)] with the conclusion of the US-North Korea Geneva Agreed Framework in

1994.[2)] Under the framework, North Korea halted its nuclear activities until 2002.

Despite the agreement, however, North Korea covertly carried out a uranium enrichment program in

the mid-1990s with support from Pakistan. North Korea denied the existence of the program at first. In

2010, however, it invited Dr. Siegfried Hecker from the United States and revealed its uranium

enrichment facilities, raising concerns in the international community.

In 2002, the Bush administration withdrew from the agreed framework, citing the incompleteness of the

agreement and suspicion regarding North Korea’s uranium enrichment activities, and discontinued the

heavy oil supply and light-water plant construction. In response, North Korea also declared its withdrawal

from the framework and resumed production of nuclear materials after deporting IAEA inspectors,

reactivating the nuclear facilities in Yongbyon, and reprocessing spent nuclear fuel rods. Subsequently,

North Korea secured a significant amount of plutonium by reprocessing the spent rods twice in 2003

and 2005. Moreover, North Korea declared possession of nuclear weapons in February 2005, followed

by its first underground nuclear test in Punggyeri, Gilju-gun, North Hamgyong Province, in October 2006.

The ROK Meteorological Administration measured the strength of artificial seismic waves from the test

site at 3.9mb, indicating that the yield of the nuclear explosion was below 1kt. Based on the result of the

nuclear test, it was assessed that, although North Korea’s nuclear technology was not at the level of

nuclear weapon employment, the country had passed the threshold of manufacturing and detonating

nuclear explosive devices.

| Advancement of Nuclear Capabilities | Following its first nuclear test, North Korea spurred efforts to

advance its nuclear capabilities with focus on enhancing the power of its nuclear warheads, mounting

warheads on missiles, and achieving mass production. North Korea disabled key nuclear facilities in

Yongbyon during the Six-Party Talks until the end of 2008 and temporarily discontinued the production

**1) In exchange for the abandonment of its nuclear development program by North Korea, the United States agreed to provide**

heavy oil, construct two modern light-water reactor power plants, and normalize the US-North Korea relationship.

**2) Adopted for the resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue after three meetings between high-ranking officials (October**

21, 1994).


-----

of nuclear materials. After the talks fell through over disagreement on the verification issue, however, in

2009, North Korea reactivated the nuclear facilities that were in the process of being disabled and

conducted the second nuclear test in May. The yield of the explosion in the second test was measured

at 3 to 4kt, representing significant improvement over the first test. Nevertheless, the yield was still less

than the force of the nuclear bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, which led to the assessment

that North Korea’s nuclear capability was lacking in terms of actual employment.

<North Korean Nuclear Tests>

|1st|2nd|3rd|4th|5th|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|October 9, 2006 (Monday) 10:36 a.m.|May 25, 2009 (Monday) 9:54 a.m.|February 12, 2013 (Tuesday) 11:57 a.m|January 6, 2016 (Wednesday) 10:30 a.m.|September 9, 2016 (Friday) 9:30 a.m.|
|3.9|4.5|4.9|4.8|5.0|
|Approx. 0.8|Approx. 3-4|Approx. 6-7|Approx. 6|Approx. 10|



After putting forward the dual-track policy of economic and nuclear development in 2012, North Korea

spurred its efforts for advancing its nuclear and missile capabilities. The efforts resulted in four additional

nuclear tests in February 2013, January and September of 2016, and September 2017. The sixth test in

particular recorded an explosive force of around 50kt, and the significantly increased yield suggests that

a hydrogen bomb test was carried out.

After the nuclear tests, North Korea stressed its status as a nuclear state and claimed that it had

achieved the standardization, specification, miniaturization, weight reduction, and diversification of

nuclear warheads[3)]. It also declared its willingness to mass-produce and field deploy warheads and

missiles.

**2. Status and Assessment of Missile Development**

To secure long-range delivery capabilities for its nuclear weapons, high explosives, and chemical/

biological weapons, North Korea has been committing workforce and resources to missile development

**3) Meaning of standardization, specification, miniaturization, weight reduction, and diversification claimed by North Korea (published**

on Rodong Sinmun on May 21, 2013 / Announced by the Nuclear Weapon Research Center on September 9, 2016)

- Standardization: refers to standardizing warheads so that they can be mounted on multiple types of missiles

-  Specification: refers to determining the specifications of warheads and their components for mass production

-  Miniaturization: refers to producing weapons with the explosive power of nuclear warheads less than 15kt

-  Weight reduction: refers to reducing the total mass of nuclear warheads for mounting on missiles

- Diversification: refers to producing multiple types of nuclear weapons for different military objectives. Nuclear weapons can

be divided by type of nuclear reaction-atomic, hydrogen, and neutron bombs-as well as by range: strategic, tactical, and
theater weapons.


-----

programs since the mid-1960s. In 1976, North Korea secured from Egypt Scud-B missiles and reverse
engineered them for the production of its own Scud-B missiles. Then, North Korea completed the

deployment of an improved version of its Scud-B missile in 1988. In the 1990s, it developed and field

deployed the Nodong 1,300km–range missile and launched a Taepodong-1 missile in 1998 and

Taepodong-2 missiles in 2006, 2009, 2012, and 2016 on the pretext of a satellite launch. North Korea

also adopted the old Soviet Union’s Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missile (SLBM) technology and

developed the Musudan intermediate-range missile (range of over 3,000km) which was field deployed in

2007 without a test launch. Subsequently, North Korea continued to develop various types of ballistic

<North Korea’s Missile Test-Launches>

After January 1, 2019


**Date** **Major Details**

Launched 19-1 SRBMs (wheeled) (a new-type tactical guided projectile, as North Korea claims) on
May 4, 2019
Hodo Peninsula, South Hamgyong Province

Launched 19-1 SRBMs (tracked) (a new-type tactical guided projectile, as North Korea claims) in
May 9, 2019
Gusong, North Pyongan Province

Launched 19-1 SRBMs (wheeled) (a new-type tactical guided projectile, as North Korea claims) on
July 25, 2019
Hodo Peninsula, South Hamgyong Province

Launched 19-2 missiles of unknown design (a new-type large-caliber MRL, as North Korea claims) in
July 31, 2019
Wonsan, Gangwon Province

Launched 19-3 missiles of unknown design (a new-type large-caliber MRL, as North Korea claims) in
August 2, 2019
Yeongheung, South Hamgyong Province

Launched 19-1 SRBMs (wheeled) (a new-type tactical guided missile, as North Korea claims) in
August 6, 2019
Gwail, South Hwanghae Province

August 10, Launched 19-4 SRBMs (a new-type projectile, as North Korea claims) in Hamheung, South
2019 Hamgyong Province

August 16, Launched 19-4 SRBMs (a new-type projectile, as North Korea claims) in Tongchon, Gangwon
2019 Province

August 24, Launched 19-5 SRBMs (wheeled) (a super-large MRL, as North Korea claims) in Sondok, South
2019 Hamgyong Province

September 10, Launched 19-5 SRBMs (wheeled) (a super-large MRL, as North Korea claims) in Gaechon, South
2019 Pyongan Province

October 2, Launched 19-6 SLBM (a dubbed Pukguksong-3, as North Korea claims) off the sea near Munchon,
2019 Gangwon Province

October 31,
Launched 19-5 SRBMs (wheeled) (a super-large MRL) in Suncheon, South Pyongan Province
2019

November 28, Launched 19-5 SRBMs (wheeled) (a super-large MRL, as North Korea claims) in Yonpo, South
2019 Hamgyong Province

March 2, 2020 Launched 19-5 SRBMs (wheeled) (an MRL, as North Korea claims) in Wonsan, Gangwon Province

Launched 19-5 SRBMs (wheeled) (a long-range projectile, as North Korea claims) near Sondok,
March 9, 2020
South Hamgyong Province

March 21, Launched 19-4 SRBMs (a tactical guided projectile, as North Korea claims) in Sonchon, North
2020 Pyongan Province

March 29, Launched 19-5 SRBMs (tracked) (a super-large MRL, as North Korea claims) in Wonsan, Gangwon
2020 Province


-----

missiles.

In 2016, North Korea developed Paektusan, an advanced high-yield engine. The development provided

the country with a foundation for the development of nuclear-capable ballistic missiles. In May, August,

and September 2017, North Korea launched a Hwasong-12 Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile (IRBM).

In July and November 2017, North Korea launched the Hwasong-14 and Hwasong-15 missiles, which

are assessed to be Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs), respectively.

In August 2016, North Korea used the old Soviet Union’s SLBM technology to test-launch an SLBM

(Pukguksong) from a Gorae-class submarine and test-launched in 2017 two Pukguksong-2 missiles as a

ground-to-ground variation. In 2019, North Korea developed and test fired various types of new solid
propellant short-range ballistic missiles and TELs (both wheeled and tracked) and test-launched the

Pukguksong-3 in October 2, 2019 using the new underwater launch tube.

<North Korean Missiles and Their Specifications>

|Scud-B/C|19-1 SRBM|19-4 SRBM|19-5 SRBM|Scud-ER|Nodong|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|300 - 500|Approx. 600|Less than 600|Approx. 400|Approx. 1,000|1,300|
|1,000|Unknown|Unknown|Unknown|500|700|
|Field deployed|Test-launched|Test-launched|Test-launched|Field deployed|Field deployed|

|Taepodong-2|Pukguksong/ Pukguksong-2|Pukguksong-3|Hwasong-12|Hwasong-14|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|At least 10,000|Approx. 1,300|Approx. 2,000|5,000|At least 10,000|
|500 - 1,000|650|Unknown|650|Unknown|
|Launched|Test-launched|Test-launched|Test-launched|Test-launched|


-----

Appendix

9


###### Agreement on the Implementation of the Historic
 Panmunjom Declaration in the Military Domain

Based on the common understanding that easing military tension and building confidence on the Korean

Peninsula is integral to securing lasting and stable peace, South Korea and North Korea reached a

comprehensive agreement on the following with a view to fully implementing the historic "Panmunjom

Declaration for Peace, Prosperity and Unification of the Korean Peninsula" in the military domain.

1. South Korea and North Korea agreed to completely cease all hostile acts against each other in

every domain, including land, air and sea that are the source of military tension and conflict.

① The two sides discussed various measures to prevent armed conflict in every domain, including

land, air and sea.

The two sides agreed to consult and resolve all matters that may lead to military conflict in a

peaceful way and preclude the use of military force under any circumstance.

The two sides agreed to refrain from any action of infiltrating, attacking or occupying each other’s

area of jurisdiction by any means or method.

The two sides agreed to have consultations on matters including large-scale military exercises and

military buildup aimed at each other, various forms of blockade, interdiction and obstruction of

navigation as well as reconnaissance activities against each other through the "Inter-Korean Joint

Military Committee".

The two sides agreed to continue to have consultations on various implementation measures

related to the "Panmunjom Declaration", in which both sides agreed to realize phased arms

reduction, in accordance with alleviation of military tension and confidence building.

② The two sides agreed to cease various military exercises aimed at each other along the Military

Demarcation Line from November 1, 2018.

On ground, the two sides agreed to cease all live-fire artillery drills and field training exercises at the

regiment level and above within 5km from the MDL.

At sea, the two sides agreed to cease all live-fire and maritime maneuver exercises within the zone

north of Deokjeok-do and south of Cho-do in the West Sea, and within the zone north of Sokcho

and south of Tongcheon in the East Sea. The two sides also agreed to install covers on the barrels

of coastal artillery and ship guns and close all gunports within the zones.

In the air, the two sides agreed to ban tactical live-fire drills involving fixed-wing aircraft, including

the firing of air-to-ground guided weapons within the designated No Fly Zones over the eastern and

western regions of the MDL.


-----

③ The two sides agreed to designate No Fly Zones for all aircraft types above the MDL, effective from

1 November 2018, in the following way:

For fixed-wing aircraft, No Fly Zones will be designated within 40km from the MDL in the East

(between MDL Markers No. 0646 and 1292) and within 20km from the MDL in the West (between

MDL Markers No. 0001 and 0646).

Other No Fly Zones will be designated in the following way: for rotary-wing aircraft, within 10km

from the MDL; for UAV, within 15km from the MDL in the East and 10km from the MDL in the West;

for hot-air balloons, within 25km from the MDL.

However, when the employment of aircraft becomes necessary such as in the cases involving fire
fighting, ground & maritime rescue, medical evacuation, weather observation and farming support,

aircraft will be permitted to fly subject to prior notification to the other side. The No Fly Zones

mentioned above do not apply to commercial aircraft (including cargo planes).

④ The two sides agreed to take measures to prevent any accidental military clash at all times in every

domain, including land, air and sea.

To this end, the two sides agreed to apply a five-step procedure (Initial warning broadcast →

Secondary warning broadcast → Initial warning fire → Secondary warning fire → Military action) on

ground and at sea, and a 4-step procedure (Warning radio & signal Interdiction flight → Warning fire

→ Military action) in the air.

The two sides agreed to implement the above revised procedures from November 1, 2018.

⑤ The two sides agreed to solve all military issues through peaceful consultations by maintaining

permanent communication channels in order to prevent at all times any accidental military clash in

every domain, including land, air and sea and by immediately notifying each other when an

abnormal situation arises.

2. South Korea and North Korea agreed to devise substantive military measures to transform the

Demilitarized Zone into a peace zone.

① The two sides agreed to completely withdraw all Guard Posts (GP) that lie within 1km of each other

as a preliminary measure to withdrawing all GPs within the DMZ. 【Annex 1】

② The two sides agreed to demilitarize the Joint Security Area. 【Annex 2】

③ The two sides agreed to proceed with a pilot project of an Inter-Korean Joint Operation to Recover

Remains within the DMZ. 【Annex 3】

④ The two sides agreed to continue consultations on military assurance measures related to joint

survey and excavation of historical remains within the DMZ.


-----

3. South Korea and North Korea agreed to take military measures to prevent accidental military

clashes and ensure safe fishing activities by turning the area around the Northern Limit Line in

the West Sea into a maritime peace zone.

① The two sides reaffirmed the agreement related to the "prevention of accidental military clashes in

the West Sea," signed during the 2nd Inter-Korean General-level Military Talks on 4 June, 2004 and

agreed to fully restore and implement it.

② The two sides agreed to establish a maritime peace zone and a pilot joint fishing zone in the West

Sea. 【Annex 4】

③ The two sides agreed to fully guarantee the safety of personnel and vessels that enter the maritime

peace zone and the pilot joint fishing zone.

④ The two sides agreed to devise and implement inter-Korean joint patrol measures in order to deny

illegal fishing and to ensure safe fishing activities for South and North Korean fishermen in the

maritime peace zone and the pilot joint fishing zone.

4. South Korea and North Korea agreed to devise military assurance measures necessary for

invigorating exchanges, cooperation, contacts and visits.

① The two sides agreed to establish military measures to ensure passage, communication and

customs in the East and West Transportation Corridors.

② The two sides agreed to devise military assurance measures to connect and modernize eastern/

western railways and roads.

③ The two sides agreed to establish a plan regarding issues related to permitting the use of Haeju

Passage and Jeju Strait for North Korean vessels through consultations at the Inter-Korean Joint

Military Committee.

④ The two sides agreed to devise military assurance measures for the shared use of Han River (Imjin

River) Estuary. 【Annex 5】

5. South Korea and North Korea agreed to devise various measures for mutual military confidence

building.

① The two sides agreed to continue consultations regarding the installation and operation of direct

communication lines between the respective military officials.

② The two sides agreed to have detailed consultations to resolve the issues concerning the

composition and operation of the Inter-Korean Joint Military Committee.

③ The two sides agreed to fully implement all agreements reached between inter-Korean military

authorities, and to regularly examine and assess the implementation progress.


-----

6. This Agreement is effective from the date of exchange of the signed documents, following the

procedures required for ratification from each party.

① Revisions and additions to the Agreement are permitted subject to agreement between both

parties.

② Two copies of the Agreement have been made with equal effect.

September 19, 2018

Republic of Korea Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Minister of National Defense Minister of People’s Armed Forces

Song, Young Moo Korean People’s Army General No, Kwang-chol


-----

【Annex 1】

**Withdrawal of Guard Posts (GP) within the DMZ**

1. The agreement is reached to completely withdraw all guard posts within the DMZ according to

the following phases:

① Phase 1 : Withdrawal of all firearms and equipment

② Phase 2 : Withdrawal of all personnel on duty

③ Phase 3 : Complete destruction of all facilities

④ Phase 4 : Mutual verification

2. Various measures for the withdrawal of all guard posts from the DMZ will be implemented

through close mutual coordination.

3. Historical landmarks, remains and artifacts that lie within the DMZ will be restored to their

original state and managed as joint assets of the Korean people.

4. The 11 guard posts that lie within 1km of each other in the DMZ from each side will be

withdrawn as a preliminary measure.

① The 11 guard posts from each side that will be withdrawn are as follows:

-  Eastern region

-  GPs from each side in between MDL Markers No. 1273 and 1278

-  GPs from each side in between MDL Markers No. 1123 and 1135

-  GPs from each side in between MDL Markers No. 0799 and 0808

-  Midlands

-  GPs from each side in between MDL Markers No. 0652 and 0660

-  GPs from each side in between MDL Markers No. 0679 and 0683

-  GPs from each side in between MDL Markers No. 0717 and 0724

-  Western region

-  GPs from each side in between MDL Markers No. 0023 and 0027

-  GPs from each side in between MDL Markers No. 0034 and 0043

-  GPs from each side in between MDL Markers No. 0155 and 0166

-  GPs from each side in between MDL Markers No. 0212 and 0216

-  GPs from each side in between MDL Markers No. 0233 and 0240

② Withdrawal of the above 11 guard posts will be completed by December 31, 2018.


-----

【Annex 2】

**Demilitarization of the 'Joint Security Area in Panmunjom'**

1. As a first step, a trilateral consultative body between South Korea, North Korea, and the United

Nations Command (UNC) will be established to consult and implement measures to demilitarize

the Joint Security Area in Panmunjom.

① South, the North and UNC (hereinafter referred to as “The three parties”) will remove all mines

in the Joint Security Area in Panmunjom within 20 days, beginning on October 1, 2018.

② The three parties will completely withdraw guard posts, personnel, and firearms within 5 days

after the minesweeping is completed in the Joint Security Area in Panmunjom.

③ The three parties will withdraw unnecessary surveillance equipment from the Joint Security

Area in Panmunjom, install any necessary surveillance equipment through consultations, and

share related information with each other.

④ The three parties will jointly verify the completion of the measures to demilitarize the Joint

Security Area in Panmunjom over 2 days.

⑤ The three parties will consult and decide on various matters such as the composition, mission

and operation method of a joint administrative body that will be established after the

demilitarization of the Joint Security Area in Panmunjom.

2. The Joint Security Area in Panmunjom will be managed after demilitarization in the following way:

① Guard duty personnel and installation of guard posts

-  Guard duty will be carried out by up to 35 unarmed personnel from each side.

-  The shift work of personnel and matters related to patrol will be decided by each side

unilaterally and notified to the other party.

-  Guard duty personnel from both sides will wear a 15 cm wide yellow armband with the

words “Panmunjom Civil Police” written in blue on his/her left arm.

-  A new Southern guard post will be installed at one end of the 'Panmunjom Bridge' in Northern

Panmunjom; a new Northern guard post will be installed in the area near the entry check point

of Southern Panmunjom. South and North Korean personnel will be on duty side-by-side.

② Building management

-  Each side will manage the buildings on its side of the Joint Security Area in Panmunjom.

-  In case a building in the Joint Security Area in Panmunjom requires repair or construction,

such work will proceed subject to approval by the joint administrative body.

③ Visits

-  Visits to the Joint Security Area in Panmunjom will be permitted between 0900 and 1700 hours.

-  Freedom of movement is allowed for visitors and tourists within the Joint Security Area in Panmunjom.


-----

【Annex 3】

**Pilot Inter-Korean Joint Remains Recovery Project within DMZ**

1. Designation of Joint Remains Recovery Site and minesweeping

① Site designation for the joint recovery of remains

-  The site for the pilot joint remains recovery project will be set in between MDL Markers No.

0489 and 0497 in Cheorwon, Gangwon Province, setting the MDL as the standard. The end

coordinates for the site will be as follows:

-  North: a) 38°17'35"N 127°05'22"E

b) 38°18'23"N 127°06'52"E

-  South: a) 38°16'38"N 127°06'04'E

b) 38° 7'26'N 127°07'33"E

-  All guard posts and obstacles within the joint remains recovery site will be withdrawn.

② Minesweeping

-  All mines and explosives within the site for the pilot joint remains recovery project will be

completely removed between October 1 and November 30, 2018.

-  The two sides will each carry out minesweeping operations from each end of the DMZ and

work in the direction of the MDL.

- The two sides will conduct minesweeping operations for 4 hours each day from 1000 to

1200 hours and from 1500 to 1700 hours. The hours may be reduced or extended according

to each circumstance.

-  The two sides will install markers around the border of the mine-cleared area within the site

designated for the pilot joint remains recovery project and notify the other side accordingly.

-  The use of equipment and material necessary for minesweeping will be mutually

coordinated.

-  Any remains recovered during minesweeping operations will be exhumed and jointly

identified, consulted, and processed.

2. Establishment of an inter-Korean road within the joint remains recovery site

① A 12 m-wide road will be constructed between South Korea and North Korea within the pilot

joint remains recovery site in order to facilitate seamless progress in the joint efforts to recover

the remains within the DMZ.

② Minesweeping will take place from each end of the DMZ towards the MDL prior to road

construction. The road will be connected along the MDL.

③ The use of material and equipment necessary for road construction, including excavators, will

be mutually coordinated.


-----

④ Personnel necessary for construction, quantity and identification of equipment, and working

hours will be decided unilaterally at each side’s convenience and notified to the other side.

⑤ If any personnel or vehicle needs to cross the MDL for the purpose of road construction, prior

notification should be provided to the other side.

⑥ Road construction must be completed by December 31, 2018.

3. Composition and operation of the Joint Remains Recovery Team

① Composition of the Joint Remains Recovery Team

-  The two sides will establish a joint investigation team and a site command team, each with 5

members and headed by a colonel-level official.

-  The Joint Remains Recovery Team will be comprised of personnel numbering 80 to 100 from

each side.

-  The two sides will complete the composition of the Joint Remains Recovery Team and notify

each other by the end of February 2019.

② Operation of the Joint Remains Recovery Team - The joint investigation team and the site

command team will jointly consult and resolve any practical issue that may arise with regard to

the pilot joint remains recovery project within the DMZ.

-  Joint remains recovery operations at the pilot site will take place from April 1 to October 31,

2019.

-  In consideration of the seasonal climate, working hours for remains recovery at the pilot site

will be from 0900 to 1200 hours and from 1500 to 1800 hours. If needed, the hours may be

reduced or extended subject to the agreement of both sides.

4.Security assurance and joint management

① Any action violating the personal safety of personnel from the other side is prohibited during

the joint remains recovery process.

② Any material or equipment that may threaten personal safety, such as weapons and

explosives, is not allowed into the joint remains recovery site.

③ Any action provoking the other side in the joint remains recovery site is prohibited.

④ In case a natural disaster occurs within the joint remains recovery site, the two sides will

establish damage repair measures and cooperate accordingly.

⑤ Once joint remains recovery is completed, each side will manage its own area and road

between the MDL and its end point of the DMZ. Matters regarding the use of roads will be

decided in the future through consultations.


-----

【Annex 4】

**Preventing Accidental Military Clashes, Establishing a Maritime Peace Zone**

**and Ensuring Safe Fishing Activities in the West Sea**

1. Establishment of a maritime peace zone

1) Scope of the maritime peace zone The scope of the maritime peace zone will be determined

in consideration of the factors including geographic location of the islands under the jurisdiction

of each side, density of passage of vessels and fixed sea routes. Specific boundary lines will

be established through consultations at the Inter-Korean Joint Military Committee.

2) Rules pertaining to entry into the maritime peace zone

① Only unarmed vessels of the two sides will be allowed entry into the maritime peace zone.

If the entry of naval ships is unavoidable, they can enter the zone subject to prior notification

to and approval of the other side.

② The number of vessels operating in the maritime peace zone will be decided by the two

sides through consultations. The plans for entry and operation of vessels within the

maritime peace zone will be notified to the other side 48 hours prior to entry.

③ Entry hours are as follows: from April to September, 0700 to 1800 hours; from October to

March, 0800 to 1700 hours. When necessary, the entry hours may be revised through

mutual consultations.

3) Rules pertaining to activities within the maritime peace zone

① Vessels from the South will not cross the Northern boundary line of the maritime peace zone,

and vessels from the North will not cross the Southern boundary line of the maritime peace

zone. All activities are limited to those of peaceful in nature. Vessels that commit hostile acts

against the other side on the other side’s waters, outside the peace zone, will be restrained

immediately. After the matter is reported to the other side, the vessel will be dealt with through

inter-Korean consultations.

② For the purpose of identification within the maritime peace zone, vessels from both sides

must hoist a 900 mm wide, 600 mm long Korean Peninsula flag. Vessels from the South

must hoist the flag on the left of the mast, and vessels from the North, on the right of the

mast.

③ Any words and actions that may provoke the other side, including psychological warfare, are

not allowed within the maritime peace zone.

④ If an accidental clash occurs between civilian vessels in the maritime peace zone, each side

must immediately withdraw all of its vessels from the zone, resolve the matter through

either inter-Korean military communication lines or inter-Korean working-level military

talks, and establish meticulous plans to prevent any recurrence.


-----

4) Humanitarian cooperation in the maritime peace zone

If individuals, vessels, naval ships or aircraft enter the maritime peace zone in unavoidable situations

such as engine failure, distress, or misnavigation resulting from deterioration of weather, each side

must immediately notify the other side through communication means at its disposal.

When such emergency situation arises within the maritime peace zone, necessary measures will be

taken through mutual cooperation.

5) Utilization of the maritime peace zone

The two sides agreed to continue to explore options for peaceful utilization of the zone, including

marine survey, joint survey, and passage of civilian vessels in accordance with the principle of easing

of military tension, confidence building as well as common prosperity and mutual benefit.

2. Establishment of a pilot joint fishing zone

1) Scope of the pilot joint fishing zone

The pilot joint fishing zone will be established between Baengnyeong-do (South) and Jangsan-got

(North). Specific boundary lines will be established through consultations at the Inter-Korean Joint

Military Committee.

2) Operation of the pilot joint fishing zone

① Vessels that wish to operate within the pilot zone will submit an entry request document 2 days (48

hours) prior to the planned entry, including the name of organization, name of the captain

(representative), crew list, vessel name, entry route, and date of operation.

② The responsible agencies of each side must notify the other side of the result of its review of the

request document 1 day (24 hours) prior to departure. If entry of a vessel is denied, the agencies

will also notify the valid reasons for denial.

③ The responsible agencies of each side will allow vessels to remain within the pilot fishing zone for

up to 5 days, if the vessel had requested permission for consecutive fishing operations for a

certain period.

④ Vessels entering the pilot joint fishing zone will use the mutually approved route and will be

controlled by fishery guidance boats from each side.

⑤ If, in the future, the joint fishing zone is expanded within the maritime peace zone, entry

regulations for South and North Korean fishing vessels will be implemented through mutual

consultations.

3. Joint patrol to interdict illegal fishing vessels and ensure safe fishing activities

1) Organization of the Inter-Korean Joint Patrol Team

① The two sides will establish an 'Inter-Korean Joint Patrol Team' composed of maritime coast


-----

guard boats (patrol boats). The joint patrol boats will displace 250 tons or below.

② 3 joint patrol boats will be assigned to each side (total of 6), but the number may be adjusted

subject to agreement.

③ The boats that belong to the Inter-Korean Joint Patrol Team will hoist a 900 mm wide, 600 mm

long yellow flag on the top of the mast.

2) Mission of the Inter-Korean Joint Patrol Team

① The Inter-Korean Joint Patrol Team will interdict illegal fishing vessels from third countries that

attempt to enter the maritime peace zone through the pilot joint fishing zone and will control and

deal with them through close coordination.

② The Inter-Korean Joint Patrol Team will maintain order among fishing vessels from the South and

North as well as control fishery guidance boats that enter the pilot joint fishing zone.

③ The Inter-Korean Joint Patrol Team will rescue vessels from the two sides drifting due to engine

failure, distress, deterioration of weather, etc. and will return them based on humanitarian

principles.

3) Operation of the Inter-Korean Joint Patrol Team

① Patrol boats of the Inter-Korean Joint Patrol Team will be prohibited from entering the joint

fishing zone. However, in case of emergency such as distress or rescue of personnel within

the joint fishing zone, the patrol boats may enter upon notification to the other side.

② Joint patrol will take place on a date agreed upon by the two sides in consideration of the

fishing schedule and interdiction of illegal fishing vessels from third countries.

③ Joint patrol will take place in principle during the day (April - September: 0800 -1800 hours,

October - March: 0900 -1700 hours). Each side will notify its patrol team’s schedule to the

other side 24 hours in advance. Any situation that arises during the night will be resolved

through consultations between the two sides.

④ The joint patrol route will follow around the outer boundary of the joint fishing zone either

clockwise or anti-clockwise, depending on mutual agreement.

⑤ The Inter-Korean Joint Patrol Team will follow each of its own superior authority’s command.

Communications and call signs between patrol boats will adhere to the 'June 4 Agreement'

of 2004.

⑥ The two sides will refrain from any provocative comment or action during joint patrol. In the

event of a contingency, the patrol boat will be immediately separated, and the matter must

be resolved through mutual consultations.


-----

【Annex 5】

**Military Assurance for the Joint Use of Han (Imjin) River Estuary**

1. Establishment of a joint utilization zone

① The zone within the Han (Imjin) River Estuary stretching 70km long–in the South, from the

northeastern end point of the Gimpo peninsula to the southwestern end point of Gyodong-do, and

in the North, from Imhan-ri, Panmun-gun, Kaesong-si to Haenam-ri, Yeonan-gun, North Hwanghae

Province–will be designated as the joint utilization zone.

② All practical military matters arising from within the joint utilization zone will be dealt with through

consultations between the two sides.

2. Joint survey

① Field survey on the joint utilization zone will be carried out by the end of December 2018.

② The joint survey team will be composed of about 10 people from each side, including experts on

the subject matter.

③ Matters regarding the use of equipment, hardware, and vessels required for the joint survey will be

subject to mutual cooperation.

④ Any comment or action that may provoke the other side will be prohibited among the site survey

crew. They may not carry any explosives, weapons, or live rounds.

⑤ In case of an emergency during the joint survey such as natural disaster, the team may anchor at a

nearby location under the other side’s jurisdiction, and the safety and comfort of the team members

will be ensured.

3. Military assurance measures within the joint utilization zone

① A document that includes information on the personnel and vessel (type, length and weight,

purpose of entry, size of crew, cargo on board) due to enter the joint utilization zone will be

delivered to the other side 1 day in advance via the Western inter-Korean military communication

line.

② Checkpoints for each side in the mutually agreed-upon locations within the joint utilization

zone will be established, where personnel and vessels will be inspected.

③ All vessels sailing through the joint utilization zone will not be allowed to approach within 100

m of the other side’s boundary line.

④ In consideration of the seasonal influence on visual identification capability, passage hours for

vessels in the joint utilization zone will be as follows: 0700 to 1900 hours from April 1 to

September 30; and 0800 to 1800 hours from October 1 to March 31.

⑤ No personnel or vessel sailing through the joint utilization zone is allowed to carry surveillance


-----

and reconnaissance equipment, explosives, other weapons, or live-rounds.

⑥ Any comment or action that may provoke the other side will be prohibited in the joint utilization

zone.

⑦ Vessel from each side may not contact or communicate with vessels from the other side

except for the purpose of exchanging navigational signals to avoid mutual collision.

⑧ If a vessel or individual drifts within the joint utilization zone or an emergency situation arises

due to other causes, the two sides will cooperate based on humanitarian principles.

4. Military assurance measures related to inter-Korean exchanges and cooperation within the

joint utilization zone will be devised through consultations between the two sides.


-----

Appendix

10


###### Chronicle of Inter-Korean Military Relations

December 1, 2018 - November 30, 2020


**North Korea** **Date** **South Korea**

Soldier (1) defected to South Korea from the 22nd December
Division across DMZ (defected) 1, 2018

December Pilot withdrawal of GPs (11 locations) opens passages

4, 2018 for mutual verification (December 4 - 11)

December Inter-Korean joint waterway survey of Han River estuary

9, 2018 completed (November 5 - December 9)

December Both Koreas conduct mutual site verification for the pilot

12, 2018 withdrawal of GPs (11 locations)

December The ROK delivers goods for normalization of military

28, 2018 communication lines in Transportation Corridor West (Kaesong)

Chairman Kim Jong-un delivers New Year’s address

-  [Thorough implementation of inter-Korean agreements; ] January 1, The ROK government announces its welcome stance
expansion and development of cooperation and 2019
exchanges

North Korea–China summit (January 7 - 10; Chairman January 8,
Kim visits China) 2019

High-level official meeting between Kim Yong-chol and January 18, The White House announces the 2nd US–North Korea
Michael Richard Pompeo (Washington, D.C.) 2019 summit to be held at the end of February

January 28, The UN Security Council (UNSC) waives sanctions on

2019 North Korea for the joint remains recovery

January 30, The two Koreas hold military working-level talks; South Korea

2019 delivers the nautical chart of Han River estuary to North Korea

The US d North Korea and the US hold working-level

February 6,

negotiations for the summit (February 6 - 8, Pyongyang)

2019

-  [North Korea (Kim Hyok-chol) and US (Stephen Biegun)]

Chairman Kim visits the North Korean Ministry of
Defense on Military Foundation Day February 8,

-  [“...promote the advancement of revolutionary ] 2019
armament capabilities”

US–North Korea summit (February 27 - 28, Hanoi) February

-  [Denuclearization negotiations break down] 27, 2019

Foreign Minister Ri Yong-ho holds an emergency
late-night press conference March 1,

-  [Insists on partial removal of sanctions rather than full ] 2019
removal

March 2, The ROK Minister of National Defense and the US Secretary of

2019 Defense talk over the phone to announce the end of "KR/FE"

March 3, The ROK and the US defense authorities announce the

2019 joint exercise "19-1 Dong Maeng"

March 4, The ROK and the US conduct the 19-1 Dong Maeng

2019 Exercise (March 4 - 12)

March 6, The ROK government announces the "Ulchi Taegeuk

2019 Exercise" (to be conducted in May)

March 8, UNSC waives sanctions against North Korea for the

2019 reunion of separated families in North and South Korea

Senior North Korean diplomat Choi Sun-hee holds a
press conference related to the US–North Korea summit March 15,

-  [“...we have no plans to enter into negotiations like this ] 2019
one”

April 1, The ROK removes additional mines on the south side of

2019 Arrowhead Hill and initiates basic excavation


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **South Korea**

April 3, The ROK announces the opening of three DMZ Peace

2019 Dulle-gil (currently known as the DMZ Peace Trail)

14th Supreme People’s Assembly holds the first meeting April 11,
(April 11 - 12) 2019

Chairman Kim delivers an administrative speech at the
Supreme People’s Assembly April 12,

-  [“...transform inter-Korean relations into solid ] 2019
reconciliation and cooperation relations”

April 22, The ROK and the US conduct a combined air exercise (2
2019 weeks) * Alternative to Max Thunder

North Korea–Russia summit (Vladivostok)
Spokesperson of the National Committee for the
Peaceful Reunification of Fatherland issues a statement
condemning the combined air exercise

-  [“...the ROK–US combined air exercise violated the ] April 25,
military agreement” 2019
North Korean Minster of Defense gives a speech in
relation to the peace regime (Moscow)

-  [“...must move from armistice agreement to peace ]
regime”

The ROK government holds a "peace performance" (JSA)

April 27,

The ROK government opens "DMZ Peace Trail" in

2019

Goseong to the public (Step 1)

May 1,

The ROK government resumes tours to the south of JSA
2019

North Korea fires two short-range ballistic missiles

The ROK government responds to North Korean

(Wonsan) May 4,

short-range missile launches

-  [Chairman Kim instructs a fire strike exercise in the ] 2019
eastern area -  [“...inconsistent with the purpose of the CMA”]

Spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs answers,

-  [“...it was just part of normal military exercise”]
Spokesperson for the delegation of general-level military May 8, The ROK government responds to North Korean
talks condemns the ROK military authorities, 2019 short-range missile launches

-  [“...they have no right to bring up the military ]
agreement”

The ROK government responds to North Korean

North Korea fires two short-range ballistic missiles

short-range ballistic missile launches

(Gusong, North Pyongan Province) May 9,

-  [Chairman Kim instructs a fire strike exercise in the the ] 2019 -  all help efforts to improve inter-Korean relations and [“...very concerned that such missile launches will not at ]
western area

alleviate military tensions on the Korean Peninsula”

President Moon Jae-in’s interview on the 2nd anniversary
of his inauguration

May 10,

2019 -  [“...have warned the North that if this behavior continues, ]

it may make inter-Korean dialogue and negotiations
difficult”

May 27,

Ulchi Taeguk Exercise (May 27 - 30)
2019

June 1, The ROK government opens “DMZ Peace Trail” in

2019 Cheorwon to the public

The ROK and the US Defense Ministers hold talks,

June 3,

announcing the end of the Ulchi-Freedom Guardian (UFG)

2019

Exercise

The ROK holds a burial ceremony for the remains
presumed to be part of the UN Forces found at

June 11,

Arrowhead Hill

2019

The ROK Navy tows a drifting fishing boat from North
Korea in the East Sea and repatriates it to North Korea


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **South Korea**

June 15, North Korean fishing boat (4 people aboard) found

2019 (Samcheok Port off East Sea)

June 18, North Korean citizens (2 persons) repatriated to North

2019 Korea (JSA)

North Korea–China summit (June 20 - 21; Xi Jinping June 20,
visits North Korea) 2019

ROK–US summit (Seoul)

June 30,

Leaders of the ROK, North Korea, and the US gather in

2019

Panmunjeom; North Korea and US hold talks

Spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs demands July 16,
the suspension of combined exercises 2019

The ROK government responds to North Korean

North Korea fires two short-range ballistic missiles

short-range ballistic missile launches

(Wonsan) July 25,

-  [Chairman Kim instructs firing a new-type tactical ] 2019 -  launches does not help in the effort to alleviate military [“...expressed our concerns that the North’s missile ]
guided weapon in a show of force

tensions on the Korean Peninsula”

The ROK Navy tows a fishing boat from North Korea in

North Korea repatriates Russian fishing boa (2 South July 28,

East Sea (3 persons aboard) and repatriates it to North

Korean sailors, Sokcho Port) 2019

Korea

The ROK finds a body suspected to be a North Korean
soldier (1st Division, Imjin River)

North Korea fires two short-range ballistic missiles

JCS responds to North Korean short-range ballistic

(Wonsan) July 31,

missile launches

-  [Chairman Kim instructs test firing of a new-type ] 2019
large-caliber MRL -  [“...expressed our concerns that the North’s missile ]

launches will not help in the efforts to alleviate military
tensions on the Korean Peninsula”

Soldier (1) defects to South Korea via Imjin River
(defected)

August 1,

UK, France, and Germany issue a joint statement

2019

condemning the launch of ballistic missiles from North
Korea

North Korea fires two short-range ballistic missiles The ROK government responds to North Korean
(Yeongheung, South Hamgyong Province) short-range ballistic missile launches

August 2,

-  [Chairman Kim instructs test firing of a new-type ] 2019 -  [“...urged North Korea anew to stop their acts that are ]
large-caliber MRL non-conducive to the efforts made to alleviate military

tensions on the Korean Peninsula”

Spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs criticizes
the joint statement made by the UK, France, and

August 3,

Germany

2019

-  [“...rights to self-sovereignty and self-defense have been ]
violated”

North Korea fires two short-range ballistic missiles (Gwail, The ROK government responds to North Korean
South Hwanghae Province) short-range ballistic missile launches

-  [Chairman Kim instructs firing a new-type tactical ] -  [“...perceiving the current situation seriously, paying ]
guided missile in a show of force August 6, close attention to the trend through close cooperation
Spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs issues a 2019 between the ROK and the United States and
criticism in relation to the combined exercise strengthening the maintenance of thorough readiness

-  [“...the drive behind the dialogue will continue to ] posture”
decelerate”

ational Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of
Fatherland issues a statement disclosing the truth,

August 8,

criticizing the combined exercise

2019

-  [“...violation of the agreement to suspend all hostile ]
acts”

August 9,

ROK–US Defense Ministers’ Talks
2019


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **South Korea**

The ROK government opens “DMZ Peace Trail” in Paju
to the public

North Korea fires two short-range ballistic missiles

The ROK government responds to North Korean

(Hamheung, South Hamgyong Province) August 10,

short-range missile launches

-  [Chairman Kim instructs test firing of a new-type ] 2019
weapon -  [“...North Korea’s missile launches are likely to raise ]

military tensions on the Korean Peninsula; we urge
cessation

ROK–US combined command post exercise (CPX)

A US-related director of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs

August 11, (August 11 - 20)

issues a statement

2019 -  [Verified the initial operational capacity (IOC) in ]

-  [“...self-defense armed forces construction project”] preparation for wartime OPCON transition

North Korea fires two short-range projectiles
(Tongcheon, Gangwon Province) The ROK government responds to North Korean

-  [Chairman Kim instructs test firing of a new-type weapon ] short-range missile launches
Spokesperson of the National Committee for the Peaceful August 16, -  [“...urged North Korea to stop their acts that are ]
Reunification of Fatherland issues a statement 2019 non-conducive to the efforts made to alleviate military
condemning the combined exercise on Liberation Day tensions on the Korean Peninsula”

-  [“...the loss of the drive behind the inter-Korean dialogue ]
is entirely attributable to the South Korean authorities”

Spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs issues a
statement condemning the South for bringing in strategic

August 22,

weapons

2019

-  [“...not interested in any dialogue accompanying military ]
threats”

The ROK government responds to North Korean

North Korea fires two short-range projectiles (Sondok, short-range missile launches

August 24,

South Hamgyong Province) 2019 -  [“...urged North Korea to stop their acts that are ]

-  [Chairman Kim instructs test firing of a super-large MRL] non-conducive to the efforts made to alleviate military

tensions on the Korean Peninsula”

UK, France, and Germany issue a joint statement

August 27,

condemning the launch of ballistic missiles from North

2019

Korea

14th Supreme People’s Assembly holds the second meeting

-  [Chairman Kim is absent; Chairman Kim][’][s status and ]
powers reinforced
Spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs issues a August 29,
statement condemning the joint statement issued by the UK, 2019
France, and Germany

-  [“...they need to realize that their acts only make dialogue ]
less likely”

Chairman Kim calls for an emergency extended meeting

September

of the Central Military Commission

6, 2019

-  [Appointed General Park Jong-chon as Chief of Staff ]

Senior North Korean diplomat Choi Sun-hee issues a
statement, proposing North Korea–US talks September

-  [“...an alternative based on acceptable calculation ] 9, 2019
methods”

The ROK government responds to North Korean

North Korea fires two short-range projectiles (Gaechon, short-range ballistic missile launches

September

South Pyongan Province) 10, 2019 -  [“...strong concern over the launch of short-range ]

-  [Chairman Kim instructs test firing of a super-large MRL] projectiles, the overall military security situation will be

inspected on the Korean Peninsula”

September

UNC contacts North Korean military staff officer (T-3)
19, 2019

September

ROK–US summit (Washington, D.C.)
23, 2019

President Moon delivers keynote speech before the UN

September General Assembly (New York)

24, 2019 -  [No war is acceptable, mutual guarantee of security, and ]

mutual prosperity


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **South Korea**

September National Assembly passes resolution condemning North

30, 2019 Korean nuclear advancement and missile provocation

Senior North Korean diplomat Choi Sun-hee issues a
statement, disclosing schedule for working-level

October 1,

negotiations between the US and North Korea

2019

-  [Preliminary contact (October 4), Working-level ]
negotiation (October 5)

The ROK government responds to North Korean missile
launch

-  [“...concerned over the launch of projectiles ahead of the ]

Test fires Pukguksong-3 (SLBM) (Wonsan) October 2, working-level negotiations between North Korea and the

-  [Chairman Kim is absent] 2019 United States...will put diplomatic efforts for the

successful holding of working-level negotiations,
complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula, and
establishment of permanent peace”

Working-level negotiation between the US and North
Korea (Stockholm)

October 5,

Ambassador Kim Myong-gil of the Ministry of Foreign

2019

Affairs holds a press conference, announcing the
breakdown of negotiations

Ministry of Foreign Affairs issues a statement
condemning the US for the breakdown of negotiations October 6,

-  [“...the fate of the dialogue depends on the attitude of ] 2019
the United States, and the time limit ends late this year”

European Union (UK, France, Germany, Belgium, Poland,

October 8,

and Estonia) issues a joint statement condemning the

2019

launch of SLBM

Chairman Kim visits Mt. Kumgang, issues remarks on October
demolishing ROK facilities in Mt. Kumgang 23, 2019

October The ROK government proposes a working-level meeting

28, 2019 between the two Koreas regarding Mt. Kumgang

North Korea refuses ROK’s proposal to hold a working- October
level meeting regarding Mt. Kumgang 29, 2019

Chairman Kim delivers condolence for the death of October
President Moon’s mother (Panmunjom) 30, 2019

The ROK government responds to North Korean

North Korea fires two short-range projectiles (Suncheon,

October short-range missile launches

South Pyongan Province)

31, 2019 -  [“...show strong concern over North Korea firing ]

-  [Chairman Kim instructs test firing of a super-large MRL] short-range projectiles”

The ROK Navy captures a fishing boat from North Korea

November

(2 people aboard) (East Sea)

2, 2019

-  [Repatriated to North Korea on November 2 (2 persons)]

US Department of Defense (DoD) announces that a

November

ROK–US combined air exercise will be carried out in

4, 2019

December

The ROK government proposes a visit to North Korea by

November

the facility inspection team related to Mt. Kumgang

5, 2019

-  [No response from North Korea]

Ambassador Kwon Jong-gun of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs issues a statement condemning the
announcement of the resumption of a combined air November US DoD announces that the exercise will be carried out
exercise 6, 2019 regardless of the condemnation

-  [“...a declaration to confront us, a damp cast over ]
dialogue”

Spokesperson of the State Affairs Commission issues a
statement condemning the combined air exercise

November US Secretary of Defense says "military exercise may be

-  [“...we will contemplate over how the 'new path' will ] 13, 2019 adjusted to improve dialogue"
affect the future of the United States”


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **South Korea**

The ROK and the US hold the 51st SCM (at the MND)

Kim Yong-chol issues a statement urging the US to November

UK, France, and Germany issue a joint statement

cease the combined air exercise 14, 2019

condemning the launch of ballistic missiles from North Korea

Chairman Kim attends the Air and Anti-Air Forces November
Combat Flight Competition 16, 2019

November The ROK and the US Defense Ministers postpone the

17, 2019 combined air exercise

Chairman Kim instructs a parachute infiltration drill for Air
and Anti-Air Forces
An adviser at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Kim Gye-
gwan issues a statement urging the withdrawal of hostile November

President Trump urges 3rd US-North Korea summit

policies before the US-North Korea summit 18, 2019

-  [“...if the United States do not wish to give up on ]
dialogue, they must make a decision to withdraw their
hostile policies that view us as an enemy first”

Kim Yong-chol issues a statement urging the withdrawal
of hostile policies prior to the US-North Korea summit

-  [“...only after the threats are clearly removed will we ] November
discuss the issue of denuclearization”

19, 2019

Ambassador Kim Myong-gil of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs issues a statement before the US-North Korea
summit urging the withdrawal of hostile policies

Chairman Kim inspects the defense unit on Changrin

November

Island along the border

23, 2019

-  [Orders coastal artillery to fire]

The ROK government expresses condemnation and
urges the prevention of recurrence of the military

November

agreement violation for firing coastal artillery on Changrin

25, 2019

Island

-  [Delivers a written protest]

JCS responds to North Korean short-range projectile
launches

North Korea fires two short-range projectiles (Yonpo, November -  [“...North Korea’s actions are non-conducive to the ]
South Hamgyong Province) efforts made to alleviate tensions on the Korean

28, 2019

-  [Chairman Kim instructs test firing of a super-large MRL] Peninsula. The ROK Armed Forces hereby express

strong condemnation and repeatedly urge North Korea
to immediately cease raising military tensions”

Rhee Tae-Sung, Vice Director in charge of the US at the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, states that the deadline at the

President Trump mentions possible use of force

end of the year is imminent, urging the US to make a December
decision 3, 2019 -  [“...we surely don't want to, but if military force is ]

necessary, we would definitely forge it”

-  [“...the choice for Christmas present is entirely up to the ]
United States”

UNSC holds a closed-door meeting to discuss North
Korean missile launch

Chief of General Staff Park Jong-chon issues a -  [Six European Union countries—UK, France, Germany, ]

Belgium, Poland, and Estonia—issue a joint statement

statement December

Minister of National Defense Jeong Kyeong-doo:

-  [“...if the United States use force, we will also act ] 4, 2019 “...tensions are rising as North Korea claims the 'new
accordingly”

path', and we are staying alert”

-  [Remarks at the meeting of major commanders of the ]
entire army

The ROK and the US Presidents talk over the phone, The ROK and the US Presidents talk over the phone,

December

“...consensus on maintaining denuclearization dialogue “...consensus on maintaining denuclearization dialogue

7, 2019

momentum” momentum”

Spokesperson of the Academy of National Defense President Trump says, “If North Korea acts hostile, they
Science announces that an important test is in progress December will lose everything”

-  [“...a very significant test is in progress at the West Sea ] 8, 2019 US Secretary of Defense says, “We are always open for
satellite launch site” (December 7, in the afternoon) dialogue with North Korea”


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **South Korea**

Kim Yong-chol issues a statement,

-  [“We have nothing more to lose”] December
Ri Su-yong of the Central Military Commission urges 9, 2019
President Trump to stop using blunt language

December Defense Ministers from the ROK and Australia urge North

10, 2019 Korea to stop increasing tension and resume dialogue

Pompeo (US) says,
“...expect North Korea to abort its ICBM launch and to
comply with its commitment to denuclearization”
Convened the UNSC

December US Ambassador to the United Nations,

11, 2019 “...North Korea must make a bold decision”

“...North Korea’s 'new path' signifies a serious
provocation”
UN General Assembly adopts 3 resolutions including the
call for abandonment of nuclear weapons

Spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs issues a
statement in response to the UNSC December

-  [“...it provided decisive help for us to make a clear ] 12, 2019
decision on which path to take”

Chief of General Staff Park Jong-chon, in relation to the
important test, urges refraining from provocations to
North Korea

-  [“...they will be able to rest throughout the end of the ]
year only if they refrain from any words or actions that December
provoke us” Spokesperson of the Academy of National 14, 2019
Defense Science announces that an important test is in
progress

-  [“a very significant test is being carried out again at the ]
West Sea satellite launch site” (December 13)

December Biegun (US) proposes holding talks to North Korea

16, 2019 -  [North Korea showed no response]

December The ROK rescues North Korean sailors (2 persons), and

21, 2019 turns them over to North Korea (East Sea)

Chairman Kim attends the 3rd expanded meeting of the
7th Central Military Commission December

-  [“...discussed important military issues and ] 22, 2019
countermeasures”

December President Trump in relation to North Korea’s Christmas

24, 2019 gift: “...we will take care of it, so let’s keep an eye on them”

The 5th Plenary Meeting of the 7th Workers’ Party of
Korea takes place (December 28 - 31) December

-  [“...powerful political, diplomatic, and military offensive ] 28, 2019
guarantees victory of a frontal breakthrough”

Omits New Year’s address (replaced by the 5th Plenary

January 1,

Meeting) President Trump: “Good relationship with Kim Jong-un”

2020

-  [“...let’s break through all obstacles head-on”]

January 2, US Secretary of Defense, “...will review the resumption of

2020 combined exercises depending on North Korea’s action”

Director of National Security returns home from the US

January 10,

2020 -  [“...delivered President Trump's birthday message to ]

Chairman Kim Jong-un to North Korea”

An adviser at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Kim Gye-
gwan issues a statement

January 11,

-  [“...a hand-written birthday message of President Trump ] 2020
was directly delivered...it is presumptuous to intervene
between Chairman Kim and President Trump”


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **South Korea**

January 12, US National Security Advisor says, “The United States

2020 conveyed its message to North Korea to resume dialogue”

North Korea declares conversion into a national January 24,
emergency defense system in response to COVID-19 2020

North Korea enforces measures to restrict inter-Korean

January 30,

traffic due to COVID-19; temporarily shuts down the

2020

Liaison Office in Kaesong

North Korea notifies the delay in demolition at Mt.

January 31,

Kumgang due to COVID-19; suspends international

2020

travel via air, train, and ship

Chairman Kim observes a joint strike drill of defense units February
in the eastern region 28, 2020

The ROK government condemns the North Korean fire

North Korea fires two short-range projectiles (Wonsan) March 2, strike drill

-  [Chairman Kim instructs test firing of a super-large MRL] 2020 -  [“...strong concern over North Korea's behavior that ]

raises military tension”

Kim Yo-jong issues a statement

March 3,

-  [“...fire combat exercise is a self-defense action...any ] 2020
condemnation or request to stop is presumptuous”

Ambassadors of five European member states of the

March 6, UNSC (UK, France, Germany, Belgium, and Estonia)

2020 issue a joint statement condemning North Korean

provocations

Spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs refutes

March 7,

the statement of condemnation of five member states

2020

-  [“...it was a conventional drill”]

The ROK government responds to North Korean

North Korea fires two short-range projectiles (Sondok,

short-range projectile launches

South Hamgyong Province) March 9,

-  [Chairman Kim again instructs a fire strike exercise for ] 2020 -  joint strike drills is not conducive to peace settlement [“...we hereby point out again that continuing large-scale ]
long-range artillery at the front line

efforts on the Korean Peninsula”

Chairman Kim instructs artillery firefighting competition March 12,
(7th and 9th corps) 2020

Chairman Kim instructs artillery firefighting competition JCS responds to North Korean short-range projectile
(3rd, 4th, and 8th corps) launches
North Korea fires two short-range projectiles (Sonchon, March 21, -  [“...North Korea’s military action is extremely ]
North Pyongan Province) 2020 inappropriate in the midst of global difficulties due to

-  [Chairman Kim instructs tactical guided weapon ] COVID-19...we urge immediate cessation”
demonstration shooting

The ROK government responds to North Korean
short-range projectile launches

North Korea fires two short-range projectiles (Wonsan)

March 29, -  [“...we are keeping an eye on related trends as we ]

-  [Chairman Kim is absent, instructs test firing of a ] 2020 continue to receive reports on the North Korean
super-large MRL

short-range projectile launches from the Ministry of
National Defense and the National Intelligence Service”

Chairman Kim instructs mortar artillery firing drill April 10,

-  [“...reinforce artillery, focus on artillery”] 2020

Chairman Kim inspects the Pursuit and Raid Regiment in April 11,
the Western District 2020

US JCS in relation to cruise missiles

North Korea fires cruise missiles (Chairman Kim is April 14,
absent) 2020 -  [“...we do not believe it was a provocation. We believe it was ]

related to an internal commemorative event”

May 3, JCS responds to GP shooting
Shooting at GP (3rd Division)

2020 -  [“...a violation of the CMA”]

May 6, The ROK Armed Forces conduct combined defense

2020 training on the northwestern islands

-  [ROKAF Air Combat Command and Navy 2nd Fleet]


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **South Korea**

Spokesperson of the Ministry of Defense condemns
military drill in the West Sea May 8,

-  [“...everything is going back to where it used to be ] 2020
before 2018”

Chairman Kim attends the 4th expanded meeting of the
7th Central Military Commission May 24,

-  [Further reinforcement of nuclear war deterrence; Ri ] 2020
Pyong-chol elected as Vice Chairman of the Central
Military Commission

Kim Yo-jong issues a statement June 4,

-  [Condemns North Korean defectors’ anti-republican ] 2020
acts

Spokesperson of the United Front Department issues a
statement

-  [Foretells the launch of a review project for the practical ] June 5,
execution in relation to the June 4 dialogue of First 2020
Deputy Director Kim Yo-jong (closure of the Joint Liaison
Office)

Korean Central News Agency announces the June 9,
“complete shutdown of all communication lines between 2020
South and North Korea” from 12 p.m., June 9"

Jang Kum-chol, Director of the United Front Department,
issues a statement June 12,

-  [“...from now on, it will be truly regrettable and painful ] 2020
for the South Korean authorities”

Kim Yo-jong issues a statement

-  [“...they will have to witness the Inter-Korean Joint ] June 13,
Liaison Office collapsing without any trace...will hand 2020
over the right to exercise the next hostile act to the
General Staff Department of the Korean People’s Army”

Vice Minister of Unification gives a briefing on the current
issue

-  [“...the destruction of the inter-Korean Joint Liaison ]
Office is a violation of the 2018 Panmunjom Declaration”

2:50 p.m., North Korea destroys the Inter-Korean Joint June 16,

Deputy Director of National Security gives a briefing on

Liaison Office in Kaesong 2020

the results of a NSC meeting

-  [“...we gravely warn that we will act strongly if North ]
Korea continues to take actions that will further
deteriorate the situation”

Chief of Operations at the JCS briefs on the current
situation

Kim Yo-jong, Jang Kum-chol, Director of the United
Front Department, and spokesperson of the General -  [“...we express our deep concern over the ]

announcement that various military plans will be ratified”

Staff Department issue a statement

Vice Minister of Unification gives a briefing on the current

-  [“...impudent sophistry that has shifted the ] issue
responsibility...slavishness and subordination” (Kim
Yo-jong) June 17, -  [“...we express strong regret over North Korea’s ]

-  [“...there will be no further exchanges or cooperation ] 2020 announcement that the Mt. Kumgang tourist district and the Kaesong Industrial Complex will be militarized”
with the South Korean authorities in the future” (Jang

Senior Presidential Secretary for Public Affairs gives a

Kum-chol)

briefing

*Announced four major military operations plans
(Spokesperson of the General Staff Department) ** “...we express strong regret over the unprecedented,

nonsensical behavior, as it has intentionally distorted the
purpose of the proposal to dispatch a special envoy to
North Korea”

Spokesperson of the United Front Department sends
message that the North’s plan to send leaflets remains June 20,
unchanged 2020

-  [“...we have no intention of reconsidering or changing ]
our plans”


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **South Korea**

Chairman Kim holds the 5th preliminary meeting of the June 23,
7th Central Military Commission 2020

-  [Withholds military action against the ROK]

Kim Yong-chol issues a statement in relation to the
remarks of Minister Jeong Kyeong-doo: “...complete
withdrawal of military action against South Korea, not June 24,
postponement” 2020

-  [“...it won’t be fun when our postponement becomes ]
reconsideration”

First Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Choi Sun-hee issues
a statement

-  [Condemns the ROK’s intention to mediate, denying the ] July 4,
possibility of US-North Korea talks for internal political 2020
purposes; demands a change in the US attitude,
pressing the US

Director-general for US affairs Kwon Jong-gun issues a
statement

-  [Continues to dismiss any possibility of US-North Korea ] July 7,
summit in line with a US high-ranking official’s visit to the 2020
ROK; condemns the role of 'mediator' of the ROK for
US-North Korea talks

Kim Yo-jong issues a statement

-  While dismissing the possibility of a US-North Korea July 10,
summit within the year, North Korea emphasizes its firm 2020
determination to denuclearize and urges the US to
change its attitude

Chairman Kim instructs the 5th expanded meeting
of the 7th Central Military Commission July 18,

-  [Points out a series of issues raised in the military ] 2020
industry; holds a closed-door meeting to discuss the key
issues to reinforce war deterrence

Chairman Kim calls for an extended emergency meeting
of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee

-  Seals off Kaesong and declares a state of emergency;
decides to convert the "national emergency epidemic July 25,
prevention system" into a "maximum emergency 2020
system"; urges strict punishment and countermeasures
against units that have allowed troops to defect to the
ROK

Chairman Kim supervises a commemorative event for
the occasion of Victory Day (July 27)

-  [Visits the war veterans’ tomb; awards the "Baekdusan ]
Commemorative Pistol" (July 26); holds the National

July 27,

Veteran’s Contest (July 27)

2020

-  [Participates in the National Veteran’s Contest to deliver ]
a congratulatory speech mentioning that the national
safety and future will be firmly guaranteed with nuclear
deterrence

Minister of Unification visits the Donghae Line Inter-
Korean Transit Office and Jejin Station

July 31, -  [“...we will actively seek ways to resume tourism in Mt. ]

2020 Kumgang and create a new economic order on the

Korean Peninsula by promoting inter-Korean railroads
and road connections”


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **South Korea**

President Moon delivers National Liberation Day
congratulatory remarks

August 15, -  [“...we look forward to the day when the citizens of the ]

2020 two Koreas will practically avail themselves to the benefits

of peace through cooperation in the prevention of
epidemics and joint management of shared rivers”

Chairman Kim presides over the 6th Plenary Meeting of
the 7th Central Military Commission

-  [“...the severe internal and external situation ]
persists...the planned growth goals of the national
economy are seriously underachieved and people’s lives August 19,
have not been remarkably improved” 2020
** [Agenda of the 8th Party Congress: program types of ]
this year; overview of the Central Military Commission’s
program; program direction for the next year and;
five-year economic development plan

President Moon delivers a speech at the UN

September

23, 2020 -  [“...war must come to a complete and permanent end ]

on the Korean Peninsula”

ROK fisheries official

-  [The shooting of a ROK civilian and damage to the body ]

September cannot be justified; the ROK government strongly

24, 2020 condemned this incident; North Korea must apologize for

this incident and take clear measures to prevent its
recurrence

Suh Hoon, Director of National Security, gives a briefing
on a telephone message from North Korea

-  Chairman Kim expressed regret over the death of the

September ROK fisheries official in the West Sea

25, 2020 -  [“...it was an unexpected and unsavory incident that ]

took place in our waters, which added great
disappointment to President Moon and the South
Koreans...we truly apologize for the incident”

Director of National Security briefs on the letters of the
leaders of the two Koreas

-  President Moon’s letter (September 8)

-  Salutes the Chairman of the State Council for his strong
commitment to respect for life. “...it is regrettable that we
are unable to help each other when each day is at stake.
We sincerely hope that all difficulties will be overcome as

September the Chairman wishes”

25, 2020 -  Chairman Kim’s letter (September 12)

-  [“...through this opportunity, I would like to extend my ]
sincerity without any pretense to the President and the
South Koreans. Hearing the news of malignant virus and
typhoon damage reminded me of the President’s tireless
efforts...I am waiting for the terrible time of this year to
pass and for the days when good things will arrive one
after another”

The NSC Secretary gives a briefing regarding the
telephone message from North Korea on the death of a
ROK fisheries official

September

27, 2020 -  [Positively evaluates North Korea’s prompt apology and ]

promise to prevent recurrence; requests a joint
investigation to discover the truth; requests the restoration
and re-operation of military communication lines

Chairman Kim sends a consolation message to President
Trump and his wife after they were tested positive for

October 3,

COVID-19

2020

-  [“...I sincerely wish you and your wife complete recovery ]
as soon as possible”


-----

**North Korea** **Date** **South Korea**

North Korea holds military parade celebrating the
foundation of the Workers’ Party of Korea October

-  [(Voice speech) Lauds the efforts of the Korean People’s ] 10, 2020
Army; sends a message of appeasement to the ROK

October 14 The ROK and the US hold the 52nd SCM (Washington,

-  15, 2020 D.C.)

Korea Central News Agency expresses its position one
month after its expression of regret over "the death of a
ROK citizen in the West Sea" (September 25)

October

-  [“...South Korea is primarily responsible for the ] 30, 2020
unfortunate event...our position is to hope that the
unpleasant precedent that caused the North and South
relations to deteriorate will not happen again”

Minister of Unification delivers congratulatory remarks at
the opening ceremony of the Panmunjom Tour Support

November Center

4, 2020 -  [“...proposed to North Korea the restoration of inter-]

Korean communications and Joint Liaison Office and the
reunion of separated families”

President Moon delivers a keynote speech at the Jeju
Peace Forum

November -  [“...the determination of the two Koreas and multilateral ]

cooperation will bring peace on the Korean Peninsula

6, 2020

and contribute to world peace. A multilateral peace
regime is an essential spirit for establishing peace on the
Korean Peninsula and in Northeast Asia”

President Moon’s remarks at a senior aides’ meeting

November -  [“...we are ready to make active efforts for establishing ]

peace and prosperity on the Korean Peninsula, along

9, 2020

with building a community for life and safety”

North Korea publishes a photo book that summarizes

November

the weapons systems developed after Chairman Kim

24, 2020

took office


-----

Appendix

11


###### Chronicle of North Korea’s Infiltrations and
 Local Provocations against the ROK

**Status of Infiltrations and Local Provocations by Year**

As of November 30, 2020

|Total|1950s|1960s|1970s|1980s|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|3,120|398|1,336|403|227|
|2,002|379|1,009|310|167|
|1,118|19|327|93|60|


|2000s|2010 - 2017|2018|2019|
|---|---|---|---|
|241|264|0|0|
|16|27|0|0|
|225|237|0|0|



**Chronicle of Infiltrations and Local Provocations**

(December 1, 2018 - November 30, 2020)


**Date** **Main Contents**

May 3, 2020 North Korean GP fires at South Korean GP in Cheorwon area (four shots)


-----

**Detailed Status of Infiltrations and Local Provocations by Year and Type**

As of November 30, 2020



Infiltrat
ions

Local
pro
voca
tions

|Col1|Total|1950s|1960s|1970s|1980s|1990s|2000s|2010 - 2017|2018|2019|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||3,120|398|1,336|403|227|250|241|264|0|0|
||1,749|375|988|298|38|50|0|0|0|0|
||214|0|0|0|127|44|16|27|0|0|
||39|4|21|12|2|0|0|0|0|0|
||2,002|379|1,009|310|167|94|16|27|0|0|
||503|7|298|51|44|48|42|12|0|0|
||559|2|22|27|12|107|180|209|0|0|
|Air|51|10|7|15|4|1|3|11|0|0|
|Electronic warfare|5|0|0|0|0|0|0|5|0|0|
|Subtotal|1,118|19|327|93|60|156|225|237|0|0|


-----

Appendix

12


**ROK–US Combined Exercise**

**Name** **Type** **Purpose** **Description**



-  Initial response to crisis

management

-  Gain proficiency with wartime

transition procedures

-  Gain proficiency with

operational plan execution
procedures

-  Gain proficiency with

reception, staging, onward
movement, and integration
procedures within the
combined operational areas


Combined command post
training in the first half and
second half
(CCPT)

|Command post exercise (CPX)|• Command theater operations and gain proficiency with warfighting procedures under the current combined defense system • Improve ROK–US combined operations and rear area defense operations capabilities|
|---|---|



-  [Concurrently verify and evaluate the operational capabilities of the F-CFC in preparation for the wartime OPCON transition under the ROK–US agreement]

**ROK Armed Forces Joint Exercise and Training**




-  National crisis response

support

-  Crisis management procedure

exercise

-  Wartime transition procedure

exercise

-  Operational plan execution

training in preparation for local
provocations and full-scale war

-  Exercise to apply operations

execution procedures
according to changes in the
operational environment

-  Counter-terrorism operations

-  Operations to prepare against

infiltrations and local
provocations

-  Wartime transition

-  Operations to prepare against

a full-scale war


Ulchi Taegeuk Exercise


Hoguk Training

Comprehensive rear area

training (Hwarang Training)

|Type|Purpose|
|---|---|
|Theater-level CPX and government exercise|• Cultivate the joint operational command capabilities • Gain proficiency with procedures for carrying out the Chungmu plan and warfighting SOPs in association with military exercises|
|Operational command-level field training exercise|• Establish military readiness posture and cultivate joint operations execution capabilities|
|Integrated civil– government–military–police defense training by area|• Gain proficiency with wartime and peacetime operational plan execution procedures • Enhance the residents’ security awareness • Confirm the integrated civil–government–military– police defense posture|


-----

Appendix

13


###### Joint Communiqué of the 51st ROK–US
 Security Consultative Meeting

Seoul, November 15, 2019

**1. The 51st Republic of Korea (ROK)–United States (US) Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) was held**

in Seoul, on November 15, 2019. ROK Minister of National Defense Jeong Kyeongdoo and US Secretary

of Defense Mark Esper led their respective delegations, which included senior defense and foreign affairs

officials. On November 14, 2019, ROK Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Park Hanki and US

Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Mark Milley, presided over the 44th US–ROK Military

Committee Meeting (MCM).

**2. The Minister and the Secretary pledged to continue close communication and cooperation to**

develop the ROK–US Alliance, which has served as the linchpin of peace and stability on the Korean

Peninsula and the Northeast Asian region, in a mutually reinforcing and a future-oriented manner. Both

sides praised the SCM’s effective handling of Alliance policy coordination over the past half-century in full

expectation that it should continue as the cornerstone venue to affirm national commitments designed to

develop the Alliance and enhance security and prosperity in the region. They also assessed the results of

the Joint Study for the Future Defense Vision of the ROK–US Alliance regarding future defense

cooperation areas of the Alliance and reaffirmed the common understanding that the scope and level of

the future Alliance cooperation should continuously expand and deepen.

**3. The Minister and the Secretary reviewed the current security environment in the Korean Peninsula**

and the region and discussed cooperative measures between the two nations. Both sides reaffirmed the

need for close coordination and cooperation to achieve their common objective of complete

denuclearization in a verifiable manner and the establishment of permanent peace on the Korean

Peninsula. They also recognized the historic achievements made by the meetings between the leaders of

the ROK, the United States, and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) during 2018 and

2019 including the ROK–US–DPRK meeting in June 2019 that was held at Panmunjom, a place that

once served as a symbol of division. They also decided to continue their efforts towards creating an

environment conducive to the implementation of the commitments in the Panmunjom Declaration on

Peace, Prosperity, and Reunification of the Korean Peninsula (Panmunjom Declaration), the Pyongyang

Joint Declaration of September 2018 (the Pyongyang Joint Declaration), and the Joint Statement of

President Donald J. Trump and Chairman Kim Jong Un at the Singapore Summit. They engaged in in
depth discussions on the repeated missile launch activities by the DPRK and pledged to remain closely

aligned. They also affirmed the importance of full enforcement of UN Security Council resolutions by the

international community.


-----

**4. The Minister and the Secretary assessed that the various actions undertaken by the ROK and the**

DPRK defense authorities to implement the Panmunjom Declaration and the Pyongyang Joint

Declaration set conditions for the easing of military tensions and reducing the threat of war on the Korean

Peninsula. Minister Jeong noted that all mutual hostilities in the ground, sea, and air have ceased in the

border areas and that key projects such as the demilitarization of the Joint Security Area (JSA) and the

mutual pilot withdrawal of Guard Posts within the Demilitarize Zone (DMZ) have been successfully

completed through the implementation of the Comprehensive Military Agreement (CMA). Both sides

assessed that the aforementioned efforts supported the stable management of the border areas with no

instance of military tension in the border areas over the past year. The Minister and the Secretary

pledged to continue to maintain close coordination and cooperation to implement the CMA and

emphasized the importance for the DPRK to resume discussions through means including, but not

limited to, holding the Inter-Korean Joint Military Committee to implement the CMA fully.

**5. The Minister and the Secretary assessed that the United Nations Command (UNC)’s administering**

of the Armistice Agreement has contributed to peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula and enabled

the implementation of inter-Korean confidence building measures contained in the CMA. The Minister

also stated that the ROK fully supports and respects the Armistice Agreement and the authorities and

responsibilities of UNC. In addition, noting that the Northern Limit Line (NLL) has been an effective means

of separating ROK and DPRK military forces and preventing military tension to date, the Minister

expressed his expectation that the buffer zone, which was agreed through the CMA, would contribute to

preventing unplanned encounters and contribute to the establishment of a permanent peace on the

Korean Peninsula. The Secretary shared his understanding that the military confidence-building

measures are important for establishing peace on the Korean Peninsula, and noted the important role

performed by UNC in implementing the Armistice Agreement and enabling the smooth implementation of

confidence-building measures.

**6. The Minister and the Secretary assessed that the US–ROK Alliance is strong and reaffirmed the two**

nations’ mutual commitment to the defense of the ROK and the enhancement of mutual security of both

nations based on the US–ROK Mutual Defense Treaty and a robust combined defense posture. The

Secretary reaffirmed the continued US commitment to provide extended deterrence to the ROK using

the full range of military capabilities, including US nuclear, conventional, and missile defense capabilities.

The Minister and the Secretary also assessed that the results of the Joint Study on Extended Deterrence

brought to light measures to enhance cooperation designed to strengthen extended nuclear deterrence.

Both sides pledged to continue to explore jointly measures to enhance the Alliance deterrence posture

and implement the Tailored Deterrence Strategy while considering the effects of changes in the security

environment on the Peninsula and in the region.


-----

**7. The Minister and the Secretary noted that the US forces in the ROK have played a critical role in**

maintaining peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula over the past 66 years, and reaffirmed that US

Forces, Korea (USFK) will continue to play an important role in preventing armed conflict on the Korean

Peninsula and promoting peace and stability in Northeast Asia. Given the current security environment,

the Secretary also reaffirmed the commitment to maintain the current level of the US military personnel in

the ROK and to enhance combat readiness.

**8. The Minister and the Secretary reviewed preparations for the relocation of the Combined Forces**

Command (CFC) Headquarters to Camp Humphreys that had been approved by the two sides at the June

3, 2019, ministerial-level meeting. The Minister and the Secretary confirmed that the CFC Headquarters

relocation strengthens the ROK–US combined defense posture, and pledged to complete the CFC

Headquarters relocation expeditiously. The two sides also pledged to work together so that the relocation

contributes toward a stable transition following transfer of wartime operational control (OPCON) in

accordance with the Alliance Guiding Principles and the Conditions-based OPCON Transition Plan (COTP).

**9. The Minister and the Secretary exchanged views on how the adjusted ROK–US combined exercise**

and training supported the existing diplomatic efforts to achieve complete denuclearization and

permanent peace on the Korean Peninsula. The two sides also assessed that the adjusted combined

exercise and training maintained the ROK–US combined defense posture and military readiness while

contributing to an environment conducive to OPCON transition, and pledged to continue close

coordination on the actions to be implemented in this regard. Both sides assessed that the ROK–US

Alliance must continue to focus on military readiness and the combined defense posture to address the

dynamic changes on the Peninsula.

**10. The Minister and the Secretary committed to cooperate closely to develop comprehensive Alliance**

capabilities in response to common security threats. The Minister emphasized the plans of the ROK to

continue to reinforce its defense capabilities in order to respond proactively to omnidirectional security

threats and to be capable of leading future security environment changes through the ongoing Defense

Reform 2.0. The Secretary expressed his expectations that the ROK military’s defense reform would

contribute to the enhancement of comprehensive Alliance capabilities and to the establishment of a

robust US–ROK binational Future-CFC commanded by a ROK general/flag officer.

**11. The Minister and the Secretary reviewed the progress of relevant tasks for OPCON transition,**

discussed the way-ahead, and commended realistic achievements and strides made in preparation for

the wartime OPCON transition to a ROK-commanded Future-CFC. The two sides reaffirmed the

implementation of the Alliance Guiding Principles that had been signed in 2018 to maintain a steadfast


-----

combined readiness posture, even after OPCON transition. The Minister and the Secretary concurred in

the important role that this year’s combined command post training had played in maintaining a strong

ROK–US combined defense posture and in conducting the certification assessment for the future ROK–

US CFC Initial Operational Capability (IOC). After review of the assessment report produced by the

combined certification team and the MCM, the Minister and the Secretary reviewed the IOC certification

assessment results. The Minister and the Secretary decided to pursue an assessment of Full Operational

Capability (FOC) for the Future CFC in 2020 and pledged to implement necessary steps, including the

development of Strategic Documents, for the FOC certification assessment.

**12. The Minister and the Secretary also affirmed that progress has been made in meeting the conditions**

for wartime OPCON transition. The two sides noted that the special Permanent Military Committee (PMC)

was held to assess the critical military capabilities and the efforts of the special PMC promoted the

credibility of the evaluation. The Minister emphasized that the ROK military will continue to acquire

defense capabilities necessary to command the future combined defense system and to pursue wartime

OPCON transition in a systematic as well as proactive manner. The Secretary reaffirmed the US

commitment to continue to provide bridging capabilities until the ROK acquires these capabilities, as well

as enduring capabilities. The Minister pledged to acquire these capabilities expeditiously. The two sides

pledged to engage in regular evaluation and review of progresses in OPCON transition implementation at

the annual SCM and MCM in order to maintain a steadfast combined defense system.

**13. The Minister and the Secretary received a report on the results of the US–ROK MCM from the US–**

ROK CFC Commander and expressed their satisfaction with the progress in enhancing combined

defense capabilities and developing relevant operational plans as well as Strategic Documents early next

year. The two sides agreed to conduct a joint study on the development of a combined joint multi
purpose live fire training complex.

**14. The Minister and the Secretary decided to continue to strengthen cooperation in various areas,**

including space and cyber, in order to ensure an effective joint response against newly emerging threats

and to bolster comprehensive Alliance response capabilities. The Minister and the Secretary

acknowledged the efforts of the respective defense authorities to attain space capabilities, including the

founding of the US Space Command and the establishment of a space surveillance system in the ROK.

The two sides also pledged to explore further cooperative measures to strengthen space capabilities as

an Alliance, such as space situational awareness information sharing systems, and to expand bilateral

and multilateral combined exercises and training events to improve space operation capabilities. They

also pledged to continue engaging in cooperation to develop space professionals equipped with the

capabilities to address new space threats and challenges.


-----

**15. The Minister and the Secretary reaffirmed their commitment to strengthen Alliance cyber capabilities**

in light of the increasing scope of cyber security threats. The two sides committed to maintain close

communication and coordination in the cyber domain, including sharing trends of cyber threats as well

as corresponding policy changes in their respective nations and discussing common issues of interest.

**16. The Minister and the Secretary noted that the ROK–US science and technology cooperation has**

expanded in several domains such as cyber defense, artificial intelligence, automation, and directed

energy. The two sides assessed that cooperation is continuing to develop in a way that furthers ROK–

US mutual interests.

**17. The Minister and the Secretary concurred in the need to strengthen the national defense capabilities**

of the Alliance, and to establish more efficient and effective collaboration in their development,

acquisition, and employment. The two sides concurred in the importance of expanding and deepening

cooperation in the areas of defense research and development, industrial cooperation, capability

acquisition, and logistics and sustainment, with a focus on strengthening the national defense capabilities

of the Alliance as well as interoperability. Going forward, the two sides pledged to continue to devise and

deepen cooperative efforts through the regular consultative bodies that support these domains, and

approved a reform of those consultative bodies to strengthen their alignment with Alliance policy and

strategy.

**18. The Minister and the Secretary pledged to continue and to enhance defense cooperation to address**

wide-ranging global security challenges of mutual interest, including through peacekeeping operations

(PKO), counter-piracy operations, stabilization and reconstruction efforts, regional security cooperation

initiatives, and humanitarian assistance and disaster relief. The Minister highlighted the effective global

leadership demonstrated by the United States in response to various global security challenges. The

Secretary praised the ROK’s dedication and contribution to various global security efforts, including the

counter-piracy activities in the Gulf of Aden, UN peacekeeping operations, and the Proliferation Security

Initiative (PSI). Based on the common understanding of the Alliance against threats posed by Weapons

of Mass Destruction (WMD), the Minister and the Secretary praised the efforts to improve response

capabilities and to guarantee interoperability in the combined force to respond against WMD threats in

contingency and to interdict WMD proliferation. They also resolved to continue to strengthen cooperation

to improve WMD response capabilities, including efforts that go through the DoD Cooperative Threat

Reduction Program.

**19. The Minister and the Secretary concurred in the importance of US–ROK.–Japan trilateral security**

cooperation based on common security interests despite the challenges. They committed to continue


-----

ROK–US–Japan trilateral cooperation such as high-level policy consultations, combined exercises,

information-sharing, and personnel exchanges. The two sides also pledged to seek ways to expand

such efforts into multilateral regional cooperation to promote peace and stability in Northeast Asia.

**20. The Minister and the Secretary reaffirmed that an expeditious approach to USFK base relocation**

and returns is in the interest of both countries and pledged to work together closely on relevant matters

including environmental conditions to ensure timely base returns in accordance with the US–ROK Status

of Forces Agreement (SOFA). With regard to the four installations that require an expeditious approach

for returns, the Minister and the Secretary commended the efforts to discuss various measures through

the SOFA channel. The Minister and the Secretary also reaffirmed their intent to continue to discuss

relevant issues through regular consultations in accordance with the SOFA in order to reach mutually

acceptable solutions. The two sides also noted that the responsibility to restore the facilities and areas

should be determined pursuant to agreements between the two countries and committed to enhance

transparency regarding release of relevant information.

**21. The Minister and the Secretary shared the view that ensuring continuous training opportunities for**

USFK is an essential element to maintaining a strong combined defensive posture. They also concurred

in the importance of communication and cooperation between the ROK Ministry of National Defense and

the USFK to strengthen civilian–military engagement with local civilians to allow for more effective joint

usage of training ranges and to ensure combined live-fire training conditions to sustain the combined

defense posture.

**22. The Secretary offered his appreciation for the ROK’s contributions toward ensuring a stable**

stationing environment for US forces in Korea while emphasizing the importance of defense cost sharing.

The Minister and the Secretary noted that the Special Measures Agreement (SMA) has greatly

contributed to strengthening US–ROK combined defense capabilities and recognized the desire to

conclude the 11th SMA before the expiration of the 10th SMA. Furthermore, the two sides shared the

understanding that future SMA contributions must be set at a fair and mutually agreeable level.

**23. Minister Jeong and Secretary Esper expressed appreciation for the courtesy, hospitality, and work**

by both sides that contributed to the success of this year’s SCM. The Minister and the Secretary affirmed

that the discussions during the 51st SCM and the 44th MCM contributed substantively to strengthening

the ROK–US Alliance and further enhanced the development of the bilateral defense relationship into a

mutually reinforcing Alliance. Both sides expect to hold the 52nd SCM and 45th MCM in Washington,

D.C., at a mutually convenient time in 2020.


-----

Appendix

14


###### Future ROK–US Alliance Defense Vision

The ROK–US Alliance has contributed to the deepening political, social, and economic ties between the

United States and the ROK over the past 66 years, while also growing into a mutually beneficial Alliance

based on the common values and robust trust between the two nations. ROK and US authorities are

closely coordinating defense activities to support the establishment of complete denuclearization in a

verifiable manner and a permanent peace on the Korean Peninsula, while maintaining a steadfast

combined defense posture with the ROK–US Alliance as the linchpin for peace, stability, and prosperity

of the Korean Peninsula and the region.

At the 50th Security Consultative Meeting on October 31, 2018, the ROK Minister of National Defense

and the US Secretary of Defense pledged to engage in discussions on a joint defense vision to advance

Alliance defense cooperation in a mutually reinforcing and future-oriented manner while taking into

consideration dynamic changes in the security environment. These discussions were based on the

understandings of the Presidents of the ROK and United States during the ROK–US summit of June 30,

2019, where both Presidents pledged to pursue harmonious cooperation between the ROK New

Southern Policy and the US Indo-Pacific strategy under the regional cooperation principles of openness,

inclusiveness, and transparency.

The US and ROK defense cooperation flows from a commitment to common principles that underpin

order of the Korean Peninsula, the region, and the global arena. These principles include:

a. Striving towards peace and prosperity of the Korean Peninsula, Northeast Asia, and the world;

b. Respect for sovereignty and independence of all nations;

c. Peaceful resolution of disputes in accordance with internationally established laws and norms; and

d. Adherence to international rules and norms, including those of free access, navigation, and overflight.

The ROK and United States intend to develop defense cooperation in a future-focused manner, based

on the aforementioned common principles even following the establishment of peace on the Korean

Peninsula. Going forward, both countries pledge to protect shared national security interests on the

Korean Peninsula, in the Northeast Asian region, and the global arena.

Alliance defense cooperation is to be pursued so that the two nations may be able to effectively

respond to new challenges and security threats. To this end, the US and ROK decide to deepen and

expand the degree and scope of defense cooperation to incorporate new nontraditional and

transnational threats such as cyber, space, maritime, and environmental issues. The two countries also

decide to cooperate to build regional partner capacity to respond to transnational and non-traditional

security threats to advance shared values and common principles.

The Alliance decide to deepen cooperation in traditional areas, such as preventing and responding to

potential chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) threats, and preventing the proliferation


-----

of CBRN capabilities and delivery system-related materials. The United States and ROK decide to

continue to strengthen extended deterrence, ensuring that deterrence remains credible, capable, and

enduring. The Alliance also intends to collaborate to identify opportunities for future-oriented defense

science and technology cooperation, including cyberspace, unmanned and autonomous technologies,

and supply networks of strategic material and technology.

Moving forward, the United States and ROK reaffirm to continue to work to ensure that the ROK–US

Alliance works to ensure security, stability, and prosperity on the Korean Peninsula, the Northeast Asian

region, and the world.


-----

Appendix

15


###### Joint Communiqué of the 52nd ROK–US Security
 Consultative Meeting

Washington D.C., October 14, 2020

**1.** The 52nd United States (US)–Republic of Korea (ROK) Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) was

held in Washington, D.C., on October 14, 2020. US Secretary of Defense Mark Esper and ROK Minister

of National Defense Suh Wook led their respective delegations, which included senior defense and

foreign affairs officials. On October 13, 2020, US Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Mark

Milley, and ROK Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Won In-choul, presided over the 45th US–

ROK Military Committee Meeting (MCM).

**2.** The Secretary and the Minister noted that the SCM has played a pivotal role in the development of

the US–ROK Alliance. The two leaders recognized that the SCM would continue to be a cornerstone

venue to discuss and affirm national commitments. Both sides pledged to continue to develop the

Alliance—the linchpin of peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula and in Northeast Asia—in a

mutually reinforcing and future-oriented manner. The Secretary and the Minister also noted that future

defense cooperation, mutual trust, and shared values such as freedom, democracy, human rights, and

the rule of law—on which the relationship is built—would be further enhanced through continued

commitment to the objectives set forth in the Joint Study for the Future Defense Vision of the ROK–US

Alliance.

**3.** The Secretary and the Minister reviewed the current security environment on the Korean Peninsula

and in the region and discussed cooperative measures between the two nations. The two sides

additionally had an in-depth discussion on North Korean military activities. In recognition of the significant

threat that North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic missile programs pose to international security, both sides

reaffirmed the need for close coordination and cooperation to establish a permanent peace on the

Korean Peninsula through complete denuclearization of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

(DPRK), as well as dismantlement of its ballistic missile program, consistent with multiple United Nations

Security Council Resolutions. The Secretary and the Minister urged North Korea to fulfill its commitments

under the Panmunjom Declaration for Peace, Prosperity, and Reunification of the Korean Peninsula, the

Singapore Summit Joint Statement between President Donald J. Trump and Chairman Kim Jong Un,

and other relevant arrangements and agreements.

**4.** The Minister noted that the various measures carried out by the ROK and North Korean military

authorities for the implementation of the Panmunjom Declaration and the Comprehensive Military


-----

Agreement (CMA) set conditions for the easing of military tensions and reducing the threat of war on the

Peninsula. The two leaders concurred that the cessation of hostilities on the ground, and in the sea and

air, through the inter-Korean implementation of the CMA, and continued United Nations Command (UNC)

enforcement and management of the Armistice Agreement, maintained stability and significantly reduced

the possibility of accidental clashes. The Minister reaffirmed the ROK’s commitment to ensure that the

implementation of the CMA contributes to the establishment of peace on the peninsula. The Minister also

expressed his expectation that the buffer zone, agreed to through the CMA, would contribute to

preventing accidental clashes and supporting military confidence-building measures on the Korean

Peninsula. He expressed that the CMA implementation efforts should continue, including: the withdrawal

of guard posts in the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ), and the establishment and functioning of the inter
Korean joint military committee. Both sides decided to continue to seek means of enhancing our security

dialogues to better meet today.’s security environment.

**5.** The Secretary and the Minister reaffirmed the role of the United Nations Command (UNC) in

maintaining and enforcing the Armistice Agreement. Both leaders affirmed that the UNC has contributed

to the successful maintenance of peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula for 67 years and continues

to carry out its mission and tasks with the utmost respect for ROK sovereignty. The Minister additionally

noted that the Northern Limit Line (NLL) has been an effective means of separating ROK and DPRK

military forces and preventing military tension to date. The Secretary acknowledged that military

confidence-building measures are important for establishing peace on the Korean Peninsula, and he

noted the important role performed by the UNC in implementing the Armistice Agreement and enabling

confidence-building measures on the Korean Peninsula. The Minister affirmed his support for the roles

and responsibilities assigned to the UNC in accordance with the Armistice Agreement and the relevant

United Nations Security Council Resolutions.

**6.** The Secretary and the Minister assessed that the US–ROK Alliance is strong and reaffirmed the two

nations’ mutual commitment to a combined defense as agreed in the US–ROK Mutual Defense Treaty to

defend the ROK. The Secretary and the Minister noted that US forces in the ROK have played a critical

role in maintaining peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula for more than 67 years, and reaffirmed

that US Forces Korea (USFK) are to continue to play an important role in preventing armed conflict on

the Korean Peninsula, and in promoting peace and stability in Northeast Asia. The Secretary reaffirmed

the unshakable commitment of the United States to the combined defense of the ROK, as enshrined in

the Mutual Defense Treaty. The Secretary also reaffirmed the continued US commitment to provide

extended deterrence to the ROK using the full range of military capabilities, including US nuclear,

conventional, and missile defense capabilities. The Secretary and the Minister committed to ensure that

the Alliance deterrence posture remains credible, capable, and enduring. To this end, the two leaders


-----

pledged to enhance deterrence through the implementation of many of the policy recommendations

from the Extended Deterrence Joint Study. The two leaders committed to make a long-term plan to

establish the conditions for the stable stationing of the Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense (THAAD)

battery at Camp Carroll as part of this commitment. The two leaders also pledged to explore jointly

measures to enhance the Alliance deterrence posture and implement the Tailored Deterrence Strategy

while considering the effects of changes in the security environment on the Peninsula and in the region.

**7.** The Secretary and the Minister received a report on the results of the US–ROK MCM from the US–

ROK Combined Forces Command (CFC) Commander, General Robert Abrams, which highlighted that

the combined defense posture is capable and ready to “Fight Tonight” and is prepared to respond

effectively to any security challenge. The Secretary expressed commitment to the CFC Commander’s

efforts to update operational plans and Alliance procedures to respond to situations on the Korean

Peninsula or in the region, considering changes in the operational environment relevant to the current

CFC.

**8.** The Secretary and the Minister reaffirmed the need to continue to conduct combined exercises and

training events on the Peninsula to strengthen Alliance readiness. The two sides also assessed that the

20-2 Combined Command Post Training, undertaken despite the COVID-19 pandemic, and other

combined training events performed throughout the year in a balanced manner, added strength to the

US–ROK combined defense posture and military readiness. Each side assessed that the US–ROK

Alliance must continue to focus on military readiness and on the combined defense posture to address

the dynamic changes on the Peninsula.

**9.** The two leaders also emphasized that continuous training opportunities for USFK are critical to

maintaining a strong combined defense posture. The Secretary and the Minister concurred in the

importance of communication and cooperation between the ROK Ministry of National Defense (MND)

and USFK to coordinate for more effective and productive joint use of ROK facilities and airspace for the

USFK training required to maintain readiness within our strong combined defense posture. The two

leaders also committed to continue cooperation on and set tangible milestones for the development of a

combined joint multi-purpose live-fire training complex.

**10.** The Secretary and the Minister expressed appreciation for the CFC, which has played a central role

in deterring war on the Korean Peninsula and defending the ROK since its establishment in 1978. The

Secretary and the Minister reviewed preparations for the relocation of the CFC Headquarters (HQ) to

Camp Humphreys. The two leaders also expressed their expectation that the CFC HQ relocation would

contribute to an enhanced combined defense posture and shared the understanding that the relocation


-----

would be expeditiously completed as soon as the site was administratively and operationally suitable.

Both sides also pledged to work together to carry out the CFC Headquarters relocation with purpose in

a safe, seamless, and effective manner.

**11.** The Secretary and the Minister reviewed the progress on directed tasks from the Conditions-based

Operational Control (OPCON) Transition Plan (COTP). The two sides noted progress made in the COTP

and discussed the way forward for wartime OPCON transition to the Future Combined Forces Command

(F-CFC) including the FOC certification. The two leaders reaffirmed that the conditions stated in the

mutually agreed COTP must be fully met before the wartime OPCON is transitioned to the F-CFC. The

two sides also reaffirmed the intent to comply fully with the 2015 COTP Base Plan as well as the 2018

COTP Change One. The Secretary and the Minister positively noted the development this year of a

single set of bilaterally formulated strategic documents for use in the assessments of Initial Operational

Capability (IOC) and Full Operational Capability (FOC) for F-CFC. They further applauded the efforts of

the Alliance to complete the F-CFC IOC certification assessment during the Crisis Management Staff

Training (CMST) this Fall and the Secretary also noted the necessity of updating the 2016 Crisis

Management Memorandum of Agreement (CM MOA) by the end of the year.

**12.** The Secretary and the Minister acknowledged that great progress had been made toward meeting

the conditions for wartime OPCON transition through US–ROK joint efforts. The two sides noted multiple

Permanent Military Committee Meetings (PMCs) on COTP topics were held in 2020 and concurred that

the activities of the PMCs promoted the credibility of the evaluation and understanding of the conditions.

The Minister reaffirmed that the ROK military will continue to acquire defense capabilities established in

the conditions-based plan signed in 2015 and its change in 2018, and would pursue the plan’s

objectives in a systematic manner. The Secretary and the Minister also affirmed the necessity to

cooperate closely to strengthen the Alliance’s combined defense capabilities and committed to

continuing efforts to meet the conditions for transition through a joint study on bridging and enduring

capabilities. The Secretary committed to the provision of bridging capabilities, but noted the need first to

understand ROK acquisition plans in order to determine what specific capabilities are needed, and for

how long. Owing to South Korea’s economic and military advances, the Minister noted that the ROK will

acquire, develop, and provide these capabilities, and committed to more robust discussions on ROK

acquisition planning. The Minister reaffirmed the ROK commitment to acquire appropriate defense

capabilities of the ROK military necessary for the defense of the Korean Peninsula. The Secretary and the

Minister pledged to continue the joint study to optimize the bridging and enduring capabilities in

conjunction with the development of the ROK capabilities. The two sides pledged to engage in regular

evaluation and review of progress in OPCON transition implementation at the annual SCM and MCMs in

order to maintain a steadfast combined defense system.


-----

**13.** The Secretary and the Minister decided to continue strengthening cooperation in various areas,

including space and cyber, in order to ensure an effective response against newly emerging threats and

to bolster comprehensive Alliance response capabilities. The Secretary and the Minister acknowledged

the efforts of the respective defense authorities working to promote critical infrastructure, including

information and space systems, and to improve the security of such systems. The two sides expressed

their shared goal of fostering closer space policy development for the Alliance. The two sides pledged to

explore further cooperative measures to strengthen space capabilities as an Alliance, such as improving

space situational awareness information-sharing systems, and expanding bilateral and multilateral

combined exercises and training events to improve the Alliance space operation capabilities. The

Secretary and the Minister also committed to exploring opportunities to develop space professionals.

The two sides committed to maintain close communication and coordination regarding the cyber domain

through sharing trends of cyber threats as well as discussing corresponding policy changes. They also

concurred in the need for exchanges between the respective cyber commands with the aim of

discussing and promoting mutual interests.

**14.** The Secretary and the Minister reaffirmed their commitment to advancing Alliance priorities and

plans in the areas of capability development, interoperability, acquisition, and sustainment by more

effectively leveraging US–ROK consultative bodies and activities that address defense research and

development, as well as industrial cooperation, capability acquisition, life cycle logistics, and technology

security. The two sides also pledged to pursue expeditiously revisions of bilateral consultative bodies

while continuing to coordinate objectives and activities across these areas to provide timely and

integrated capability solutions to Alliance requirements.

**15.** The Secretary and the Minister also noted that US–ROK science and technology cooperation has

expanded in several domains such as cyber defense, artificial intelligence, automation, and directed

energy. The two sides assessed that such cooperation is continuing to develop in a way that furthers

US–ROK mutual interests.

**16.** The Secretary and the Minister pledged to continue enhancing defense and security cooperation to

address wide-ranging global security challenges of mutual interest given the complex security dynamics

in the region and around the world. In that sense, they also emphasized the need to seek synergies in

US and ROK regional strategies. The two leaders reaffirmed the importance of the rules-based

international order and adherence to international rules and norms, including those of freedom of

navigation and overflight. They further expressed their intent to work together for that purpose. They also

reiterated their commitment to peacekeeping operations (PKO), counter-piracy operations, stabilization

and reconstruction efforts, regional security cooperation initiatives, and humanitarian assistance and


-----

disaster relief. The Secretary highlighted the effective leadership of the ROK in response to COVID-19

and expressed appreciation for the personal protective equipment (PPE) support that the ROK provided

to the United States earlier this year. The two sides committed to continuing close coordination and

cooperation to deal with this global pandemic. The Minister also noted the COVID-19 support that the

United States and the ROK were providing to various nations in the region and the stringent measures

USFK was taking to ensure COVID-19 protection. The Secretary also separately expressed appreciation

for the ROK’s dedication and contribution to various global security efforts, including the Proliferation

Security Initiative. The Secretary and the Minister applauded the US–ROK Counter Weapons of Mass

Destruction (CWMD) efforts to enhance the Alliance’s combined response capabilities to prevent the

acquisition and use of WMD, and, if necessary, to respond to mitigate WMD threats. They resolved to

continue discussions about strengthening cooperation through the ROK–US Counter WMD Committee

(CWMDC), which has enhanced the Alliance CWMD capabilities.

**17.** The two leaders committed to continue US–ROK–Japan trilateral defense cooperation such as

information-sharing, high-level policy consultation, including the defense trilateral talks (DTT), combined

exercises, and personnel exchanges to maintain the peace and security of Northeast Asia.

**18.** The Secretary and the Minister reaffirmed that expedited USFK base relocations and land returns

including those of the Yongsan Garrison are in the interest of both countries and pledged to work

together closely on relevant matters, including environmental conditions, to ensure timely base returns in

accordance with the US–ROK Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA). The US side noted that seventeen

sites are ready for return to the ROK Government at this time. The Secretary and the Minister confirmed

their intent to continue to discuss relevant issues through the established processes of the US–ROK

SOFA Joint Committee.

**19.** The Secretary offered his appreciation for the ROK’s contributions toward ensuring a stable

stationing environment for US forces in Korea while emphasizing the importance of defense cost sharing.

The Secretary noted that the current lack of a Special Measures Agreement (SMA) could have lasting

effects for Alliance readiness if an expeditious agreement is not reached. The two sides concurred in the

necessity of expeditiously resolving the SMA negotiations, in a fair, equitable, and mutually agreeable

manner, particularly in light of the impact of the lapse on the ROK–US Alliance.

**20.** Secretary Esper and Minister Suh expressed appreciation for the courtesy, hospitality, and work by

both sides that contributed to the success of this year’s SCM. The Secretary and the Minister both

assessed that the discussions during the 52nd SCM and the 45th MCM contributed substantively to

strengthening the ROK–US Alliance and further enhanced the development of the bilateral defense


-----

relationship into a mutually reinforcing Alliance. Both sides expect to hold the 53rd SCM and 46th MCM

in Seoul at a mutually convenient time in 2021.


-----

Appendix

16


###### Guiding Principles Following the Transition of
 Wartime Operational Control

October 31, 2018

(Purpose) After the decision between the Presidents of both nations in 2017 to “expeditiously enable the

conditions-based transition of wartime operational control (OPCON) of ROK forces”, the Ministry of

National Defense of the Republic of Korea (hereinafter referred to as “the ROK MND”) and the

Department of Defense of the United States of America (hereinafter referred to as “US DoD”) have

formulated the following Alliance Guiding Principles in order to maintain a strong combined defense

posture after the transition of wartime operational control.

(Preamble) The ROK MND and US DoD recognize that since the signing of the Mutual Defense Treaty

between the Republic of Korea (hereinafter referred to as “ROK”) and the United States of America

(hereinafter referred to as “US”) in 1953, the ROK–US Alliance, built on mutual trust as well as shared

values of liberal democracy, human rights, and rule of law, has served a critical role in the security,

stability, and prosperity of the Korean Peninsula and the Asia-Pacific Region.

The ROK MND and US DoD confirm that the contributions of the ROK–US Alliance are to continue into

the future, carrying on the spirit of the ROK–US Mutual Defense Treaty to prevent armed conflict on the

Korean Peninsula, promote peace and stability in Northeast Asia, and contribute to global peace.

Together in this recognition, the ROK MND and US DoD mutually approve the following Alliance

Guiding Principles in order to maintain a reinforced combined defense posture even after the transition of

wartime operational control.

As a symbol of the commitment pursuant to the Mutual Defense Treaty, US Forces Korea (USFK) is to

continue to be stationed on the Korean Peninsula and firmly fulfill the security commitment to the ROK.

The ROK–US post-OPCON transition Combined Forces Command and its subordinate combined

component commands are to be established to deter external aggression and, if deterrence fails, to

defend the ROK.

The post-OPCON transition Combined Forces Command is to operate as a separate standing entity,

and receive strategic direction and operational guidance from a Military Consultative Committee which

receives bilateral guidance from the ROK and the US national command authorities.

The national authorities of the ROK are to appoint a General or an Admiral to serve as the Commander

of the post-OPCON transition Combined Forces Command, and the national authorities of the United

States are to appoint a General or an Admiral to serve as the deputy commander of the post-OPCON

transition Combined Forces Command.

The ROK MND and US DoD are to continue to maintain and support the United Nations Command,


-----

which has served the function of preventing armed conflict on the Korean Peninsula, and develop the

mutual relationships between the ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff, the post-OPCON transition Combined

Forces Command, USFK, and the United Nations Command.

The ROK MND is to continue to develop capabilities to lead the combined defense, while the US DoD

provides bridging and enduring capabilities for the defense of the ROK.

The ROK MND is to expand its responsibilities in deterring external aggression, while the US DoD

continues to provide extended deterrence.

The ROK MND and US DoD are to engage regularly in consultations even after the transition of wartime

operational control in order to strengthen the combined defense posture.

Therefore, together in the recognition that the combined defense structure following the transition of

wartime operational control serves to strengthen further the peace and security on the Korean Peninsula

provided by the ROK–US Mutual Defense Treaty, the ROK MND and US DoD commit to strive towards

developing the Alliance in a mutually reinforcing and future-oriented manner.


-----

Appendix

17


###### Direct and Indirect Financial Support
 for the Stationing of USFK

**Details of Continuous Financial Support: Approximately KRW 2.9 trillion**

Unit: KRW billion

960.2


Defense


19.2

|Subcategory|Items|
|---|---|
|Defense burden sharing|Labor cost (371), military construction (444.2), and logistics support (145)|
|Budget other than defense burden sharing|Use of US communication lines and combined C4I systems|
||KATUSA troop support (basic wages, clothing expenses, and other operational support expenses)|
||Base maintenance and relocation expenses|
||Property support|



497.1

121.5

9.7


Direct
Support

Indirect
Support

|m sources other fense budget|Maintenance in areas around camps (surrounding road projects and regional development)|
|---|---|
||Total direct support|
||Appraisal of rent of lands granted free of charge|
||Opportunity costs for KATUSA|
||Support for training field use|
||Waiving of tariffs, domestic taxes, local taxes, and taxes on oil import and sales|
||Reduction of water/sewage bills, electricity bills, gas bills, and phone bills|
||Waiving of road, port, airport, and railroad fees|
||Total indirect support|
||Total|


-----

**Description by Item**



**Classification** **Description** **Legal basis**

ROK–US Combined Forces Command

Cost for using US Agreement on the Sharing of Communications

Fee for using US communication lines and

communication lines and Expenses; Implementation Agreement Regarding

subsidies for combined C4I systems

combined C4I systems Cost Sharing and Information Interoperability

System

KATUSA troop support

(basic wages, clothing Basic wages, clothing expenses, and other

Verbal agreement between President Rhee

expenses, and other operational cost support for the ROK Armed

Seung-man and UNC Commander MacArthur

operational support Forces support group

expenses)

Articles 2 and 5 of SOFA; Articles 2 and 3 of

Costs for demolition of old facilities inside Agreed Understandings; Article 78 of the Act on

Base maintenance and returned bases and environmental cleanup Acquisition of and Compensation for Land, Etc.

relocation expenses costs, outsourced services related to the US for Public Works Projects; Article 2 of the Act on

military base relocation, etc. National Defense and Military Installations

Projects

Article 4 of the ROK–US Mutual Defense Treaty;
Articles 2 and 5 of SOFA; Articles 2 and 3 of
Agreed Understandings; Article 78 of the Act on

Expenses for purchase, use, and compensation Acquisition of and Compensation for Land, Etc.
Property support
of facility and used sites for Public Works Projects and Article 40 of its

Enforcement Decree; Article 2 of the Act on
National Defense and Military Installations
Projects

Article 4 of the ROK–US Mutual Defense Treaty;
Articles 2, 3, and 5 of SOFA; Special Act on

Maintenance in areas

Development costs for areas around USFK Support for Areas, Etc. Adjacent to Districts

around camps

bases (surrounding road maintenance and Granted to the United States Armed Forces in

(surrounding road projects

regional development support costs) Korea and the Special Act on Support, Etc. for

and regional development)

Pyeongtaek-si, Etc. Following the Relocation of
US Military Bases in Korea

Article 4 of the ROK–US Mutual Defense Treaty;

Appraisal of rent of lands Opportunity costs of rent for donated land and

Article 2 of SOFA; Article 32 of the State Property

granted free of charge buildings provided to USFK free of charge

Act and Article 29 of its Enforcement Decree

Additional expenses to be borne by the US

Opportunity costs for Verbal agreement between President Rhee

forces if KATUSA personnel were US military

KATUSA Seung-man and UNC Commander MacArthur

personnel

Articles 2 and 5 of SOFA; agreements and MOUs

Support for using training Costs to support the use of USFK live fire

regarding the use of ROK military training areas

ranges training ranges

and firing ranges by the USFK

Waived and reduced Waiving and reduction of various taxes and

Articles 6, 10, 14, and 16 of SOFA

expenses charges


-----

Appendix

18


###### Status of Defense Industry Cooperation Agreements
 with Foreign Countries

**Countries that have signed defense industry cooperation agreements (MOUs)**
**with the ROK: 39 countries**

As of December 2020

|Signed in|Country|Signed in|Country|Signed in|Country|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|June 1988|Thailand|November 1991|Spain|March 1992|France|
|September 1993|Philippines|May 1994|Israel|August 1995|Indonesia|
|May 1996|Germany|November 1997|Russia|November 1997|Romania|
|June 1999|Turkey|December 1999|Venezuela|December 1999|Vietnam|
|December 2006|Colombia|May 2008|Egypt|December 2009|Ecuador|
|June 2010|UAE|September 2010|Norway|September 2010|Denmark|
|May 2014|Chile|August 2015|Czech Republic|August 2015|Finland|
|July 2016|Botswana|January 2017|Estonia|February 2017|Croatia|
|September 2017|Kazakhstan|October 2017|Argentina|February 2019|Uzbekistan|
|May 2019|Sweden|June 2019|Paraguay|October 2019||



**Status of other agreements (MOUs) on defense industry cooperation**

As of December 2020


**Classific**

**ation**

Country


**International technical cooperation and**

**protection agreements (18 countries)**


**Quality assurance agreements**

**(24 countries)**


**Agreement to provide price**

**information (4 countries)**

US, UK, Germany, and
Netherlands

|Multilateral* among the US, France, UK, Israel, India, Colombia, Indonesia, Singapore, and Australia * Signed multilateral agreements with 14 countries including the US (Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, UK, US, and ROK)|US, UK, France, Spain, Switzerland, Canada, Netherlands, Denmark, Australia, Philippines, Germany, Israel, Turkey, New Zealand, Poland, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Sweden, Peru, Norway, Colombia, Vietnam, Pakistan, and Uzbekistan|
|---|---|


-----

Appendix

19


###### Defense Cooperation Agreements with

**1)**

###### Foreign Countries

As of November 2020


November

2019

|Concluded in|Country|Concluded in|Country|Concluded in|Country|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|May 1994|Jordan (treaty)|October 2009|Philippines|October 2013|Fiji|
|May 1995|Singapore|December 2009|Poland (treaty)|October 2013|Egypt|
|August 1995|Lithuania|February 2010|Azerbaijan|December 2013|Angola|
|November 1996|India|September 2010|New Zealand|May 2014|Myanmar|
|November 1999|Kazakhstan|September 2010|Qatar (treaty)|November 2014|Cambodia|
|December 1999|Vietnam|October 2010|Czech Republic|February 2015|Brunei|
|November 2004|Romania|October 2010|Colombia|March 2015|Italy (treaty)|
|March 2006|Gabon|October 2011|Bulgaria|May 2015|Chile (treaty)|
|September 2006|Peru|October 2011|Turkmenistan|May 2015|Bahrain|
|November 2006|Australia|December 2011|Paraguay|January 2016|Oman|
|December 2006|Thailand|March 2012|Ethiopia|May 2016|Senegal|
|June 2008|China|July 2012|Uganda|May 2016|Hungary|
|April 2009|Saudi Arabia (treaty)|February 2013|Ecuador|July 2016||
|July 2009|Indonesia (treaty)|October 2013|Botswana|January 2017||



**1) Significance: This is a document on the basic agreement for promoting mutual defense cooperation, stating comprehensive**

provisions such as cooperation principles, sectors, and methods.

Standardization: refers to standardizing warheads so that they can be mounted on multiple types of missiles

Content: cooperation principle (mutual reciprocity, etc.), cooperation scope (military information, military personnel
exchanges, defense industry, logistics, etc.), administrative matters (cost burden, effect, etc.)


-----

pp

20

###### International Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
 Agreements and Organizations

As of November 2020

-  One of six committees in the UN General Assembly

193 (UNGA) to discuss issues concerning disarmament

1945) -  Recommends 50 to 60 draft resolutions annually to

UNGA, and most of them are adopted by UNGA

-  Selects three major issues concerning disarmament

and nonproliferation and submits a report to UNGA

of the international community’s agreement

tions

concerning major issues

-  The only international negotiation body that is in

charge of multilateral disarmament

ROK -  Majority of key disarmament-related multilateral

Conference on (June 1996) treaties are established through negotiations in CD

Disarmament (CD) North Korea -  Although not an organization directly under UNGA, it

(June 1996) is operated by a regular UN budget and its agendas

and standing rules independently

-  Submits an annual report to UNGA

(April 1975) -  Provides technological support to promote the

-  [Withdrew in ] civilians to military purposes

-  Prohibits all nuclear tests in all environments (including

the atmosphere, outer space, underground, and
underwater)

184 -  Prohibits all nuclear tests in all environments (including
(not the atmosphere, outer space, underground, and

(November 2002) -  Voluntary and political code of conduct to prevent the

North Korea proliferation of ballistic missiles

183 -  Complete prohibition of the development, production

(March and stockpiling of biological weapons (agents or

and

|Classification|Number of Member States (Effective/ Established)|Membership Status of the ROK and North Korea|
|---|---|---|
|First Committee of the UN General Assembly|193 (October 1945)|ROK (September 1991) North Korea (September 1991)|
|UN Disarmament Commission (UNDC)|193 (January 1952)|ROK (September 1991) North Korea (September 1991)|
|Conference on Disarmament (CD)|65 (February 1984)|ROK (June 1996) North Korea (June 1996)|
|Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT)|191 (March 1970|ROK (April 1975) North Korea (December 1985) * Withdrew in January 2003|
|International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)|172 (July 1957)|ROK (September 1999) North Korea (not a member)|
|Comprehensive Nuclear- Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)|184 (not effectuated)|ROK (September 1999) North Korea (not a member)|
|Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation (HCOC)|143 (November 2002)|ROK (November 2002) North Korea (not a member)|
|Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS)|95 (December 1959)|ROK (September 1994) North Korea (not a member)|
|Biological Weapons Convention (BWC)|183 (March 1975)|ROK (June 1987) North Korea (March 1987)|


Chemical -  Complete prohibition of the development, production,

ROK

Weapons Chemical Weapons 193 (April 1997) stockpiling, and use of chemical weapons

Convention (CWC) (April 1997) North Korea

(not a member)



-  Complete prohibition of the development, production,

stockpiling, and use of chemical weapons

-  Mandates the destruction of all chemical weapons

within 10 years of accession to CWC

-  [If inevitable, the deadline may be extended by 5 years]


-----

**Main Contents**

-  An executive body to monitor and inspect member

states to ensure their implementation of CWC
obligations

-  Contributes to world peace and security by preventing

the illicit trade of conventional weapons and their
diversion

-  Prescribes matters in relation to the regulations of

international trade of conventional weapons

-  Full title: Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on

the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects
-Protocol I: prohibits the use of fragmentary

ammunitions undetectable by X-rays

-Protocol II: prohibits or restricts the use of mines,

booby traps and other devices

-Protocol III: prohibits and restricts the use of

incendiary weapons

-Protocol IV: prohibits the use of blinding laser

weapons

-Protocol V: regulates the explosive remnants of war

-  Requires all member states to register their status of

imports and exports records and possessions of
conventional arms at the UN

-  Seeks to enhance confidence by sharing information

on the conventional arms transfer and improving
transparency in armaments

-  Complete prohibition of the production, use,

stockpiling, and transfer of anti-personnel mines

-  Requires the destruction of anti-personnel mines

(within 4 years for stockpiles; within 10 years for mines
planted in the soil)

-  If inevitable, the deadline may be extended by 10

years

-  Complete prohibition of the production, use,

stockpiling, and transfer of cluster munitions

-  Current stockpiled cluster munitions should be

destroyed within 8 years


Biological

and

Chemical
Weapons

Conventional

Weapons

|Classification|Number of Member States (Effective/ Established)|Membership Status of the ROK and North Korea|
|---|---|---|
|Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)|193 (April 1997)|ROK (April 1997) North Korea (not a member)|
|Arms Trade Treaty (ATT)|110 (December 2014)|ROK (February 2017) North Korea (not a member)|
|(Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW)|125 (December 1983)|ROK Protocol I (May 2001) (Amended) Protocol II (May 2001) Protocol V (January 2008) North Korea (not a member)|
|United Nations Register of Conventional Arms (UNRCA)|193 (December 1991)|ROK (March 1993) North Korea (not a member)|
|Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti- Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction (Ottawa Convention)|164 (March 1999)|Not acceded by the ROK/ North Korea|
|Convention on Cluster Munitions (CCM)|110 (August 2010)|Not acceded by the ROK/ North Korea|


-----

**Main Contents**

-  Any exports of nuclear-related materials to non-NPT

members that possess no nuclear weapons are
conditional on the IAEA safeguards

-  Only NPT members are allowed to join

-  Export control of nuclear substances, technology,

equipment, and dual-use items

-  Export control of all non-nuclear weapon states

regardless of their NPT member status

-  Export control regime to prevent the proliferation of

chemical and biological weapon-related substances,
dual-use items, and technologies to states of concern

-  A regime that voluntarily controls the proliferation of

rockets, unmanned aerial vehicles, and related
equipment and technology capable of carrying WMD

-  Export control regime regarding conventional weapons,

dual-use items, and technologies

-  International cooperative activities with the aim of

cutting off the illicit trade of WMDs, missiles, and
related supplies by rogue states and terrorist groups
and preventing the proliferation of such items


Multilateral

Export

Control

Regimes

Prevention of

Proliferation

WMD

|Classification|Number of Member States (Effective/ Established)|Membership Status of the ROK and North Korea|
|---|---|---|
|Zangger Committee (ZC)|39 (August 1974)|ROK (October 1995) North Korea (not a member)|
|Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG)|48 (January 1978)|ROK (October 1995) North Korea (not a member)|
|Australia Group (AG)|43 (June 1985)|ROK (October 1996) North Korea (not a member)|
|Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR)|35 (April 1987)|ROK (March 2001) North Korea (not a member)|
|Wassenaar Arrangement (WA)|42 (July 1996)|ROK (July 1996) North Korea (not a member)|
|Proliferation Security Initiatives (PSI)|107 (June 2003)|ROK (May 2009)|


-----

Appendix

21


###### Status of the Overseas Deployment
 of ROK Armed Forces

**Total of 1,038 personnel deployed to 14 countries**


As of November 2020

**Rotation**

**Cycle**

8 months

1 year


Units

Individuals


UN PKO

Peace

Operations

of

Multinational

Forces

Defense

Cooperation

Activities




Individuals


|Classification|Col2|No. of Personnel|Region|Initial Deployment|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Dongmyeong Unit in Lebanon||280|Tyre|July 2007|
|Hanbit Unit in South Sudan||270|Bor|March 2013|
|UN Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP)||8|Srinagar|November 1994|
|UN Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS)||7|Juba|July 2011|
|UN-African Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID)||1|Darfur|June 2009|
|UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)||4|Naqoura|January 2007|
|UN Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)||3|Laayoune|July 2009|
|UN Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA)||-|Al-Hudaydah|July 2019|
|||573|||
|Cheonghae Unit in the Coast of Somalia||306|Coast of Somalia|March 2009|
|Combined Maritime Forces (CMF) in Bahrain|Staff officer|4|Manama|January 2008|
|Combined Joint Task Force – Horn of Africa (CJTF-HOA)|Coordination officer|1|Djibouti|March 2009|
|US Central Command (CENTCOM)|Coordination group|3|Florida|November 2001|
|US Africa Command|Coordination officer|1|Stuttgart|March 2016|
|Kuwait|Coordination officer|2|Camp Arifjan|December 2019|
|European Union Naval Force (EU NAVFOR) Somalia (CTF-0465)|Staff officer|1|Coast of Somalia|March 2020|
|||318|||
|Akh Unit in the United Arab Emirates||147|Abu Dhabi|January 2011|
|||147|||
|||1,038|||



-  UN Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA): scheduled to resume the mission in 2021 due to COVID-19.


-----

Appendix

22


###### Changes in Enlisted Servicemember Salaries


Unit: KRW

|Sergeant|Corporal|Private First Class|
|---|---|---|
|19,600|17,700|16,000|
|21,900|19,800|17,900|
|23,100|20,900|18,900|
|34,000|30,700|27,800|
|44,200|39,900|36,100|
|72,000|65,000|58,800|
|88,600|80,000|72,300|
|97,500|88,000|79,500|


|103,800|93,700|84,700|
|---|---|---|
|108,000|97,500|88,200|
|129,600|117,000|105,800|
|149,000|134,600|121,700|
|171,400|154,800|140,000|
|197,000|178,000|161,000|
|216,000|195,000|176,400|
|405,700|366,200|331,300|


2009 Freeze

2010 Freeze


2019 Freeze

|540,900|488,200|441,700|
|---|---|---|



-  [Source: - Attached Table 13 (Salary table of military personnel) in 1983–]

2020 Public Officials Remuneration Regulations (Presidential
Decree)

-  Attached Table 2 (Salary table of military personnel) in

1970–1982 Enforcement Decree of the Military Personnel
Remuneration Act (Presidential Decree)


|Sergeant|Corporal|Private First Class|
|---|---|---|
|900|800|700|
|1,030|920|800|
|1,200|1,050|900|


1973 Freeze

|1,560|1,370|1,170|
|---|---|---|



1975 Freeze

|2,260|1,990|1,700|
|---|---|---|
|2,890|2,540|2,170|
|3,460|3,050|2,600|
|3,800|3,300|2,900|
|3,900|3,400|3,000|



1981 Freeze

|4,200|3,700|3,300|
|---|---|---|
|4,500|3,900|3,500|



1984 Freeze

|4,600|4,000|3,600|
|---|---|---|
|4,900|4,300|3,900|
|5,100|4,500|4,000|
|7,500|6,500|6,000|
|8,300|7,000|6,500|
|9,400|8,200|7,300|
|10,000|9,000|8,000|
|10,900|9,800|8,700|
|11,300|10,100|9,000|
|11,700|10,400|9,300|
|12,100|10,700|9,600|
|12,700|11,200|10,100|
|13,300|11,800|10,600|

|13,700|12,200|10,900|
|---|---|---|


1998 Freeze

1999 Freeze


-----

Appendix

23


###### Changes in Mandatory Military Service Period

**Period of Service (months)**


**Army and** **Reasons for Adjustment**


**Year**


Normal implementation of the Military Service Act was
impossible due to the Korean War

Discharge of long-term servicemembers after the Korean
War

Mitigation of the conscription burden for enlisted
servicemembers

Mitigation of the conscription burden for enlisted
servicemembers

Extension of the military service period due to the January
21 Incident

Reduction of surplus resources and provision of industrial
technical expert support

Mitigation of difficulties with acquiring enlisted
servicemembers for Navy and Air Force

Mitigation of the conscription burden for enlisted
servicemembers

Mitigation of difficulties with acquiring enlisted
servicemembers for Navy

Reduction of surplus resources due to abolishment of
secondary reserve system

Mitigation of difficulties with acquiring enlisted
servicemembers for Navy

Mitigation of the conscription burden for enlisted
servicemembers

Mitigation of difficulties with acquiring enlisted
servicemembers for Air Force

Reduction of military service period by six months to ease

2014)

Adjustment of the previous reduction of six months to three

shelling of Yeonpyeong Island

Transformation of troop-centered military forces into elite
military forces powered by science and technology and
mitigation of the conscription burden for enlisted
servicemembers (Defense Reform 2.0)

|Army and Marine Corps Navy Air Force|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|No discharge system|||
|36|36|36|
|33|36|36|
|30|36|36|
|36|39|39|
|33|39|39|
|33|35|35|
|30|35|35|
|30|32|35|
|26|30|30|
|26|28|30|
|24|26|28|
|24|26|27|
|24 → 18|26 → 20|27 → 21|
|21|23|24|
|21 → 18|23 → 20|24 → 22|
|18|20|22 → 21|


-----

Appendix

24


###### National Defense Organizations


Subsidiary agencies (3):
Seoul National Cemetery Office, Defense Media Agency,

**Ministry of** Defense Computing and Information Agency

**National** Organizations set up by individual law (3):
**Defense** MND USFK Base Relocation Office, Compensation Support

**(MND)** Team for Persons Who Performed Special Military Missions,

Support Team for Landmine Victims

Joint Chiefs of

Staff (JCS)

Units and agencies directly

Army Military Manpower

Administration controlled by the MND (26) (* alphabetical order)

(MMA)

Navy -  Gyeryongdae Service -  ROK Defense -  Criminal Investigation

Support Corps Communication Command Command

Defense -  High Court for Armed Forces • Armed Forces Nursing -  Korea Armed Forces Athletic Corps -  Defense Installations Agency • Defense Intelligence Agency

Air Force Acquisition Program Academy -  ROK CBRN Defense -  Defense Agency for Spiritual

Administration -  MND Welfare Agency Command and Mental Force

(DAPA) -  ROK Transportation Command -  Korea National Defense University -  Defense Integrated Data Enhancement

-  Armed Forces Psychological -  MND Prosecutor’s Office Center

Operations Group -  Korea Arms Control -  Defense Security Support

-  Armed Forces Medical Verification Agency Command

Command -  MND Institute for Military -  Defense Cyber Command

-  Korea Armed Forces Printing History -  Joint Forces Military

& Publishing Depot -  MND Service Support Group University

-  Armed Forces Financial -  MND Agency for KIA

Management Corps Recovery and Identification


**Minister**

Office of the Office of The Policy Adviser Office of Defense

Minister Spokesperson to Minister Reform

**Vice**

**Minister** Military Structure

Reform Bureau

Defense Management

Reform Bureau

General Counsel Inspection

Bureau Bureau

Office of Planning Office of National Office of Personnel Office of Military Force and

and Coordination Defense Policy and Welfare Resources Management

General Services Planning and Policy Planning Personnel Planning Logistics

Division Management Bureau Bureau Bureau Management Bureau

Programming and International Policy Mobilization Planning Military Installations
Budgeting Bureau Bureau Bureau Planning Bureau

Information Planning

Bureau


Bureau

North Korea Policy

Bureau


Planning Bureau

Military Force Policy

Bureau

Military Airbase

Relocation Bureau


Health and Welfare

Bureau


-----

**Assignments and Functions of the MND Subsidiary Agencies and Organizations**
**Set Up by Individual Laws**

**Classification** **Assignments and Functions**

- Implements memorial services including burial and enshrinement

- Establishes and implements plans for visitors who pay respects

Seoul National - Establishes and implements educational initiatives to honor patriotic martyrs for the

Cemetery Office country and engages in PR activities for the Seoul National Cemetery

- Manages and operates the facilities, graves, and surrounding forest of the Seoul

National Cemetery

- Engages in military PR activities and education of servicemembers through Korea

Subsidiary Defense Media Defense Daily, Defense TV, Defense FM radio, etc.

Agencies Agency - Disseminates defense news and current affairs reports and engages in cyber PR activities

- Shoots photographs and manages records related to defense events and activities

- Develops and maintains defense resources management information systems

- Procures and operates communications networks and computing equipment for the

Defense Computing MND and its subsidiary agencies and units

Information Agency - Procures, operates, and supports computing equipment and software for office use at

the MND and its subsidiary agencies and units

- Designs and implements information educational programs

- Establishes implementation plans for USFK installation-related projects

- Executes, manages, and supervises USFK installation-related projects

MND USFK Base

- Provides support for the management and operation of special accounts for relocating

Relocation Office

USFK bases

- Engages in other affairs related to the pursuit of USFK installation-related projects

- Prepares and provides support for deliberations of the Compensation Deliberation

Compensation

Organizations Support Team for Committee for Persons Who Performed Special Military Missions and its subcommittees

Set Up Persons Who - Compiles and executes budgets for compensation payment, etc.

by Individual Performed Special - Verifies and investigates applicants’ submitted materials

Laws Military Missions - Responds to lawsuits and civil complaints in relation to compensation under the laws

and regulations

- Prepares and provides support to the deliberation committee for victim support,

working-level committee for evaluating victims and bereaved families, and working
Support Team for level committee for determining the handicap level
Landmine Victims - Compiles and executes budgets for compensation payment, etc.

- Verifies and investigates applicants’ submitted materials

- Provides support for tasks and response to civil complaints regarding landmine victims


**Assignments and Functions of Public Institutions**


**Classification** **Assignments and Functions**

-  Conducts studies on security environment and basic defense policies and develops alternatives

-  Conducts studies on military strategies, military force buildup, selection of weapons

systems, and acquisition policies

Korea Institute for

-  Conducts studies on defense workforce, resources management, and defense science

Defense Analyses

and technology management policies

(KIDA)

-  Conducts studies on defense informatization policies and provides support and

technical advice on the development of defense informatization-related projects

-  Collects and analyzes materials related to national defense and provides information services

-  Operates and manages the War Memorial of Korea and monuments

-  Collects, preserves, manages, exhibits, investigates, and studies war and military relics

Public War Memorial of -  Conducts studies on war history and military relics, searches for patriots and honors
Institutions Korea them, and engages in other academic activities

-  Engages in PR activities for and education on commemorative projects and produces

and disseminates relevant publications

-  Offers outplacement training for servicemembers facing retirement and improves the

employment capabilities of job seekers

-  Promotes the employment of servicemembers facing retirement by means such as

Military Outplacement providing employment information and holding job fairs
Training Institute -  Manages the database and maintains/analyzes statistics for job seekers among

servicemembers facing retirement

-  Conducts studies on outplacement support-related policies and systems development

for servicemembers facing retirement


-----

Appendix

25


###### Modification of Laws and Regulations Under the
 Jurisdiction of the Ministry of National Defense

**Breakdown of Modified Legislation (December 1, 2018 - November 30, 2020)**

**Total** **Laws** **Presidential Decrees** **Ministerial Ordinances**

|43|66|
|---|---|



**Laws**




**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Reflected the amendments to the “Criminal Procedure Act” such as

Partial Amendment

allowing signatures in addition to name and seal as a method of verifying

Military Court Act No. 15983

the identity in relation to the documents and write summons for non-public

(December 18, 2018)

officials

Special Act on the

Payment of Severance -  Extended the application deadline for severance benefits to June 30, 2021;

Partial Amendment

Benefits for allowed the Minister of National Defense to request registered entries,

No. 16029

Servicemembers Retiring resident registration information, and family relations of people of national

(December 24, 2018)

Before December 31, merit from relevant agencies to carry out its tasks

1959

-  Since it has been pointed out in the enforcement rules that allowing the

Protection of Military Partial Amendment Minister of National Defense or the commander of the jurisdictional unit to

Bases and Installations No. 16030 set conditions and agree without any delegation of the parent law violates

Act (December 24, 2018) the principle of reservation of law, and such may infringe upon the rights of

the people, such details were specified in the Act

Partial Amendment

Military Mutual Aid -  Modified the term relating to “remaining period” to help the public

No. 16031

Association Act understand the legal terms

(December 24, 2018)

Partial Amendment -  Modified the "jeonse (deposit-based lease) loan account" to "residential

Military Welfare Fund Act No. 16032 support account" and added more types of residential support to the

(December 24, 2018) purposes, including the security deposit, to the residential support account

Partial Amendment -  Provide rental fund for private housing, such as the interest for the fund

Framework Act on Military

No. 16033 borrowed for lease deposit or security deposit, so as to provide the financial

Welfare

(December 24, 2018) support required for the military personnel’s resident stability

-  Prescribe matters to ensure that no military personnel is coerced into

Partial Amendment participating or restricted from participating in any religious rituals against

Framework Act on Military

No. 16034 their will, and that all the necessary measures are enforced such as rapid

Status and Service

(December 24, 2018) protection of victims when they are faced with difficulties such as

infringement upon their basic rights

-  Reinforce sexual crime as one of the reasons for disqualification of military

personnel to ensure that strict measures are enforced against any sexual

Partial Amendment

Military Personnel crime; clearly specify the reasons for disqualification of cadets; and allow

No. 16224

Management Act military personnel to take a leave of absence to take care of their

(January 15, 2019)

grandparents or grandchildren as allowed for public officials, thereby
striking a balance in the working conditions with public officials

-  When hiring active military personnel or reserve forces who have become

physically disabled during combat or training related to an operation and

Act on the Management Partial Amendment

their acts have set an example to other military personnel, prescribe

of Civilian Personnel in the No. 16315

provisions to hire them through the career-based competitive examination

Military Service (April 16, 2019)

of appointment targeting a large number of people who fall under said
criteria


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

Act on the Conferment of -  As for the exploits of persons of distinguished service who were to be

Orders of Military Merit for Enactment No. decorated with the Orders of Military Merit for their distinguished service

Distinguished Services 16346 rendered during the Korean War but could not be actually awarded a

Rendered During the (April 23, 2019) medal, create the legal basis to confer upon them or the member of their

Korean War bereaved families the Orders of Military Merit

Act on the Report and -  In order to increase the effectiveness of the disclosure system of military

Partial Amendment

Disclosure of Military service information, for the military service information that a person is

No. 16347

Service Records of Public obligated to report, add the military unit or agency and branch he or she

(April 23, 2019)

Servants, Etc. served and his military occupational specialization

Act on Establishment of Partial Amendment -  Stipulate mandatory provisions to compose the curriculum of the Korea

the Korea Armed Forces No. 16348 Armed Forces Nursing Academy to be competent enough to award a

Nursing Academy (April 23, 2019) bachelor’s degree in nursing

-  Recognizing that the monetary penalty was too weak compared to the

Act on the Repatriation, illegality of criminal acts such as receiving money or valuables by fraudulent

Partial Amendment

Treatment of the Republic means by participating in repatriations of ROK Armed Forces Prisoners of

No. 16349

of Korea Armed Forces War, the monetary penalty for such crimes was amended to imprisonment

(April 23, 2019)

Prisoners of War not exceeding 10 years or monetary penalty not exceeding 100 million won

in order to meet realistic standards

-  Mandate the Minister of National Defense to conduct a fact-finding survey

concerning the current status of the building and use of national defense
and military installations every two years and report the outcome thereof to

Act on National Defense Partial Amendment

the relevant standing committee of the National Assembly

and Military Installations No. 16350

-  Where, based on the outcome of the fact-finding survey, the State is

Projects (April 23, 2019)

confirmed to have failed to secure the source of right, such as ownership or
right to use, on the land used and occupied as national defense and military
installations, mandate the Minister to announce such fact publicly

-  Stipulate the sharing of data such as personal information of persons who

Partial Amendment have been vaccinated and vaccination details thereof with the relevant

Military Healthcare Act No. 16351 central administrative agencies and the Korea Disease Control and

(April 23, 2019) Prevention Agency to ensure that the details of vaccination conducted by

the military are managed in an integrated manner

-  In the definition of military installations, specify the research facilities and

Protection of Military Partial Amendment

test facilities or test sites for military use

Bases and Installations No. 16352

-  Stipulate that the districts returned by the United States to the ROK are

Act (April 23, 2019)

deemed canceled as protection zones when the return thereof is complete

-  Prepare the airworthiness certification for military aircraft temporarily

Military Aircraft Partial Amendment operated for research, experiment, export, or publicity

Airworthiness Certification No. 16353 -  Stipulate allowing the Minister of the Defense Acquisition Program

Act (April 23, 2019) Administration to designate one of the specialized institutions as the main

airworthiness certification institution for each project for military aircraft

-  Allow the Commandant of the Marine Corps who has been promoted or

Partial Amendment

Military Personnel transferred to another position after the end of his or her term of office to be

No. 16354

Management Act used for other purposes so as to capitalize on his or her expertise in various

(April 23, 2019)

fields without discharging him or her

-  When a military personnel is deemed to have died in the line of duty as a

result of the re-examination by the Central Committee for Examination of

Partial Amendment Killed or Wounded in Action and Death or Injury in the Line of Duty, allow

Military Pension Act No. 16355(April 23, the initial date of prescription for compensation for death, retirement

2019) allowance, and condolence money to be the date his or her death was

confirmed so as to reinforce the privileges and compensation for the
bereaved family members

Partial Amendment

-  Strengthen the service management of social work personnel and military

Military Service Act No. 16356

service management of public officials, etc.

(April 23, 2019)

Act on the Establishment Partial Amendment -  Specify the mandatory regulations to ensure that the curriculum of the

of the Korea Army No. 16357 Korea Army Academy at Youngcheon is sufficiently structured to confer

Academy at Youngcheon April 23, 2019) degrees


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

Special Act on the -  Prescribe special provisions for the Military Personnel Management Act so

Promotion of Promotable Enactment No. as to allow the bereaved family of promotable military personnel killed in

Military Personnel Killed in 16358 action after September 1, 2001 and before March 28, 20011 and who are

Action or in the Line of (April 23, 2019) eligible to file an application for promotion for 1 year from the effective date

Duty of this Act

Partial Amendment

Special Act on the

No. 16359 -  Extend the period for applying for condolence money, etc. to May 31, 2021

Support for Mine Victims

(April 23, 2019)

Act on Compensation to Partial Amendment

-  Extend the period for applying for compensation, etc. to 6 months after this

Persons Who Performed No. 16360

Act enters into force

Special Missions (April 23, 2019)

Special Act on

Investigating the Truth of Partial Amendment -  Add persons who have served in the military for more than 20 years to the

the May 18 No. 16577 eligible qualifications of a member of the Commission to Investigate the

Democratization (November 12, 2019) Truth of the May 18 Democratization Movement

Movement

Act on Noise Prevention

and Damage Enactment No. -  Create legal grounds to efficiently promote the prevention of noise

Compensation for Military 16582 generated by the operation of military airfields and military shooting ranges

Airfields and Military (November 26, 2019) and compensation for damages

Shooting Ranges

-  Where a person has lent his or her certificate of qualification for Military Air

Partial Amendment

Act on the Operation, Etc. Traffic Controller as required for certifying his or her qualification, strengthen

No. 16583

of Military Aircraft the penalty regulations for the person who engages in air traffic control by

(November 26, 2019)

means such as canceling his or her certificate of qualification

-  Strengthening education for basic rights within the military

Partial Amendment

Framework Act on Military -  In order to protect the rights and interests of the bereaved family members

No. 16584

Status and Service of a soldier who has died in the line of duty, stipulate special provisions for

(November 26, 2019)

the appointment of lawyers for the bereaved family members

-  Stipulate requiring the Minister of National Defense to enforce the necessary

Partial Amendment

measures such as employing indoor training or adjusting the training hours

Reserve Forces Act No. 16585

when the level of particulate matter is at or above the standard for issuing

(November 26, 2019)

air pollution warnings

Special Act on

Investigating the Truth of Partial Amendment -  Extend the application period to allow people to apply for truth investigation

the May 18 No. 16759 within 1 year of the date the Commission to Investigate the Truth of the May

Democratization (December 10, 2019) 18 Democratization Movement is organized

Movement

-  In accordance with the enactment of the Act on Accident Compensation for

Full Amendment No.

Soldiers, restructure pertinent provisions and introduce the installment

Military Pension Act 16760

pension scheme to enhance the guarantee of livelihood at old age of the

(December 10, 2019)

divorced spouse

-  In order to develop a professional, systematic military accident

Act on Accident Enactment No.

compensation scheme, separate the military accident compensation

Compensation for 16761

scheme from the Military Pension Act and enact the Act on Accident

Soldiers (December 10, 2019)

Compensation for Soldiers

-  Strike a balance between the constitutional freedom of conscience and the

Partial Amendment

duty of military service by establishing a new alternative service and

Military Service Act No. 16926

ensuring equity in the duty of military service among alternative service and

(February 4, 2020)

active duty service, reserve service, or supplementary service.

-  Strike a balance between the constitutional freedom of conscience and the

Act on the Assignment Enactment No. duty of military service by providing an alternative service program such as

and Performance of the 16851 assignment, screening and performance of alternative service where military

Alternative Service (December 31, 2019) service is performed in lieu of serving as military personnel in active duty for

the freedom of conscience


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

Partial Amendment -  As the change in the name of military police into a natural Korean

Military Court Act No. 16926 expression that clearly reflects their mission is being promoted, reorganize

(February 4, 2020) the relevant regulations

Act on the Execution of -  In order to improve the human rights of servicemembers, abolish the

Criminal Penalties in the Enactment No. confinement facilities among the types of disciplinary action against

Armed Forces and the 16929 servicemembers; to replace them, however, reorganize the Act by adding

Treatment of Military (February 4, 2020) military discipline training and reducing salaries as the types of disciplinary

Inmates action

Act on the Development Enactment No. -  Separate the parts related to the development of the defense industry from

and Support of the 16929 the Defense Acquisition Program Act to enact this Act and prescribe

Defense Industry (February 4, 2020) matters necessary for the development and support of the defense industry

-  As technological development continues to gain momentum due to the

Fourth Industrial Revolution, etc., innovation and development are also
required in the field of defense science and technology, but research and

Act on the Promotion of Enactment No. development under the current Defense Acquisition Program Act are

Innovation in Defense 17163 (March 31, focused on the means for obtaining weapons systems. As a result, the

Science and Technology 2020) research and development system for the promotion and development of

defense science and technology is insufficient; thus, lay the foundation for
promoting challenging and innovative defense R&D projects by enacting
this Act

-  In order to implement the programs on terminal sewage treatment and

wastewater treatment pursuant to the Act on Acquisition of and

Protection of Military Partial Amendment

Compensation for Land, Etc. for Public Works Projects in the Flight Safety

Bases and Installations No. 17164

Zone 1, establish the grounds for allowing the installation of facilities and

Act (March 31, 2020)

appurtenances thereof laid underground through consultation with the
commander of the jurisdictional unit

-  While enacting the Act on the Promotion of Innovation in Defense Science

Partial Amendment

Defense Acquisition and Technology to systematically and continuously promote R&D for the

No. 17165

Program Act innovation of defense science and technology, delete and amend the

(March 31, 2020)

pertinent details stipulated in this Act

-  Reduce the service period of servicemembers on active duty in the Air

Force by one month, strengthen the surveys on the status of onboard ship

Partial Amendment reserve service with shipping companies, etc., require the head of a

Military Service Act No. 17166 shipping company, etc. to submit a pledge to fulfill the working conditions

(March 31, 2020) that will enhance protection of the rights of onboard ship reserve service,

thereby improving some shortfalls found in the operation of the current
system

-  As Korean workers go on unpaid leave due to the delayed settlement of the

Agreement Between the United States and the Republic of Korea
Concerning Special Measures Related to Article V of the Agreement Under
Article IV of the Mutual Defense Treaty Between the United States and the

Special Act for the

Republic of Korea, Regarding Facilities and Areas and the Status of the

Support of Korean Enactment No. 17266

United States Armed Forces in the Republic of Korea, the status and life of

Workers in the United (May 19, 2020)

Korean workers affiliated with the USFK were put in an unstable situation.

States Forces Korea

Therefore, formulate systematic and specific support measures for Korean
workers affiliated with the USFK who are on unpaid leave so as to create a
legal basis that will minimize the threat to their livelihood and disadvantages
in their lives

-  Increase the safeguard for the human rights of servicemembers in the

military criminal proceedings while reflecting the key amendments made to
the recently amended Criminal Procedure Act by means such as allowing

Partial Amendment the military prosecutor to select a public defender for the victim of a crime

Military Court Act No. 17367 that has occurred among servicemembers and civilian workers in the

(June 9, 2020) military and extending the period of filing an application for adjudication for

appeals proceedings of the plaintiff or complainant against the disposition
not to institute public action by the military prosecutor to up to 30 days
from the date of receipt of the disposition


-----

**Presidential Decrees**


**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amend the provisions to integrate the 1st and 3rd Army Commands

Partial Amendment

Operations Command previously under the Field Army Command Ordinance into the Ground

No. 29321

Ordinance Operations Command, which commands ground operations units at the

(December 4, 2018)

corps level

Partial Amendment

Defense Intelligence -  Amendment to abolish the Defense Geospatial-Intelligence Agency and

No. 29322

Agency Ordinance integrate the relevant tasks to be performed by the Intelligence Command

(December 4, 2018)

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Decree of -  Stipulate reducing the service period of full-time reserve forces by up to 6

No. 29373

the Military Service Act months

(December 18, 2018)

-  Amend to improve the current system by means such as allowing the

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Decree of united defense councils for city (si) and province (do) and united defense

No. 29399

the United Defense Act councils for city, county (gun) and district (gu) to hold video conferences to

(December 24, 2018)

ensure the implementation conditions of efficient united defense operations

Regulations on the Partial Amendment -  Change the location of the 2nd and 4th divisions of the General Military

Organization of Military No. 29400 Court of the Army Headquarters to reflect the amendments to the

Courts (December 24, 2018) Operations Command Ordinance

-  Amend the provisions to set forth matters included in the written proposals

Enforcement Decree of Partial Amendment of requirements as identical to the matters contained in the force

the Defense Acquisition No. 29496 requirement plan to ensure that agencies proposing requirements such as

Program Act (January 22, 2019) Army, Navy, and Air Force Headquarters propose objective and reasonable

requirements for weapons systems, etc.

-  Create a legal basis to allow the Minister of National Defense to provide

medical service subsidies within the budget to military healthcare

Enforcement Decree of Partial Amendment

professionals who have acquired specialist qualifications according to their

the Military Healthcare No. 29497

medical treatment results, and, if medical service subsidies are paid by

Act (January 22, 2019)

fraudulent or any other illegal means, to redeem such medical service
subsidies

-  In order to establish the status of the Cyber​Command, which performs

Full Amendment No.

Cyber Command cyber operations and tasks to support such operations in the defense

29561

Ordinance cyberspace, fully amend the current provisions of the Cyber Command

(February 26, 2019)

Ordinance

Enforcement Decree of -  Set the specific scope of data or information that the Minister of National

the Special Act on the Defense may request from related agencies for fact-finding such as the

Payment of Severance Partial Amendment address, resident registration number, military service information, etc. of

Benefits for No. 29637 the person of national merit

Servicemembers Retiring (March 25, 2019) -  When applying for the payment of severance benefits, stipulate allowing the

Before December 31, applicants to submit the confirmation of their signature in lieu of the

1959 certificate of seal impression to be submitted as an attached document

Organizational Setup of Partial Amendment -  Increase the number of personnel required to provide and expand the use

the MND and Its Affiliated No. 29640 of public data for the MND by two persons (one grade-5, one grade-6) and

Organizations (March 26, 2019) one person (grade-5) required to prevent sexual violence in the military

Enforcement Decree of

-  Add those who are eligible to receive reward payment by allowing the

the Act on the Excavation Partial Amendment

Minister of National Defense to pay reward not exceeding 10 million won to

of the Remains of No. 29672

those who have contributed to the identification of the war dead’s remains of

Soldiers Killed in the (April 2, 2019)

the Korean War with their DNA samples

Korean War

Organizational Setup of Partial Amendment

-  Increase the personnel by one person (professional officer) necessary to

the MND and Its Affiliated No. 29734

reinforce the function of gender equality policy in the defense domain

Organizations (May 7, 2019)

-  Stipulate allowing the Minister of National Defense to provide honorable

Enforcement Decree of

treatment such as welcoming ceremony or retirement ceremony for

the Act on the

Partial Amendment registered prisoners of war, determine whether to provide honorable

Repatriation, Treatment

No. 29747 treatment depending on whether the prisoners of war aligned themselves

of the Republic of Korea

(May 7, 2019) with the detaining country, etc. during the period of detainment at the

Armed Forces Prisoners

request of the Minister him/herself or the bereaved family members thereof,

of War

and vary the degree of honorable treatment


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

Partial Amendment

Regulations on Military -  Regulations on strengthening the management and supervision of military

No. 29790

Entrusted Students entrusted students

(May 28, 2019)

Partial Amendment -  In order to reinforce the combat readiness inspection function of operation

Organizational Setup of

No. 29819 units and combined units, establish a combat readiness inspection group

the Joint Chiefs of Staff

(June 11, 2019) as a special staff section under the Joint Chiefs of Staff

-  Set matters delegated under the Act and other matters necessary for

implementation thereof by setting the conditions for agreement of the

Enforcement Decree of commander of the jurisdictional unit, etc. as the case where alternative

Partial Amendment

the Protection of Military facilities are installed in the previous military installations, prohibiting any

No. 29893

Bases and Installations unreasonable or inaccessible conditions such as banning the installation of

(June 25, 2019)

Act windows facing the unit, and requiring the facilities directly used for military

purposes to be used for war equipment, production of supplies, and
storage facilities

-  Set matters delegated under the Act and other matters necessary for

implementation thereof for the event where there are no lineal descendants
of grandparents or lineal ascendants of grandchildren other than the military

Enforcement Decree of Partial Amendment personnel him/herself, so there is no one to care for the grandparents or

the Military Personnel No. 29894 grandchildren, thereby allowing the military personnel to take a leave of

Management Act (June 25, 2019) absence to care for said grandparents or grandchildren

-  Amend provisions, such as modifying the chemical division to the CBRN

division among the names of basic branches in each service, so as to
correctly reflect the mission of each branch in the name thereof

Enforcement Decree of -  When calculating the period of continuous service for civilian personnel in

the Act on the Partial Amendment the military service, be sure to add all the relevant experiences only for

Management of Civilian No. 29937 civilian personnel in the military service who has been converted from

Personnel in the Military (July 2, 2019) extraordinary civilian personnel or general civilian personnel in contractual

Service service into general civilian personnel in the military service

Enforcement Decree of

the Act on the

-  Set matters delegated under the Act and other matters necessary to

Conferment of Orders of Enactment No.

implement thereof, such as the method of applying the registration of the

Military Merit for 29993

person of merit or bereaved family members thereof and the tasks of the

Distinguished Services (July 23, 2019)

investigation team for finding the order of military merit for the Korean War

Rendered During the

Korean War

-  Set matters delegated under the Act and other matters necessary for

implementation thereof to ensure that, when any bereaved family member

Enforcement Decree of of military personnel killed in action or during the course of his or her duty

the Special Act on the and who was set to be promoted applies for promotion, the member is

Enactment No.

Promotion of Promotable asked to submit documents such as a certificate of family relations attached

29994

Military Personnel Killed to the promotion application to the Minister of National Defense; enable the

(July 23, 2019)

in Action or in the Line of Minister to require the Chief of Staff of each service or the commander of

Duty the Marine Corps to verify the facts regarding whether the person for which

an application for promotion has been submitted is indeed the person set
to be promoted and make reports thereof within 30 days

-  In order to reinforce the protection of military personnel who have made

Decree on Disciplinary Partial Amendment positive administration, amend the provisions to ensure that, when a person
Action Against Military No. 30022 subject to review such as sanctions testifies of the fact or submits evidence,

Personnel (August 6, 2019) it includes also the fact that it corresponds to the grounds for exemption

such as sanctions

Organizational Setup of Partial Amendment -  Appoint a general public official falling under the scope of high-level public

the MND and Its Affiliated No. 30041(August officials as the logistics management officer of the MND and increase the

Organizations 13, 2019) needed manpower by one person (high-level public official)

-  Amend the provisions to require play etiquette music only without any wind

Partial Amendment

Decree on Military instruments for foreign guests of the State and skip playing wind

No. 30064

Ceremony instruments limited to ceremonial events where no salutes are fired for the

(September 3, 2019)

President, thereby reducing the time required for playing honors music


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Allow military personnel to take emergency leave of up to 3 days in the

Enforcement Decree of event of the death of their grandparents, maternal grandparents, children or

Partial Amendment

the Framework Act on spouses of their children, and servicemembers who have served for more

No. 30065

Military Status and than half of their mandatory service period to take an emergency leave of

(September 3, 2019)

Service up to 2 days for their job-seeking activities such as employment counseling

and taking recruitment tests

-  Amend the provisions to ensure that, when an investigation is ongoing or a

criminal proceeding is underway for a criminal activity where the military
personnel or a person who used to be military personnel may be punished

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Decree of by a sentence of imprisonment due to causes that arose during his or her

No. 30066

the Military Pension Act military service, and where a decision has been made to place him or her

(September 3, 2019)

on the wanted list because his or her whereabouts are unknown as he or
she has fled, suspend payment of 50/100 of the severance benefits until he
or she is removed from the wanted list or the notification thereof is lifted

Partial Amendment -  Amend the provisions for reorganization by transferring the policy tasks of

Organizational Setup of

No. 30067 the force planning office and newly establishing the head of the policy office

the Marine Corps HQ

(September 3, 2019) to efficiently perform the tasks and functions of the Marine Corps HQ

-  Among the subcommittees of the Defense Acquisition Program Promotion

Committee, integrate the Policy and Planning Subcommittee, Program

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Decree of Management Subcommittee, and Military Logistics and Procurement

No. 30090

the Defense Acquisition Subcommittee, which have been separately operated by promotional stage,

(September 24,

Program Act into the Defense Program Planning and Management Subcommittee

2019)

-  Increase the prescribed number of members of each subcommittee from

20 to 26

Partial Amendment -  Adjust the rank of unit commander of the Korea Armed Forces Athletic

Decree on Korea Armed

No. 30121 Corps from a general-level officer or a field-grade officer to a grade-2 or

Forces Athletic Corps

(October 15, 2019) higher civilian personnel in the military

Enforcement Decree of

No. 30122 -  With the amendment to the Military Welfare Fund Act, reorganize related

the Military Welfare Fund

(October 15, 2019) terms

Act

Enforcement Decree of Partial Amendment -  Require the Minister of National Defense to transmit the vaccination record

the Military Healthcare No. 30135 of servicemembers, etc. possessed by the MND to the head of the relevant

Act (October 22, 2019) central administrative agencies within 14 days of vaccination

-  Set matters delegated by the Act and other matters necessary for

Enforcement Decree of

Partial Amendment implementation thereof such as the methods and procedures of fact-finding

the Act on National

No. 30136 surveys and announcements by requiring the Minister of National Defense

Defense and Military

(October 22, 2019) to conduct the fact-finding survey on an even-numbered year to report the

Installations Projects

results thereof by May 31st of the following year

Enforcement Decree of -  Stipulate the provisions delegated under the Act by specifying the scope of

Partial Amendment

the Military Aircraft devices that may be used for aviation prescribed under the Presidential

No. 30137

Airworthiness Certification Decree to unmanned aerial vehicles, powered parachutes, powered

(October 22, 2019)

Act paragliders, etc.

-  Add served units or organizations, branches, and military specializations to

Enforcement Decree of

the military modifications to be verified by the head of the Military Manpower

the Act on the Report Partial Amendment

Administration

and Disclosure of Military No. 30162

• Prepare the basis for requesting data from the Chief of Staff of each military

Service Records of Public (October 29, 2019)

service for the head of the Military Manpower Administration to verify

Servants, Etc.

changes in military service of the person required to report

Enforcement Decree of -  In order to reinforce the operational autonomy of the responsible

the Act on the administrative agencies in the military, adjust the scope of the right to

Partial Amendment

Assignment and appoint civilian personnel in the military delegated to the head of the

No. 30185

Operation of Responsible institution and allow the head of the institution to separately set the amount

(November 5, 2019)

Administrative Agencies and method of payment of the reward by the responsible administrative

in the Military agency in the military


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Amend the provisions to ensure that, as for general civilian personnel in the

Enforcement Decree of military with outstanding attitude to performing positive administration, allow

the Act on the Partial Amendment the reduction of the period required for promotion after continuous service

Management of Civilian No. 30199 by one year and, as for the person who has been subject to sanction due

Personnel in the Military (November 5, 2019) to negative administration or DUI, add 6 months to the restricted period for

Service general promotion due to disciplinary action and prohibit the person from

being promoted during that period

Enforcement Decree of the

Act on the Execution of Partial Amendment

-  Stipulate allowing units commanded by grade-2 or higher civilian workers in

Criminal Penalties in the No. 30213

the military to install military detention facility for detainees pending trial

Armed Forces and the (November 26, 2019)

Treatment of Military Inmates

-  Stipulate addressing the issue of requiring munitions sales agents to submit

identical documents repeatedly, and where the Commissioner of the

Enforcement Decree of Partial Amendment National Tax Service or the Korea Customs Service has conducted a tax

the Defense Acquisition No. 30225 audit, etc. on taxation data in connection with reporting the brokerage fees

Program Act (December 3, 2019) of munitions sales agents submitted by the Minister of DAPA, and where

the content differs from the taxation data in the investigation results, require
the notification thereof to the Minister of DAPA

-  Include military personnel who have died after applying for honorable

discharge benefits in the scope of people who are eligible to receive
honorable discharge benefits to clarify the scope of those who are eligible

Regulations on the

Partial Amendment to receive honorable discharge benefits

Payment of Honorable

No. 30269 -  Where the person who had received honorable discharge benefits has been

Discharge Benefits for

(December 24, 2019) reappointed as a state public official, allow the Chief of Staff of each service

Military Personnel

who has paid honorable discharge benefits to request data necessary for
redemption so as to assist the heads of central administrative agencies who
have made such reappointment

-  Stipulate the provisions to allow authorities to hire any person falling under

the scope of persons with disabilities with physical impairment under the
Act on the Employment Promotion and Vocational Rehabilitation of Persons

Enforcement Decree of

with Disabilities through the career-based competitive examination of

the Act on the Partial Amendment

appointment

Management of Civilian No. 30279

-  In order to create a public service culture where work and life are balanced,

Personnel in the Military (December 31, 2019)

where both parents of the first child have taken a leave for childcare and the

Service

leave of absence of each person is 6 months or longer, add the entire
duration of the leave of absence to the minimum number of years required
for promotion

-  In order to solidify the foundation of democratic control over defense

policies, appoint general public officials who correspond to high-level public
officials for the informatization planning officer and mobilization officer who

Organizational Setup of Partial Amendment

had been previously assigned with general-level officers and provide

the MND and Its Affiliated No. 30281

matters regarding manpower increase

Organizations (December 31, 2019)

-  Extend the evaluation period for one division in the Office of National

Defense Policy by two years according to the evaluation results obtained
thus far

Enforcement Decree of

Partial Amendment -  In order to create a culture where childbirth and child-rearing can be carried

the Framework Act on

No. 30312 out concurrently through work–life balance, expand the leave available for

Military Status and

(December 31, 2019) military personnel who are pregnant or who have children

Service

-  Simplify the procedure for disposition for military service by reducing the

waiting period for the physical re-examination of those who are subject to

Partial Amendment active duty and who are returning home due to illness, etc. after the

Enforcement Decree of

No. 30323 enrollment and physical examination, and expanding the scope to those

the Military Service Act

(January 7, 2020) who may be exempted from military service or transferred to wartime labor

service without a draft physical examination so as to improve the current
system

Organizational Setup of Partial Amendment -  Stipulate provisions to extend the duration of existence of the military air

the MND and Its Affiliated No. 30364 base relocation project group established in the MND as a temporary

Organizations (January 29, 2020) organization by two years from January 30, 2020 to January 30, 2022


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Modify the name of the military police, one of the basic branches of

Enforcement Decree of Partial Amendment

servicemembers, and establish the intelligence division as the basic branch

the Military Personnel No. 30384

in the Marine Corps so as to enhance the expertise of the intelligence of the

Management Act (February 4, 2020)

Marine Corps

Decree on Military Partial Amendment -  Increase the prescribed number of military officers at diplomatic offices by

Officials in Diplomatic No. 30385 two from 75 to 77 (one field-grade officer from the Army and another one

Offices (February 4, 2020) from the Air Force)

Organizational Setup of Partial Amendment -  Amend the provisions in relation to manpower increase by increasing the

the MND and Its Affiliated No. 30452 number of personnel required for employment support for young

Organizations (February 25, 2020) servicemembers by two (grade-5 and grade-7)

-  In order to expand the opportunity for persons with severe disabilities to be

Enforcement Decree of appointed as military personnel, establish the grounds for allowing only

the Act on the Partial Amendment persons with severe disabilities to apply for the career-based competitive

Management of Civilian No. 30553 examination of appointment and allow them to be exempted from the

Personnel in the Military (March 31, 2020) written examination in this case

Service -  Establish cyber forces in the information and communications position of

general civilian personnel in the military

-  Amend the provisions to prepare a separate safety management system for

Enforcement Decree of Partial Amendment safety-related accidents concerning manufacturing and storage of military

the Defense Acquisition No. 30554 firearms, swords, explosives, etc., and waive the export permit where the

Program Act (March 31, 2020) same defense supplies as those that have previously obtained export

permit are exported to the same consumers

-  Adjust part of the assigned administrative affairs of the Office of Personnel

Organizational Setup of Partial Amendment and Welfare and the Office of Military Force and Resources Management

the MND and Its Affiliated No. 30635 under the MND; add the tasks of establishing military safety management

Organizations (April 28, 2020) policies to the assigned administrative affairs of the Office of Military Force

and Resources Management

-  With the amendment to the Framework Act on Military Status and Service,

Enforcement Decree of

Partial Amendment set matters delegated under the Act and other matters necessary for

the Framework Act on

No. 30695 implementation thereof, such as facility criteria subject to the management

Military Status and

(May 26, 2020) of indoor air quality, specific matters needed for the management of indoor

Service

air quality, and purpose, methods, and types of military discipline training

-  With the enactment of the Act on Accident Compensation for Soldiers,

modify the relevant provisions; with the full amendment of the Military

Full Amendment No.

Enforcement Decree of Pension Act, set matters delegated under the Act and other matters

30759

the Military Pension Act necessary for implementation thereof such as the standards for recognizing

(June 9, 2020)

the duration of marriage excluded from the installment pension and
procedures for claiming installment pension

Enforcement Decree of -  With the enactment of the Act on Accident Compensation for Soldiers, set

Enactment No.

the Act on Accident matters delegated under the Act and other matters necessary for

30760

Compensation for implementation thereof such as the standards for recognizing the duration

(June 9, 2020)

Soldiers of marriage excluded from the installment pension

-  With the enactment of the Act on the Assignment and Performance of the

Alternative Service, reflect modifications such as establishment of

Organizational Setup of Partial Amendment Commission for Examination of Alternative Service in the MMA, increase 20

the MMA and Its Affiliated No. 30767 personnel required therefor, establish two divisions of the Commission for

Organizations (June 9, 2020) Examination of Alternative Service as the organization subject to evaluation,

and reassign two prescribed MMA personnel under the control of the MMA
so as to increase efficiency of the organizational and personnel operation

-  With the enactment of the Act on the Assignment and Performance of the

Enforcement Decree of Alternative Service, set matters delegated under the Act and other matters

the Act on the Enactment No. necessary for implementation thereof by preparing the draft and mobilization

Assignment and 30807 postponement procedures for those who have applied to be transferred to

Performance of the (June 30, 2020) an alternative service, organizing and operating the Commission for

Alternative Service Examination of Alternative Service, and setting the details necessary for the

alternative service


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  In order to enhance the capability of the Minister of DAPA to perform

Enforcement Decree of Partial Amendment defense force enhancement projects and to improve the transparency and

the Defense Acquisition No. 30814 efficiency in the procurement of military supplies, prepare the grounds for

Program Act (July 1, 2020) the Minister of the DAPA to entrust part of the force support system among

the military supplies to the head of the Public Procurement Service

-  With the amendment to the Military Personnel Management Act, reorganize

the relevant regulations and require the disciplinary committee that reviews

Decree on Disciplinary Partial Amendment

sexual violence crimes or sexual harassment to, in principle, include at least

Action Against Military No. 30880

1/3 of members whose gender is identical to the victim, so as to establish

Personnel (July 28, 2020)

the grounds for operating the disciplinary committee and the appellate
review committee by means of video teleconference

Enforcement Decree of -  Require the disciplinary committee for civilian military employees, which

the Act on the Partial Amendment reviews sexual violence crimes or sexual harassment to, in principle, include

Management of Civilian No. 30881 at least 1/3 of members whose gender is identical to the victim, so as to

Personnel in the Military (July 28, 2020) establish the grounds for operating the disciplinary committee and the

Service appellate review committee by means of video teleconference

-  Set matters delegated under the Military Personnel Management Act and

other matters necessary for implementation thereof, such as deleting the
provisions on the establishment of the General and Central Committees for

Enforcement Decree of Partial Amendment

Examination of Killed or Wounded in Action and Death or Injury in the Line

the Military Personnel No. 30891

of Duty which have been upgraded according to the amendment of the Act,

Management Act (August 4, 2020)

and where the war-wounded, etc. has applied for the disclosure of the
minutes of the general or central committee meeting, mandating such
disclosure within 3 days

Enforcement Decree of

-  With the enactment of the Special Act for the Support of Korean Workers in

the Special Act for the Enactment No.

the United States Forces Korea, set matters delegated under the Act and

Support of Korean 30945

other matters necessary for implementation thereof, such as the specific

Workers in the United (August 19, 2020)

selection criteria and payment methods as to the relevant fund

States Forces Korea

-  In order to allow each service to carry out professional educational tasks

Partial Amendment that meet the characteristics thereof, delete the provisions regarding Army

Decree on Joint Forces

No. 30963 College, Navy College, and Air Force College that had been under the

Military University

(August 25, 2020) control of the Joint Forces Military University and place each college under

the respective service

-  With the amendment to the Military Service Act, add the status of any

human rights violation to matters requiring fact-finding survey in relation to

Partial Amendment

the onboard ship reserve service and require the head of a shipping

Enforcement Decree of No. 31058

company to attach a pledge for faithful implementation of the agreed-upon

the Military Service Act (September 29,

working conditions when submitting the application of transfer to the

2020)

onboard ship reserve service to the head of the competent regional military
manpower office

-  Among the members of the Regional Integrated Defense Committees,

designate the head of the regional military manpower administration or the
head of the military manpower branch office and head of the fire & disaster

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Decree of headquarters or head of the fire department as the previous head of the

No. 31092

the United Defense Act regional military manpower office considering the formation or roles of the

(October 7, 2020)

organization; for the practical protection of key national facilities, require the
manager of the facilities, vice commander of the local unit, and chief of the
police station to sign jointly a guard agreement regardless of jurisdiction

-  Where a servicemember in full-time reserve service or on active duty suffers

from illness or injury in the process of education or trainings during the
period of service and receives treatment at a civilian medical institution,

Enforcement Decree of Partial Amendment

establish the grounds for the Minister of National Defense to purchase

the Military Healthcare No. 31122

insurance to cover such treatment expenses; while entrusting tasks such as

Act (October 27, 2020)

insurance subscription and termination to the Military Mutual Aid
Association, establish the grounds for using the personal information held
by the MMA to process the relevant tasks


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

- As the laws and provisions on the grounds for mutatis mutandis application

following the enactment of the Act on Accident Compensation for Soldiers
are modified, and the criteria for payment of compensation for injuries and

Partial Amendment deaths are unified to the average amount of monthly income of all public

Enforcement Decree of

No. 31123 officials in accordance with the Act on Accident Compensation for Soldiers,

the Reserve Forces Act

(October 27, 2020) apply the same payment criteria to the reserve forces as the

servicemembers on active duty so as to enhance compensation for
personnel in the reserve forces who have sustained injury or died during the
performance of their duty or training

- In order to respond rapidly to the sudden change in the defense

environment such as the Fourth Industrial Revolution and reorganization of

General Rules on Defense Partial Amendment future unit structures, expand the scope of delegated rights to adjust

Organization and No. 31124 occupational groups and line or work of general civilian personnel in the

Capacity (October 27, 2020) military, which are currently delegated by the Minister of National Defense

to the Chief of Staff of each service and the Commander of Marine Corps,
from general civilian personnel grade-6 or below to all ranks

Enforcement Decree of - With the enactment of the Act on Noise Prevention and Damage

the Act on Noise Compensation for Military Airfields and Military Shooting Ranges, set

Enactment No.

Prevention and Damage matters necessary for the designation and announcement of areas requiring

31173

Compensation for Military countermeasure against noise, specific calculation methods of

(November 24, 2020)

Airfields and Military compensation for damages arising from noise, and payment method

Shooting Ranges thereof

**Ministerial Ordinances**



**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

Enforcement Rules on the

Partial Amendment

Organizational Setup of -  Increase the manpower of the MND by using the total labor cost system to

No. 974

the MND and Its Affiliated support job-oriented state administration and facilitate state affairs

(December 24, 2018)

Organizations

Rules on Special Service Partial Amendment -  With the amendment to the Regulations on Allowances, Etc. for Public

Allowance for Military No. 976 Officials, amend the provisions by assigning aerospace physiological

Personnel, Etc. (January 24, 2019) instructors to those who are eligible to receive hazard pay allowance

-  Where applicable, military incentives could only be paid in the fourth year of

Partial Amendment a four-year college in the past; in the future, however, by considering the

Rules on the Payment of

No. 977 selection of officer candidate and the time of graduation from the university

Military Incentives

(January 31, 2019) of cadets, amend the provisions to make the payment even before the start

of the officer candidate course if the student consents

-  Amend the provisions by extending the scope of public organizations where

the military personnel who work as alternative social workers work; thus,
where an application is made to be transferred to wartime labor service due

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Rules of the to the livelihood of the family, require the submission of the detailed history

No. 978

Military Service Act of employment insurance and daily work history under the employment

(February 27, 2019)

insurance along with the documents to be verified by the head of the
regional military manpower office through the joint use system of
administrative information

Enforcement Rules on the -  Reflect modifications as the organizational setup of the MND and its

Partial Amendment

Organizational Setup of affiliated organizations are amended to increase the manpower required for

No. 981

the MND and Its Affiliated providing public data and expanding the use thereof to the MND and its

(March 5, 2019)

Organizations affiliated organizations


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  In terms of equity with the officer promotion systems, amend the provisions

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment by deleting the grounds for excluding those who are excluded from the

Military Personnel No. 983 group of people entitled to undergo promotion and selection of NCOs, and
Management Act (April 26, 2019) establishing grounds for prohibiting the promotion before any

announcement is made, thereby improving the promotion system of NCOs

-  With the amendment to the Organizational Setup of the MND and Its

Affiliated Organizations (Presidential Decree No. 29734, promulgated and

Enforcement Rules on the

Partial Amendment enforced on May 7, 2019), set the specific positions of increased manpower

Organizational Setup of

No. 984 and modify the previous titles of the Outplacement Support Policy Division

the MND and Its Affiliated

(May 7, 2019) and Defense Women and Family Support Division to the Defense

Organizations

Employment Policy Division and Gender Equality Policy Division,
respectively

-  Amend the provisions to make improvements by upgrading to the

Regulations on Military Entrusted Students, deleting the prescribed details,

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment

and enabling the Minster of National Defense to inspect the status of

Regulations on Military No. 985 (May 30,

military entrusted students reported by the Chief of Staff of each service

Entrusted Students 2019)

every semester and reflect the results thereof when approving the
educational plan for military entrusted students

-  Amend the provisions so as not to impose any disciplinary action or penalty

Enforcement Rules of the

Partial Amendment as disciplinary action for any misbehavior recognized to have arisen while

Decree on Disciplinary

No. 986 faithfully and proactively processing tasks by establishing and executing

Action Against Military

(June 25, 2019) policies for public interests such as making improvements in unreasonable

Personnel

regulations

-  With the upgraded enactment of the Act that allows conditional consent

Enforcement Rules of the

Partial Amendment where the head of the relevant administrative agency consults with the

Protection of Military

No. 987 Minister of National Defense or the commander of the jurisdictional unit, etc.

Bases and Installations

(July 8, 2019) for permission or other disposition in the protected area, amend the

Act

provisions by deleting the relevant provisions

Enforcement Rules of the -  Amend related provisions by amending the form to provide whether the

Partial Amendment

Decree on Disciplinary grounds for exemption are applicable in the resolution for disciplinary

No. 988

Action Against Military action, etc. so as to be exempted from disciplinary action against positive

(August 6, 2019)

Personnel administration, etc.

Enforcement Rules of the

Partial Amendment -  Amend the form to provide whether the grounds for exemption are

Act on the Management

No. 989 applicable in the resolution for disciplinary action, etc. so as to be exempted

of Civilian Personnel in the

(August 6, 2019) from disciplinary action against positive administration, etc.

Military Service

Enforcement Rules on the

Partial Amendment -  With the amendment to the Organizational Setup of the MND and Its

Organizational Setup of

No. 990 Affiliated Organizations (Presidential Decree No. 30041, promulgated and

the MND and Its Affiliated

(August 13, 2019) enforced on August 13, 2019), reflect the modifications

Organizations

-  As the service period of servicemembers on active duty is gradually

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment reduced, prepare the grounds for reducing the minimum service period to

Military Personnel No. 991 be promoted to private first class, corporal, and sergeant by one month
Management Act (August 27, 2019) and extend the minimum service period to be promoted up to one month

on account of the characteristics of each service

-  With the amendment to the Enforcement Decree of the Military Pension Act

(Presidential Decree No. 1180, promulgated and enforced on September 3,

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Rules of the 2019), amend the relevant forms, such as the personal details report of

No. 993

Military Pension Act people residing overseas and claim for payment of the remaining severance

(September 3, 2019)

benefits due to the elimination of the grounds to restrict payment, and
reflect such details

-  With the amendment to the Enforcement Decree of the Defense Acquisition

Partial Amendment Program Act, (Presidential Decree No. 30090, promulgated and enforced

Enforcement Rules of the

No. 995 on September 24, 2019), modify the subcommittee that reviews core

Defense Acquisition

(September 24, technology proposals from its previous affiliation to the Policy and Planning

Program Act

2019) Subcommittee to the Defense Program Planning and Management

Subcommittee


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  Previously, the procedure for submitting requests for fostering and

Partial Amendment

Rules on Fostering and supporting reserve forces was delegated to be set by local governments’

No. 996

Supporting Reserve ordinances; since there is no need to set the provisions for each local

(September 26,

Forces government, however, deleted the regulations delegating the role to

2019)

ordinances

Rules on the Payment of -  Amend the provisions to extend the period of exception that temporarily

Partial Amendment

Retaining Fee and Interim suspends the payment of the guaranteed amount specified in the guarantee

No. 997

Payments for the Defense of payment of subcontractors or submission of the guarantee of payment,

(October 11, 2019)

Industry etc. for the amount equivalent thereto by shipbuilders

-  Amend the provisions to make system improvements by allowing the Chief

of Staff of each military to give extra points up to a certain limit considering

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment the environment and characteristics of each service’s labor acquisition in

Military Personnel No. 998 relation to the extra points given in the selection of long-term NCOs and
Management Act (October 18, 2019) NCOs eligible for promotion, and set the appointment criteria to at least 300

flight hours when appointing pilots for rotary-wing aircraft to increase
accuracy

-  Amend the provisions to set matters delegated under the Act and

Presidential Decree and other matters necessary for implementation thereof

Enforcement Rules of the by setting the detailed criteria for unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) among

Partial Amendment

Military Aircraft military aircraft and requiring the head of the project management agency

No. 999

Airworthiness Certification who intends to apply for airworthiness certification for the purpose of

(October 24, 2019)

Act research, etc. to submit the application for airworthiness certification

containing details such as the operational purpose and period of military
aircraft to the Minister of DAPA

-  With the amendment to the Act on the Report and Disclosure of Military

Enforcement Rules of the

Service Records of Public Servants, Etc. and its Enforcement Decree,

Act on the Report and Partial Amendment

amend the provisions to improve some shortfalls found in the operation of

Disclosure of Military No. 1000

the current system by amending the forms necessary for such

Service Records of Public (October 29, 2019)

implementation, including the notice to report modifications in the military

Servants, Etc.

service information

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment -  With the amendment to the Enforcement Decree of the Defense Acquisition

Defense Acquisition No. 1001 Program Act, amend the provisions by deleting the form of the relevant

Program Act (December 4, 2019) agreement on security requirements

Rules on Calculating the

Partial Amendment -  Amend the provisions by improving the profit calculation standards to

Cost of Goods Subject to

No. 1002 guarantee appropriate profits for the defense industry and introducing the

the Cost of Defense

(December 30, 2019) unit cost of defense wage and concept of standard amount of work

Industry

-  With the amendment to the Organizational Setup of the MND and Its

Enforcement Rules on the

Partial Amendment Affiliated Organizations (Presidential Decree No. 30281, promulgated and

Organizational Setup of

No. 1004 enforced on December 31, 2019), amend the provisions by reflecting the

the MND and Its Affiliated

(December 31, 2019) modifications and designating the chief of Gender Equality Policy Division in

Organizations

MND as an open position to ensure efficient operation of open positions

-  With the amendment to the Decree on the Act on Welfare of Persons with

Partial Amendment Disabilities, which revises the grade of disability, amend the provisions by

Enforcement Rules of the

No. 1006 reforming the criteria for people who require draft physical examination

Military Service Act

(January 7, 2020) among persons with disabilities in the preliminary military service who are

eligible to be exempted from military service

-  Amend the provisions by deleting the age in the selection criteria for

promoting NCOs so as to eliminate unreasonable discrimination in relation
to age, as well as allowing those who have not completed their mandatory

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment

service period due to physical or psychological impairment to continue to

Military Personnel No. 1008

serve on active duty through deliberation by the committee for examination

Management Act (January 23, 2020)

on discharge from active service of the Army, Navy, and Air Force
considering their capacity to serve such as the possibility of treating the
physical and psychological impairment and characteristics of each branch


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

Enforcement Rules on the -  Extend the duration of the military air base relocation project group

Partial Amendment

Organizational Setup of established as a temporary organization under the MND by two years and

No. 1009

the MND and Its Affiliated reduce one of the existing prescribed number of affiliated temporary

(January 29, 2020)

Organizations personnel

Enforcement Rules of the -  In order to reinforce the assessment capacity of the screening interview

Partial Amendment

Act on the Management among new recruitment tests for general civilian personnel in the military

No. 1011

of Civilian Personnel in the and to minimize the number of people with tied scores, subdivide the

(February 17, 2020)

Military Service scores for each evaluative element of the screening interview

Enforcement Rules on the

Partial Amendment

Organizational Setup of -  With the amendment to the Organizational Setup of the MND and Its

No. 1013

the MND and Its Affiliated Affiliated Organizations, reflect the modifications

(February 25, 2020)

Organizations

-  With the amendment to the Enforcement Decree of the Defense Acquisition

Program Act, set the criteria, etc. of the harms prevention regulations for

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment those who have acquired the license for manufacturing facilities for military

Defense Acquisition No. 1014 firearms, swords, explosives, etc., and set the export status forms and

Program Act (March 31, 2020) attached documents that those who have been exempted from export

permit and exported defense industry supplies, etc. are required to submit
within 7 days of export

-  With the amendment to the Regulations on Allowances, Etc. for Public

Rules on Special Service Partial Amendment

Officials that aimed to expand the scope of people who are eligible to

Allowance for Military No. 1015

receive allowance for special tasks, set the monthly amount of allowance

Personnel, Etc. (April 2, 2020)

paid to the pilots who are general-level officers

Enforcement Rules on the -  With the amendment to the Organizational Setup of the MND and Its

Partial Amendment

Organizational Setup of Affiliated Organizations (Presidential Decree No. 30635, promulgated and

No. 1017

the MND and Its Affiliated enforced on April 28, 2020), adjust the administrative affairs assigned to

(April 28, 2020)

Organizations lower organizations and the names of departments

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment -  With the amendment to the Framework Act on Military Status and Service,

Framework Act on Military No. 1018 set the management standards for maintaining indoor air quality of the

Status and Service (May 27, 2020) facilities needed for barracks life at a pleasant level

-  Improve the personnel management system by preparing a special

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment

screening system of admissions to appoint NCOs who have become

Military Personnel No. 1019

physically impaired due to acts that may set an example for other military

Management Act (June 1, 2020)

personnel during battle or training related to operations as warrant officers

-  Where the President of the Defense Agency for Technology and Quality

Enforcement Rules of the Partial Amendment received an application for the renewal of certification from a defense

Defense Acquisition No. 1020 company but is unable to conduct field inspection due to extenuating

Program Act (June 2, 2020) circumstances, allow the Agency to carry out the inspection with data

submitted in lieu of the field inspection

-  Set matters delegated by the Enforcement Decree of the Act and other

Full Amendment No.

Enforcement Rules of the matters necessary for implementation thereof, such as the reporting

1022

Military Pension Act procedure for the duration of marriage excluded when calculating the

(June 11, 2020)

installment pension

Enforcement Rules of the

-  With the enactment of the Enforcement Decree of the Act on Accident

Act on Accident Enactment No. 1023

Compensation for Soldiers, set matters delegated under the Act and other

Compensation for (June 11, 2020)

matters necessary for implementation thereof

Soldiers

Regulations on Officer Partial Amendment -  Change the number of officer candidates of the Reserve Officers’ Training

Candidates for Reserve No. 1024 Corps to 40 and NCO candidates to 30 and prepare the grounds for the
Officers’ Training Corps (June 19, 2020) transition of military records

Enforcement Rules of the -  Set the application form for transfer to alternative service and require the

Act on the Assignment Enactment No. 1026 applicants to attach other documents such as their written statements and

and Performance of the (June 30, 2020) the statements of their parents and surrounding people when submitting

Alternative Service the transfer application


-----

**Promulgation No.**
**Title** **Main Contents**

**(Date)**

-  With the amendment to the Military Service Act, modify the provisions and

Partial Amendment

Enforcement Rules of the forms by adding matters regarding alternative service to the subjects that

No. 1027

Military Service Act may submit the abstract of resident registration card in lieu of the certificate

(June 30, 2020)

of military service

-  In the qualification to apply for the selection of commanders of reserve

military units, the commander for the operation of the reserve forces

Regulations on the

Partial Amendment management organization and personnel to provide assistance include

Selection of Persons in

No. 1028 those with experience as officers in command in the Army personnel

Charge of Reserve Forces

(July 15, 2020) department; modify the number of questions and assigned scores in the

Management

written examination among the selection exams, thereby improving
shortfalls in the operation

-  Amend the standards for imposing disciplinary actions for servicemembers

Enforcement Rules of the

Partial Amendment and prepare the standards for imposing disciplinary actions against officers

Decree on Disciplinary

No. 1029 and NCOs who neither report nor whistle-blow on negative administration,

Action Against Military

(July 28, 2020) bribery acceptance, or embezzlement of government money, thereby

Personnel

improving shortfalls in the operation

-  With the amendment to the Enforcement Decree of the Act on the

Management of Civilian Personnel in the Military Service, establish test

Enforcement Rules of the

Partial Amendment subjects for the new recruitment of general civilian personnel in the military

Act on the Management

No. 1030 in cyber forces, amend the evaluation elements of interview exams for the

of Civilian Personnel in the

(July 27, 2020) new recruitment of general civilian personnel in the military, and allow the

Military Service

head of the testing agency to collect reference data required for evaluating
interview exams and provide them to the interviewers

Enforcement Rules of the -  With the enactment of the Enforcement Decree of the Special Act for the

Special Act for the Enactment Support of Korean Workers in the United States Forces Korea, set matters
Support of Korean No. 1032 delegated under the Act such as procedures for raising objections for

Workers in the United (August 20, 2020) decisions made by the Minister of National Defense regarding the provision

States Forces Korea of the relevant support fund

Partial Amendment -  With the amendment to the Military Service Act and its Enforcement Decree

Enforcement Rules of the No. 1033 to require the submission of the pledge to faithfully implement the working

Military Service Act (September 29, conditions agreed upon with onboard ship reserve servicemembers, set the

2020) applicable pledge form

Enforcement Rules on the

Partial Amendment -  In order to increase the efficiency of organizational operation, adjust part of

Organizational Setup of

No. 1034 the assigned administrative affairs and part of the line of work for personnel

the MND and Its Affiliated

(October 21, 2020) at the MND HQ

Organizations

-  With the enactment of the Act on Noise Prevention and Damage

Enforcement Rules of the

Compensation for Military Airfields and Military Shooting Ranges, set how to

Act on Noise Prevention

Enactment calculate the noise impact level according to the operation of military aircraft

and Damage

No. 1035 and firing exercise at military shooting ranges, types of installations limited

Compensation for Military

(November 24, 2020) in the noise countermeasure zones and such limiting conditions, and how

Airfields and Military

to make announcements for the plan of installation of automatic noise

Shooting Ranges

measurement network


-----

Appendix

26


###### Organization and Major Activities of the National
 Defense Committee of the National Assembly

As of December 31, 2020


**Senior Expert Member**

Bae Yong-geun

Grade-1


**Expert Member**

Lee Sin-woo

Grade-2


**Legislative Examiners**

Seo Deok-gyo, Grade-3 / Kang Kun-hee, Grade-4

Kim Jae-hwan, Grade-4 / Joo Gyeong-deok, Grade-5

Lee Ji-yoon, Grade-5


**Committee Chairperson (Democratic Party of Korea)**

Min Hong-chul
(born in 1961, Gimhae-si Gap in Gyeongsangnam-do)
Third-term (19th, 20th, and 21st National Assembly)
Department of Law and Master's degree in Law at Pusan
National University; Army Judge Advocate General;
President of the High Court for Armed Forces; (former)
Brigadier general of the ROK Army; (former) Attorney;
(former) Supreme council member of the Democratic Party
of Korea; (current) Chairperson of the Democratic Party of
Korea Gyeongsangnam-do Party Chapter

National Assembly Building Rm. 421
O) 784-6490, 784-6491, F) 6788-64855



**Democratic Party of Korea**

Hwang Hee
(born in 1967, Yangcheon-gu Gap in Seoul)
Second-term (20th and 21st National Assembly)
PhD in Urban Planning and Engineering at Yonsei University
Graduate School; (former) Cheongwadae Administrative
Official at the Office of the President during Roh Moo-hyun

Executive
Secretary administration; (current) Member of the Smart City Special

Committee under the Presidential Committee on the Fourth
Industrial Revolution

Members’ Office Building Rm. 838
O) 784-8551, 784-8552, F) 6788-7500

Kim Min-ki
(born in 1966, Yongin-si Eul in Gyeonggi-do)
Third-term (19th, 20th, and 21st National Assembly)
Korea University Department of Food and Resource
Economics; (former) Chairperson of the Intelligence
Committee; (former) Member of the Public Administration
and Security Committee

Members’ Office Building Rm. 945
O) 784-1930, 784-1931, F) 6788-6155

Kim Byung-kee
(born in 1961, Dongjak-gu Gap in Seoul)
Second-term (20th and 21st National Assembly)
Department of National Ethics at Kyung Hee University;
Served at the National Intelligence Service; Vice chairperson

3 of the Democratic Party of Korea Policy Committee;

Member of the Economic Unification Committee for the
Korean Peninsula of Democratic Party of Korea

Members’ Office Building Rm. 721
O) 784-1322, 788-1323, F) 6788-6170

Kim Byung-joo
(born in 1962, proportional representative)
First-term (21st National Assembly)
PhD in International Politics, Graduate School of Political
Science, Kyonggi University; (former) Deputy Commander of
the ROK–US Combined Forces Command;
(former) Vice chairperson of the Democratic Party of Korea
Policy Committee

Members’ Office Building Rm. 447
O) 784-4177, 784-4178, F) 6788-6185


**People Power Party**

Han Ki-ho
(born in 1952, Chuncheon-si, Cheorwon-gun, Hwacheon-
gun, Yanggu-gun Eul in Gangwon-do)
Third-term (18th, 19th, and 21st National Assembly)
Graduate of the Korea Military Academy;

Executive (former) Chairperson of Saenuri Party Gangwon-do Chapter;
Secretary (former) Commander of the ROK Army Training and Doctrine

Command (former Lieutenant General)

Members’ Office Building Rm. 908
O) 784-3860, 788-3861, F) 6788-7410

Kang Dae-sik
(born in 1959, Dong-gu Eul in Daegu)
First-term (21st National Assembly)
Undergraduate at Yeungnam University;
(former) Head of Daegu Dong-gu Office;
(former) Chairman of Daegu Dong-gu Council

Members’ Office Building Rm. 341
O) 784-5275, 788-5276, F) 6788-6010

Shin Won-sik
(born in 1958, proportional representative)
First-term (21st National Assembly)
Kookmin University Graduate School of Business
Administration (PhD in Business Administration);
(former) Vice Chairperson of JCS;
(former) Commander of the ROK Army Capital Defense
Command (former Lieutenant General)

Members’ Office Building Rm. 745
O) 784-9630, 788-9631, F) 6788-6685

Yoon Ju-keyng
(born in 1959, proportional representative)
First-term (21st National Assembly)
Department of Chemistry (Master’s degree), Ewha Women’s
University; (current) Director of Maheon Yoon Bong-Gil
Woljinhoe; (former) Director of the Independence Hall of
Korea; (former) Member of the Presidential Committee for
National Cohesion

Members’ Office Building Rm. 828
O) 784-7057, 788-7058, F) 6784-6880


-----

**People Power Party**

Lee Che-ik
(born in 1955, Nam-gu Gap in Ulsan)
Third-term (19th, 20th, and 21st National Assembly)
PhD in Science of Public Administration, University of Ulsan
Graduate School;(former) Secretary of the Public
Administration and Security Committee;(former) Head of
Ulsan Nam-gu Office; (former) President of Ulsan Port
Authority

Members’ Office Building Rm. 844
O) 784-8011, 788-8012, F) 6788-7080

Ha Tae-keung
(born in 1968, Haeundae-gu Gap in Busan)
Third-term (19th, 20th, and 21st National Assembly)
Seoul National University Department of Physics; Jilin
University Graduate School (PhD in International Economics),
China; CEO of Open Radio for North Korea;
Senior researcher at SK Telecom’s Management and
Economy Research Institute

Members’ Office Building Rm. 916
O) 784-2491, 788-2492, F) 6788-7405



**Independent**

Hong Jun-pyo
(born in 1954, Suseong-gu Eul in Daegu)
Fifth-term (15th, 16th, 17th, 18th, and 21st National
Assembly)
Graduate of Korea University School of Law;
(former) Candidate of the Liberty Korea Party for the 19th
Presidential Election;
(former) Representative of the Liberty Korea Party; (former)
Prosecutor at the Seoul Central District Prosecutors’ Office

Members’ Office Building Rm. 549
O) 784-7610 , 784-7611 , F) 6784-7485


**Democratic Party of Korea**

Kim Jin-pyo
(born in 1958, Suwon-si Mu in Gyeonggi-do)
Fifth-term (17th, 18th, 19th, 20th, and 21st National
Assembly)
Seoul National University School of Law;Deputy prime
minister for economic affairs; Deputy prime minister for
educational affairs; Chairman of the supreme council and
representative of the Democratic Party of Korea

Members’ Office Building Rm. 744
O) 784-3807, 784-3808 , F) 6788-6330 0

Park Sung-joon
(born in 1969, Jung-gu, Seongdong-gu Eul in Seoul)
First-term (21st National Assembly)
PhD from the Department of Political Science and
Diplomacy, Sungkyunkwan University; (former) JTBC news
presenter; (current) Deputy spokesperson for the
Democratic Party of Korea Central Chapter

Members’ Office Building Rm. 324
O) 784-8430, 784-8431, F) 6788-6480

Sul Hoon
(born in 1953, Bucheon-si Eul in Gyeonggi-do)
Fifth-term (15th, 16th, 19th, 20th, and 21st National
Assembly)
Department of History, Korea University; (current) Supreme
council member of the Democratic Party of Korea;
(former) Chairperson of the Agriculture, Food, Rural Affairs,
Oceans and Fisheries’ Committee

Members’ Office Building Rm. 948
O) 784-8570, 788-8571, F) 6788-6620

Ahn Gyu-back
(born in 1961, Dongdaemun-gu Gap in Seoul)
Fourth-term (18th, 19th, 20th, and 21st National Assembly)
Bachelor’s and master’s degrees at Sungkyunkwan
University; Expert Member of the Commission on Presidential
Transition for President Roh Moo-hyun; Chairperson of the
Democratic Party; Chairperson of the National Defense
Committee; Floor Leader of the New Politics Alliance for
Democracy

Members’ Office Building Rm. 807
O) 784-4180, 788-4181, F) 6788-6705

Hong Young-pyo
(born in 1957, Bupyeong-gu Eul in Incheon)
Fourth-term (18th, 19th, 20th, and 21st National Assembly)
Dongguk University; Secretary for Civil Society of Prime
Minister's Office; Floor spokesperson; Chief deputy
chairperson of the Democratic United Party Policy
Committee; Chairperson of the Democratic Party of Korea
Incheon Metropolitan City Chapter; Chairperson of the
Environment and Labor Committee; Floor leader of the
Democratic Party of Korea;

Members’ Office Building Rm. 1004
O) 784-3143, 784-3144, F) 6788-7470


-----

**Major Activities of the National Defense Committee of the National Assembly**
**(January 2019 - December 2020)**

**Session** **Date** **Main Contents**


**The 20th National Assembly**





-  Received progress reports (under MND, MMA, and DAPA jurisdictions)

-  Introduced the Inspection and Investigation of State Administration Report for 2018

-  Introduced 50 legislative bills including the Military Service Act

March 18, 2019 -  Passed resolution for the continued development of the ROK–US Alliance

367th Extraordinary commemorating the 50th anniversary of SCM and resolution urging the Japanese
Session military to issue an apology for posing a threat with maritime patrol aircraft and
(March 7 - April 5, cease any further recurrence
2019)

-  Adopted the Inspection and Investigation of State Administration Report for 2018

-  Adopted the subcommittee’s activity report for the improvement of the special

March 28, 2019

military service system

-  Passed 30 legislative bills including the Military Personnel Management Act

369th Extraordinary -  Received major pending issue reports (under MND, MMA, and DAPA
Session jurisdictions)

July 3, 2019

(June 20 - July 19, -  Introduced 49 legislative bills including the Act on the Organization of National
2019) Armed Forces

-  Received status report on MND affairs (regarding North Korean missile launch,

North Korean small wooden ship situation, and Russian military aircraft invasion

August 5, 2019 of airspace)

-  Passed resolution condemning the nuclear advancement and missile provocation

370th Extraordinary of North Korea and demanding the cessation of any further recurrence
Session
(July 29 - August 27, -  Introduced proposed settlement of accounts for the 2018 fiscal year
2019) -  Received progress report on the demand for modification related to the

inspection and investigation of state administration in 2018 and on the settlement

August 21, 2019

of accounts for the 2017 fiscal year

-  Passed 31 legislative bills including the Special Act on Investigating the Truth of

the May 18 Democratization Movement

September 4, 2019 • Passed proposed settlement of accounts for the 2018 fiscal year

September 19, -  Public hearing on the legislative bill for alternative service program for

2019 conscientious military service objectors

-  Adopted the Inspection and Investigation of State Administration Plan for 2019

September 24,

-  Passed 14 legislative bills including the Military Pension Act

2019

-  Introduced 25 legislative bills including the National Defense Reform Act

371st Regular Session October 2 - 26, -  Conducted the inspection and investigation of state administration for 2019
(September 2 - 2019
December 10, 2019) November 4, 2019 -  Introduced the 2020 budget bill

-  Passed the 2020 budget bill

-  Introduced 6 legislative bills including the Military Secret Protection Act

November 7, 2019

-  Introduced a motion to extend the dispatch to the waters of the Gulf of Aden and

a motion to extend the dispatch to support the UAE forces

-  Passed the motion to extend the dispatch to the waters of the Gulf of Aden and

November 19,

the motion to extend the dispatch to support the UAE forces

2019

-  Passed 27 legislative bills including the Military Secret Protection Act

376th Extraordinary -  Major pending issue report (under the MND, MMA, and DAPA jurisdictions)
Session -  Introduced 27 legislative bills including the Defense Technology Security Act

February 24, 2020

(February 17 - March -  Passed one revised bill for the Military Service Act
17, 2020) -  Passed resolution urging the enactment of the Defense Industry Day

377th Extraordinary -  Introduced 6 legislative bills including the Special Act for the Support of Korean
Session Workers in the United States Forces Korea

April 29, 2020

(April 16 - May 15, -  Passed the Special Act for the Support of Korean Workers in the United States
2020) Forces Korea


-----

**Session** **Date** **Main Contents**


**The 21st National Assembly**



379th Extraordinary June 22, 2020 -  Received progress reports (under MND, MMA, and DAPA jurisdictions)

Session

(June 5 - July 4, 2020) June 29, 2020 -  Introduced and passed the 3rd supplementary revised budget bill for 2020

380th Extraordinary

Session

July 28, 2020 -  Received progress reports (under MND, MMA, and DAPA jurisdictions)

(July 6 - August 4,

2020)

381st Extraordinary

-  Introduced proposed settlement of accounts for the 2019 fiscal year

Session

August 25, 2020 -  Received progress report on the demand for modification on the settlement of

(August 18 - 31,

accounts for the 2018 fiscal year

2020)

September 1, 2020 • Passed proposed settlement of accounts for the 2019 fiscal year

-  Received urgent status report on MND affairs (regarding the disappearance of a

September 24, public official from the Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries)

2020 -  Passed resolution condemning the shooting of the public official from the Ministry

of Oceans and Fisheries and armed provocation

October 7 - 26,

-  Conducted the inspection and investigation of state administration for 2020
2020

-  Introduced the 2021 budget bill

382nd Regular -  Introduced 69 legislative bills including the United Defense Act

Session November 9, 2020 -  Introduced a motion to extend the dispatch to the waters of the Gulf of Aden and

(September 1 - a motion to extend the dispatch to support the UAE forces

December 9, 2020) -  Passed resolution urging the enactment of the Defense Industry Day

November 12,

-  Passed the budget 2021 bill
2020

-  Passed 32 legislative bills including the Special Act on Support, Etc. for

November 20, Pyeongtaek-si, Etc. Following Relocation of US Military Bases in Korea

2020 -  Passed the motion to extend the dispatch to the waters of the Gulf of Aden and

the motion to extend the dispatch to support the UAE forces

-  Passed the partial amendment to the Special Act on Investigating the Truth of the
December 8, 2020

May 18 Democratization Movement


-----

### Videos

ROK Armed Forces
promotional video
p. 62

Dokdo, the beautiful
island of Korea
p. 69

ROK Air Force’s joint
maritime refugee
SAR training
p. 109

Launching of the
5th M-Friends
p. 162

Hanbit Unit
p. 243

A job fair for
servicemembers
nearing discharge
held in 2019
p. 292


Army
promotional video
p. 63

The ROK Armed Forces
protecting the daily lives
of people
p. 87

Reserve forces
protecting
the security of the ROK
p. 127

72nd Anniversary of
ROK Armed Forces
Day Challenge
p. 162

Temporary expansion
of operation areas of
Cheonhae Unit
p. 246

DNA sampling of
bereaved families
of KIAs during
Korean War
p. 299


Navy
promotional video
p. 63

Launch of
ANASIS-II
p. 94

Smart defense
innovation
p. 138

Improvement of the
alternative service
program
p. 166

Use of mobile
phones at
barracks after work
p. 262

COVID-19
Response of
the ROK Armed
Forces
p. 352


Marine Corps
promotional video
p. 63

ROK Army’s
KCTC training
p. 106

70 years of the
ROK Female
Armed Forces
p. 152

2019 ADEX
p. 186

Military Meal
Upgrade Project
p. 272


Air Force
promotional video
p. 65

ROK Navy’s
cruise training
p. 108

ROK Armed
Forces:
Strong Force that
Creates Peace
p. 162

2020 Seoul Defense
Dialogue
p. 231

Mothers’
meals and clothing
monitoring group
comprised
of mothers
p. 272


-----

### INDEX

A

Acquisition and Cross-Servicing 239
Agreements (ACSAs)

Act on Accident Compensation 426, 432, 434, 437
for Soldiers

ADMM-Plus 13, 83, 85, 92, 93, 108, 215, 217,

219, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 252

African swine flu (ASF) 78, 88, 89

Agency for Defense Development 84, 146, 179
(ADD)

Akh Unit 223, 249, 250, 255, 419

alternative service program 58, 166, 285, 287, 288, 333, 334,

335, 426, 441

Armed Forces Trauma Center 199, 283, 348

Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) 236, 417

artificial intelligence 4, 20, 99, 273, 399, 407

ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) 13, 231

Ashena Unit 245, 255

augmented reality 115, 328

automated meal service 141
measurement system

B

Battle Command Training 107
Program (BCTP)

Biological Weapons Convention 79, 235, 416
(BWC)

C

C4I 132, 208, 412, 413

cap on the maximum amount of 136
liquidated damages for delay

Chemical Weapons Convention 79, 235, 416
(CWC)

Cheonghae Unit 227, 245, 246, 247, 248, 256, 419

Cobra Gold 108, 111

combined command post training 113, 214, 394, 398, 405
(CCPT)

command post exercise (CPX) 69, 205, 383, 394

Comprehensive Military 2, 5, 26, 68, 304, 305, 320, 396,
Agreement (CMA) 404

cruise training 108, 109, 228, 330




D

Defense & Security Expo Korea 85, 186
(DX-Korea)

Defense Agency for Spiritual and 105, 115, 422
Mental Force Enhancement

defense burden sharing 206, 207, 208, 412

defense force enhancement 135, 181, 433
projects

Defense Medical Information 142
System (DEMIS)

defense mobile security app 263, 337, 339

defense Modeling and Simulation 140
(M&S) system

Defense Rapid Support Team 347, 348

defense strategy technology 145

Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) 27, 225, 322, 368, 404

DNA 243, 247, 256, 297, 298, 299, 300,

428

Dongmyeong Unit 241, 242, 243, 255, 419

DPAA 299, 329

dronebot combat system 64

drone 4, 22, 34, 64, 83, 84, 98, 144, 145,

175, 176

E

EU 12, 219, 224, 227, 246, 247, 419

F

F-35A 55, 66, 133, 134, 135, 193

FFX 132

field training exercises (FTX) 71, 108, 321, 367, 394

force enhancement budget 190, 192, 193

Full Operational Capability (FOC) 212, 398,406

future challenge defense 146, 183
technology development

G


General Security of Military
Information Agreement (GSOMIA)


217


government liability system on
175
proving the need for regulation


-----

Korea Disaster Relief Team
(KDRT)

Korea Marine Exercise Program
(KMEP)

Korea–US Integrated Defense
Dialogue (KIDD)


92, 249

111

74, 202, 214


H

Hanbit Unit 229, 241, 242, 243, 244, 255, 256,

257, 351, 419

HEU 35, 365, 382, 383

HGV 19

Hoguk Training 112, 394

HUAV 133, 193

Hwarang Training 99, 112, 394

I

infectious disease hospitals 90, 349

Initial Operational Capability (IOC) 113, 212, 398, 406

Integrated Defense Committees 96, 97, 98, 99, 433

integrated disaster management 45, 91
system

intercontinental ballistic missiles 17, 366
(ICBMs)

Inter-Korean Joint Liaison Office 388

Inter-Korean joint remains
373
recovery

Intermediate-Range Nuclear
11, 15
Forces Treaty (INF)

International Maritime Defense 85, 186
Industry Exhibition (MADEX)

International Maritime Security 248
Construct (IMSC)

International Peace Support 252, 255
Standby Force (IPSSF)

Internet of Everything (IoE) 146

Internet of Things (IoT) 56, 142, 143, 146, 197

J

Joint Comprehensive Plan of 12
Action (JCPOA)

K

KCTC 106, 107

KF-X 132, 133, 135

Khaan Quest 111

Korea Air and Missile Defense 76, 134, 195
(KAMD)

Korea Air Defense Identification 216, 218
Zone (KADIZ)

Korea Arms Control Verification 79, 422
Agency


Land Partnership Plan (LPP) 206

life cycle of defense resources 55

live, virtual, constructive (LVC) 55, 140
training system

long-range surface-to-air missiles 123, 195
(L-SAMs)

M

MCM 202, 205, 395, 398, 400, 403, 405,

406, 408, 409

Military Demarcation Line (MDL) 306, 308, 315, 321, 367

Military Pension System 296,

military service credit 270

mixed reality 145

MND Agency for KIA Recovery
422
and Identification

Mothers’ Monitoring Group 274

MUAV 133, 195

Multiple Integrated Laser 107, 141
Engagement System (MILES)

multiple launch rocket system 63, 64, 66, 133, 134, 358
(MLRS)

muscle-assisted robots 144

Mutual Defense Treaty between 66, 203, 207, 404, 427
the United States of America and
the Republic of Korea

N

National Competency Standards 295, 296
(NCS)

National Defense Authorization 17, 18
Act (NDAA)

National Defense Help Call Center 267

National Defense Strategy (NDS) 14, 16

national security diagnosis 86

National Security Strategy (NSS) 14, 16, 42, 43, 48, 50

NATO 12, 219, 224, 227

New START (US–Russia Strategic 15
Arms Reduction Treaty)


-----

Northern Limit Line (NLL) 27, 68, 108, 305, 310, 321, 396,

404

nuclear and WMD response 58
system

Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty 234, 363, 416
(NPT)

Nuclear Posture Review (NPR) 74


reserve forces training centers 128, 129

Reserve Noncommissioned 103, 104
Officers’ Training Corps (RNTC)

Rim of the Pacific Exercise 108
(RIMPAC)

ROK Air Force Space Operations 94
Unit

ROK prisoners of war (POW) 315, 316, 317

ROK–US Security Consultative 18, 73, 74, 75, 95, 202, 203, 209,
Meeting (SCM) 211, 212, 214, 238, 385, 391, 395,

398, 400, 403, 406, 408, 409, 441


Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW)


79, 417


Panmunjom Declaration 26, 46, 304, 305, 306, 309, 310,

312, 313, 320, 361, 367, 388, 395,

396, 403

peace process on the Korean 232, 233, 304
Peninsula

peacetime service program for 124, 130
reserve forces

performance-based logistics 72
(PBL)

PKO 21, 221, 222, 233, 241, 252, 253,

254, 255, 399, 407

PKO Centers 254

plutonium 35, 362, 363

Presidential Truth Commission on 287
Deaths in the Military

professional counselor in barracks 267

Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) 237, 399, 408, 418

Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI)
237
exercise

Pyongyang Joint Declaration 26, 304, 305, 306, 312, 320, 361,

395, 396

R

rapid pilot acquisition program 181

reconnaissance unmanned aerial 66, 67, 122, 131, 134
vehicles (UAV)

Regional Consultative Group 93
(RCG) on Humanitarian Civil–
Military Coordination for Asia and
the Pacific

reserve forces 37, 56, 124, 127, 128, 129, 130,

192, 194, 335, 346, 358, 424, 426,

428, 434, 436, 438


S

Safe Korea Exercise 78, 86, 87

Satellite Surveillance Control Unit 94

scientific security systems 68, 323

SCMs 18, 73, 74, 75, 95, 96, 202, 203,

205, 209, 211, 212, 214, 238, 385,

391

self-development subsidies 56

Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD) 13, 85, 219, 221, 231

Seoul International Aerospace & 85, 186, 220, 224
Defense Exhibition (ADEX)

sincere performance recognition 135
program

smart ammunition 143

smart defense innovation 4, 54, 57, 138

social media 161, 337

SOFA 206, 207, 400, 408, 413

Soldiers Tomorrow Ready
96
Savings

space situational awareness (SSA) 21, 95, 398, 407

Special Measures Agreement 207, 400, 408
(SMA)

standing unit for overseas 255
deployment

Stockholm Agreement 28

submarine-launched ballistic 17, 33
missiles (SLBMs)

T

TPFDD 66

U

Ulchi Taegeuk Exercise 71, 86, 112, 380, 394


-----

UN Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan (UNMISS)

UN Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA)

United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL)

United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization (UNTSO) in Palestine


241, 243, 244, 252, 419

241, 242, 245, 419

242, 419

241


V

virtual reality 115, 128, 328

W

war-game 113

WMD 29, 46, 58, 73, 76, 79, 93, 131,

134, 192, 195, 234, 236, 237, 360,

399, 408, 418

Y

Yongsan Relocation Plan (YRP) 206

Number

3D scanning 141

4D Strategy 75, 76

4D Operational Concept 75


-----

Published Date June 2021

Published by Ministry of National Defense

Compiled by Defense Policy Division,
Policy Planning Bureau

Edited & Designed by DANI Communications

ISBN 979-11-6212-102-3

For inquiries about the content of this booklet,
please contact the Defense Policy
Division of the Ministry of National Defense
(+82-2-748-6237).


-----

22, Itaewon-ro, Yongsan-gu, Seoul, 04383, Republic of Korea
TEL: +82-2-748-1111 Help Desk: +82-2-748-6891 FAX: +82-2-748-6895
www mnd go kr


-----

