#### 2012 DEFENSE
###### WHITE PAPER


-----

**Message from**
**the Minister of National Defense**

The Republic of Korea today is enjoying a period of prosperity that is unprecedented throughout our history.

Rising from the ruins of the Korean War, Korea has grown to become one of the world’s leading economic

powers in less than 60 years. The success of the recent G-20 and Nuclear Security Summits hosted by the

Republic of Korea (ROK) served to elevate the ROK’s stature within the international community. The ROK

Armed Forces have supported such growth by guaranteeing the continuation of unequivocal security.

However, challenges that pose threats to our national security are likely to further increase. While the issues of

territorial sovereignty, religion, natural resources, and ethnicity are constant sources of potential regional

disputes, non-military and transnational threats such as terrorism and cyber-attacks are ever increasing.

Additionally, the current global economic crisis is complicating the security environment even further. Although

Northeast Asia is emerging as the political and economic center of the world in the 21[st] century, tensions in the

region are increasing over disparate interpretations of history, and sovereignty over islands and territorial waters.

Despite chronic economic crises and food shortages, North Korea is relentlessly pursuing nuclear and missile

development while maintaining an adversarial strategy towards the ROK. It is highly likely that the security

environment of the Korean Peninsula, Northeast Asia, and the world will rapidly change over the next few years.

It will be an important period in which the whole nation must come together to forge a staunch security posture.

Our Armed Forces are striving to transform into an ‘Advanced Elite Military’ in order to continuously

safeguard the security and prosperity of the ROK. In response to North Korea’s armed provocations against the

ROK Ship Cheonan, and Yeonpyeongdo (Island), our Armed Forces are being transformed into a ‘combat

mission-oriented advanced military’ following a comprehensive review of our security posture. We will eliminate

the enemy’s will to carry out provocations through a concept of active deterrence, and in the event of

provocation, our security posture will allow us to conduct swift, accurate, and thorough response within our

sovereign rights of self-defense. Furthermore, we have established a new Northwest Islands Defense Command

to enhance our military response capabilities pertaining to the Northwestern Islands region. We have also

established the ROK Cyberspace Command, which has significantly strengthened our ability to conduct counter

cyber warfare. We have also continued to revise and develop our ‘Defense Reform Basic Plan’ to realize our

vision for a multi-functional and highly efficient form of national defense. Furthermore, in advance of the

transition of wartime operational control in 2015, we are making every effort to secure the key assets that would

permit our Armed Forces to lead theater operations on the Korean Peninsula.

We have reinforced the correct perception of our enemy and the esprit de corps of our service members by

strengthening our education programs. We have established an environment of complete dedication to combat

and training by improving our education system for new recruits, instituting an overall evaluation system for

officer and non commissioned officer (NCO) candidates and strengthening the intensity of tactical exercises


-----

undertaken by individual military units. We have also laid the groundwork for enhancing our joint capabilities by

establishing the Joint Forces Military University, as well as implementing a common curriculum across the three

service academies. Furthermore, we are continuing to improve active duty service conditions for our service

members by promoting a culture of  ‘autonomy and responsibility’ within military confines, while simultaneously

reforming the armed services medical system. We are also endeavoring to provide our service members with the

suitable conditions for the pursuit of self-development, while they are on active duty.

During the past five years, the ROK and the United States have fortified our military alliance. We created a

new ‘Korea-U.S. Integrated Defense Dialogue (KIDD)’ to enhance the efficiency of our security consultative

apparatus. Furthermore, to counter North Korea’s nuclear and missile threats, we have continued to develop an

effective extended deterrence strategy and policies designed to bolster precision strike capabilities.

Through the expansion of global peacekeeping activities, the ROK Armed Forces are fulfilling our responsi
bility to the international community on a level that is befitting our national power. In the process, we are

enhancing our global stature as a defender of world peace. Following the deployment of the Dongmyeong Unit

to Lebanon, the Cheonghae Unit to the Gulf of Aden, the Ashena Unit to Afghanistan, the Danbi Unit to Haiti,

and the Akh Unit to the United Arab Emirates, we are planning to deploy a peacekeeping unit to South Sudan.

The 2012 Defense White Paper is a representation of the direction of the ROK’s defense policy, its current

status, and the MND’s plans for realizing our national security strategy. In particular, the publication contains

detailed assessments of North Korea’s threat and the readiness posture of our Armed Forces. It also contains a

description of our efforts to transform into a combat-centric elite military. The history of the ROK-U.S. alliance,

the peacekeeping efforts of our Armed Forces, and a variety of other defense-related materials can be found in

the appendix.

As the guardian of the ROK and as a global military force, our Armed Forces will strive to become a combat

mission-oriented advanced military that upholds peace on the Korean Peninsula, and contributes to similar efforts

on the international stage. Your continued support to the ROK Armed Forces would be greatly appreciated.

December 11, 2012

Kim, Kwan Jin
Minister of National Defense, Republic of Korea


-----

2012 **DEFENSE**
WHITE PAPER

**Contents**

Chapter
**1**

Changes in Security Environment and Challenges Ahead

Section 1 Global Security Environment
Section 2  Security Environment of Northeast Asia
Section 3 North Korean Situation and Military Threats


14
24

40
43

52
63
67

74
82

90
110

126
134


Chapter
**2**

National Security Strategy and Defense Policy

Section 1 National Security Strategy
Section 2 National Defense Policy

Chapter
**3**

Defense Posture for Comprehensive Security

Section 1 Robust Military Readiness Posture
Section 2  Integrated Civilian-Government-Military-Police Defense Posture
Section 3  Development of a Readiness Posture against Transnational and
Non-military Threats


Chapter
**4**

Development of the ROK-U.S. Alliance and Expansion of
Defense Diplomacy and Cooperation

Section 1 Development of a Future-oriented ROK-U.S. Alliance
Section 2  Wartime OPCON Transition and Building a New Combined Defense
System
Section 3 Expansion of Defense Diplomacy and Cooperation
Section 4  Contributions to International Peacekeeping Operations

Chapter
**5**

Military Support for the Development of Inter-Korean
Relationship

Section 1  Inter-Korean Military Confidence Building and Arms Control
Section 2  Repatriation of ROK POWs and South-North Joint Remains
Recovery


-----

Chapter
**6**

Establishing Advanced Military Capabilities

Section 1  National Defense Reform to Establish a Multi-functional and Highly
Efficient National Defense System
Section 2  Reorganizing the Military into a Tailored Structure
Section 3  Reforming the Force Structure for Efficiency
Section 4  Raising the Standard of the Reserve Forces
Section 5  Establishing a Defense Informatization Environment and Enhancing the
Capabilities to Counter Cyber Threats

Chapter
**7**

Building a Combat Mission Focused Advanced Military

Section 1  Reinforcing Mental Strength Education for Service Members and
Patriotism Promoting Activities for Citizens
Section 2  Improving the Education System to Cultivate Competent Cadres
Section 3  Realistic Training and Education to Build a Combat-Oriented Military
Section 4  Developing the Operations and Management System of the Defense
Workforce


**Appendix**

Special Appendix

1. Past, Present, and Future of the ROK-U.S. Alliance
2. 20 Years of ROK Armed Forces Overseas
Deployment: History and Accomplishment
3. Status of Nations that Supported the ROK
during the Korean War

Appendix

1. Status of Neighboring Countries’ Military
Strength
2. Comparison of Major Countries’ Defense
Budgets
3. Comparison of the Military Strength of the Two
Koreas
4. Comparison of the Economic Indicators between
South and North Koreas
5. Negotiation Process in North Korea’s Nuclear
Program
6. Progress of North Korea’s Missile Development
Program and Descriptions
7. Chronology of South-North Military Talks
8. Chronicles of Military Relations between South
and North Korea
9. Chronicles of North Korean Intrusions and Local
Provocations to South Korea
10. Status of Dispatch of ROK Troops Overseas
11. Budget for ROK Military Units Dispatched
Overseas
12. JOINT COMMUNIQUÉ The 43[rd] U.S.-ROK
Security Consultative Meeting
13. JOINT COMMUNIQUÉ The 44[th] U.S.-ROK
Security Consultative Meeting
14. Major International Arms Control Agreements
and Organizations
15. National Defense Organizations
16. Annual Defense Budgets
17. Status of Defense Industrial Cooperation
Agreements with Other Countries
18. Changes in Compulsory Military Service Period
19. Alternatives to Military Service
20. Combined/Joint Military Exercises and
Training
21. Composition and Major Activities of the
National Defense Committee of the National
Assembly
22. Modification of Laws and Regulations under
the Jurisdiction of the Ministry of National
Defense


142

147
153
159
168

178

182
188
200

218
227
231
235
245

254
270
274
280
285

290
307


332
340

346

350

352

353

354

354

356

357
362

374

378
379

380

384

388

391
393
394

395
396
397

399

402


Chapter
**8**

Enhancing the Efficiency of National Defense Management

Section 1  Enhancing the Efficiency of National Defense Budget Management
Section 2  Enhancing Fairness and Transparency of Weapons System Acquisition
Section 3  Optimizing Defense Resources through the Use of Private Sectors
Section 4  Enhancing the Efficiency of National Defense Resource Management
Section 5  Developing the Defense Economy in Support of the National Economy

Chapter
**9**

Improving Working Conditions for Service Members

Section 1  Improvements in Welfare
Section 2  Modernization of Military Housing
Section 3  Innovation in the Medical System
Section 4  Advancement of Military Culture
Section 5  Ensuring a Productive Working Environment


Chapter
**10**

The Armed Forces Serving the Public

Section 1 Enhancing the Public’s Rights and Benefits
Section 2  Enhancing Communication with the Public through Policies Focused on
Daily Life


-----

-----

##### Chapter 1
**Changes in Security**
**Environment and**
**Challenges Ahead**

Section 1 Global Security Environment
Section 2 Security Environment of Northeast Asia
Section 3 North Korean Situation and Military Threats


14
24


-----

**Global Security Environment**

Today’s global security environment is becoming ever more complex with
the continued presence of traditional military threats coupled with an
increase of transnational and non-military threats, against the backdrop of a
prolonged global economic downturn. In such an environment, states are
strengthening their national security while simultaneously supporting international efforts towards peace and stability. In fact, they are cooperating
with other states but at the same time treating them as competitors.

**1. International Security Threats**

Although the threat of a large-scale war has diminished since the end of

the Cold War, traditional sources of conflict such as territorial disputes,

competition for natural resources, religious and ethnic conflicts, and

separatist and irredentist movements persist, posing a serious threat to

global security. In addition, transnational and non-military threats such as

the proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD), terrorism,

cyber terrorism, piracy, and environmental disasters continue to increase,

adding to the complexity of the international security environment already

plagued by a global economic downturn.

The Middle East has become a world’s figurative powderkeg with its

various conflicts and disputes. Even though the United States completed

the withdrawal of its troop from Iraq in 2011, and is in the process of

doing the same in Afghanistan by 2014, it is continuing its ‘war on terror’

against Al Qaeda. Despite the best efforts of the international community

to mediate, Israel launched offensives on Gaza in March and November of

2012, amidst the continuing Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Moreover,


**Section**
# 1


**Major regions of conflict**

Syria

Afghanistan
Israel

Sudan

Somalia

South Sudan


-----

tensions are rising over the development of Iran’s nuclear program and

Israel’s potential response.

Meanwhile, the pro-democracy movements that emanated from Tunisia

in December 2010 and swept through the Middle East and North Africa

have become another key security issue for the international community.

Depending on how these movements in the Middle East develop, the

potential for regional instability and the involvement of the international

community cannot be ruled out.

Various forms of conflicts exist in Africa – conflicts arising from

competition for natural resources and territory, conflicts along religious

and ethnic lines, as well as civil strife related to the movements for

democracy. The conflict between Somali government troops and Al

Qaeda-backed rebels that began in January 2009 continues to this day. The

prolonged civil war in Sudan that had been fought on religious and ethnic

grounds has evolved into a war over oil and territory between Sudan and

South Sudan since the latter’s independence in July 2011. Although

relations between Sudan and South Sudan are progressing towards

normalization with both countries accepting a peace proposal put forth by

the international community in September 2012, the situation may

deteriorate in the future if covenants are not kept.

Despite financial pressures, countries in Asia continue to increase their

military strength to counter potential threats, while maritime territorial

disputes over islets between the major Asian powers are intensifying. In

addition, international competition over natural resources is emerging as a

new variable in the global security environment.

A variety of transnational and non-military threats are also continuing to

increase, posing a major threat to international security.

In addition, certain states including North Korea and Iran are threatening

international peace and security by continuing to develop nuclear

capabilities and long-range missiles. In particular, the proliferation of

WMD and long-range missiles pose a significant threat to the global

security environment given the increased likelihood that terrorist organi
zations such as Al Qaeda may gain access to WMD-related technologies

and materials through international black markets.

The threat of terrorism is also increasing. The methods of terrorist attack

are becoming more formidable, while the damage caused by random


-----

attacks on unspecified targets is becoming more devastating. Terrorist acts

are being perpetrated by international groups such as Al Qaeda as well as

by home-grown armed groups.[1]

Advancements in information technology are leading to various forms

of cyber terrorism[2] whose resultant damage is rapidly increasing in

magnitude. Cyber attacks are emerging as a new security threat as the

entities that carry them out are becoming more organized, targeting

national security related agencies and key national information networks.

Securing sea lanes has become another security issue due to the increase

in pirate activities. According to the International Maritime Organization,

pirate activities worldwide increased by 11.3 percent from a total of 489 in

2010 to 544 in 2011.

Large-scale natural disasters, such as the 2011 major earthquake and

tsunami in Japan, as well as the severe floodings in Bangkok, Thailand,

have also emerged as a new security issue requiring joint action by the

international community. In particular, the radiation leak from the

Fukushima nuclear plant in Japan highlighted the importance of nuclear

plant safety as well as the serious consequences of accidents at nuclear

power plants. As such, this issue was discussed as a key topic during the

2012 Seoul Nuclear Security Summit.

Moreover, anxiety over the global economic crisis is increasing as the

financial crisis that began in the United States spilled over to Europe.

Although it is unlikely that such a global economic crisis will pose a direct

threat to global security, it nevertheless complicates the global security

environment in that it could exacerbate elements of conflict, and bring

about a change to the international economic order and the regional

security structure.

**2. Efforts of the International Community to build Peace**
**and Stability**

Some of the major threats to global peace and stability today include the

development of nuclear capabilities and long-range missiles by Iran and

North Korea, terrorism, regional instability in the Middle East and Africa,

pirate activities in the major sea lanes, cyber attacks, and large scale


**1. Recent Major Terrorist Bombings**

Alexandria, Egypt (January 2011)
Mumbai, India (July 2011)
Oslo, Norway (July 2011)
Yala and Haad Yai, Thailand (March 2012)
Kano, Nigeria (April 2012)

**2. Various Forms of Cyber Terrorism**

Hacking, DDoS attacks, denials of
service, logic bombs, Trojan horses,
Worm viruses, HERF guns etc.


-----

natural disasters. There are challenges to resolving these threats through

traditional means as they are intertwined with a combination of issues

involving regions, ethnicities, religions, and ideologies. Therefore, a close

cooperation and response by the international community and interna
tional organizations is required.

The development of nuclear capabilities and long-range missiles by Iran

and North Korea threatens not only regional security, but global peace and

security as well. While maintaining close cooperation, the international

community is combining negotiations with sanctions in order to prevent

Iran’s nuclear development. Meanwhile, in April 2012, North Korea

test-launched a long-range missile, in violation of the UN Security

Council Resolutions 1718 and 1874 that prohibit North Korea from

developing nuclear weapons and launching ballistic missiles and satellites.

In response, the UN Security Council issued a presidential statement

condemning North Korea’s actions.

The Nuclear Security Summit has been held since 2010 as the threat of

nuclear proliferation and nuclear terrorism increased. At the Nuclear

Security Summit, a wide array of issues that go beyond the prevention of

threats of nuclear terrorism, such as the prevention of illegal trade of

nuclear materials, the protection of nuclear material and facilities, as well

as nuclear power safety, are discussed, and a consensus is being expanded

on these issues. The Nuclear Security Summit was first held in

Washington D.C. in 2010 with the goal of creating a safer and more

peaceful world free from nuclear terrorism. The second Nuclear Security

Summit[3] was held in Seoul in March 2012, with 53 states participating.

The Seoul Communiqué adopted at the conclusion of the Summit outlined

the responsibilities of each state to uphold nuclear security in order to

prevent nuclear and radiological terrorism, the need for international

cooperation, the voluntary efforts of each state to minimize nuclear

material, the role of International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and the

correlation between nuclear security and atomic energy safety.

The United States and many other states are continuing the ‘war on

terror’ against Al Qaeda and the Taliban in Afghanistan through the

International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)[4] under North Atlantic

Treaty Organization (NATO) and in conjunction with local Afghan forces.

By eliminating Osama Bin Laden, the leader of Al Qaeda, in May 2011,


**3. The Seoul Nuclear Security**
**Summit [(]26−27 March 2012[)]**

10,000 attendees including the heads of
53 countries and 4 international
organizations (58 in total), as well as
their staffs. President Lee Myung-bak
held 26 summit talks with the heads of
24 countries and 2 international
organizations.

**4. International Security Assistance**
**Force [(]ISAF[)]**

Multinational force formed in
accordance with a UN Security Council
resolution to assist Afghanistan in
maintaining internal security and
carrying out post-war reconstruction
efforts.


-----

the Obama administration of the United States has weakened the Al Qaeda

forces but at the same time is pursuing a peaceful resolution through

negotiations with the Taliban. As a result of these efforts, the United States

announced its plans to withdraw troops from Afghanistan in June 2011.

Following this announcement, other key allies within ISAF have

announced similar plans to withdraw their troops, while discussions on

transferring the responsibilities for internal security to the Afghanistan

government by 2014, as well as providing further assistance continue.

Since July 2010, the Republic of Korea (ROK) government has been

assisting in post-war reconstruction of Afghanistan by deploying a

Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT), while the ROK Ashena unit

carries out protection missions for the base and the PRT.

The Middle East pro-democracy movements that began in Tunisia have

brought down the dictatorial regime of not only Tunisia, but of Yemen,

Egypt, and Libya as well. In particular, the collapse of the Gaddafi regime

in Libya was not only a result of popular resistance within the country, but

also of the United Nations Security Council’s resolve to intervene

militarily, and of the NATO’s political and military assistance. Moreover,

the United Nations, the Arab League, Russia, China, the EU, and other key

countries and international organizations have been cooperating to resolve

the crisis in Syria, which began in March 2011. The United Nations

Security Council dispatched a special envoy to Syria to press the

government to cease the bloodshed. The international community is

pressuring the Syrian government for a peaceful solution by employing

diplomatic means and leaving open the possibility of a military

intervention.

In Africa, the 50-year war in Sudan ended with South Sudan declaring

independence from Sudan, and joining the UN as its 193[rd] member on 14

July 2011. This came about as a result of mediation efforts by the African

Union (AU) and the United Nations. Although conflict between Sudan and

South Sudan continued over oil and territory, both countries agreed to a

peace compromise proposed by the international community in September

2012.

The ROK government initiated steps to deploy peacekeeping troops to

South Sudan, and the National Assembly approved the government’s plan

to deploy the UN South Sudan Mission in September 2012.


-----

The EU, NATO, and the international community are responding to

piracy in Somali waters by operating a multinational navy. The ROK

government, since March 2009, has been contributing to the effort to

secure the safety of sea channels by deploying the ROK navy’s Cheonghae

Unit to Somali waters.

As the internet continues to rapidly develop, cyber attacks are posing a

serious threat to not only everyday life, but also to national security. In

particular, cyber attacks perpetrated by enemy states are posing a critical

challenge to security. In response, countries are formulating cyber security

strategies and establishing organizations dedicated to confronting this

challenge.

The international community is also increasing its efforts to deal with

large-scale natural disasters. In March 2011, a massive earthquake
(magnitude of 9.0 on the Richter Scale) and a super-sized tsunami hit

northeastern Japan, leading to a disaster that damaged the Fukushima

nuclear power plant causing radiation leakage. In October 2011, one third

of Thailand was declared a disaster zone following heavy flooding, while

an earthquake measuring 7.3 on the Richter Scale caused numerous deaths

in Turkey. The international community carried out combined recovery

efforts by dispatching relief teams to the disaster stricken areas and

providing medical and emergency supplies.


-----

**Security Environment of**
**Northeast Asia**

In Northeast Asia, mutual exchanges and cooperation for regional peace and
stability, as well as economic advancement are increasing. At the same
time, anxiety over security due to competition for regional ascendancy
continues, amidst persisting elements of tension between nations, such as
discrepancies in the perceptions of past histories, territorial disputes, and
demarcation of territorial waters.

**1. Regional Security Environment**

Northeast Asia is a region where the interests of military and economic

powers such as the United States, Japan, China, and Russia intersect.

Countries in Northeast Asia are undertaking efforts towards mutual

cooperation while at the same time keeping each other in check, in order

to secure a position of regional ascendancy as well as to fulfill national

interest.

In 2011, the United States issued a foreign policy[1] related to politics,

economy, and strategies that focuses on the Asia-Pacific region. In

accordance with this policy, the United States is strengthening its

traditional security cooperation relationships with five key allies including

the ROK, Japan, Australia, the Philippines, and Thailand, while

constructing a more effective system of multilateral security in the region.

Moreover, the United States is strengthening security cooperation in the

region in the form of two trilateral arrangements (ROK, United States, and

Japan / United States, Japan, and Australia), centering on humanitarian


**Section**
# 2


**1. United States Foreign Policy**
**Focused on the Asia-Pacific Region**

U.S. foreign policy concentrating on the
broad set of challenges and
opportunities related to the security and
prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region.


-----

assistantce and disaster relief.

China is expanding the scope of its security cooperation and

strengthening its strategic partnerships with Russia and other neighboring

states of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) through the

Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO).[2] Since its first combined

military exercise in 2005(‘Peace Mission’), the SCO have held five

additional exercises between 2007 and 2011. In particular, the combined

naval exercises between China and Russia in 2012 showcased the Organi
zation’s military cooperation relationships.

The ROK, China, and Japan are also advancing security and economic

cooperation – summit meetings[3] among the three countries have taken

place under the framework of ASEAN+3[4] since 1999, while a separate

meeting has also taken place since December 2008.

Moreover, mutual economic exchange between the ROK, China, and

Japan is increasing, as well as the level of human and material resource

interdependency. Negotiations have begun for a Free Trade Agreement
(FTA) between the ROK and China, while discussions over a

ROK-China-Japan FTA are ongoing. This increase in trilateral economic

cooperation and interdependency among the three nations could also set in

motion a change to the traditional security interests of the three countries

to a certain degree.

In addition to these efforts, military exchanges between countries in the

region are actively taking place. By engaging in bilateral and trilateral

ministerial meetings and military dialogue during the annual Asian

Security Summit (ASS)[5] in Singapore, countries in the region are making

efforts towards military confidence-building and the establishment of

regional stability. Through senior officer-level bilateral dialogues, Japan

and China, as well as Japan and Russia are expanding the scope of their

exchanges. In July 2011, the Japanese Defense Minister met with the Vice

Chief of General Staff of the People’s Liberation Army during his visit to

China, while Russia participated in the multinational RIMPAC (Rim of the

Pacific) exercise for the first time in 2012.

However, disagreements over perceptions of history and distortions of

history textbooks, as well as sovereignty disputes over islets between

China and Japan, and Japan and Russia, remain as potential elements that

could increase security tensions in Northeast Asia. In addition, maritime


**2. Shanghai Cooperation Organization**
**(SCO)**

Multilateral cooperative body composed
of China, Russia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, and Tajikistan.
*[ Observer nations (4): India, Pakistan, ]
Mongolia, Iran.

**3. ROK, China, Japan summit meetings**

1[st] meeting: Japan (Decmber 2008)
2[nd] meeting: China (October 2009)
3[rd] meeting: The ROK (May 2010)
4[th] meeting: Japan (May 2011)
5[th] meeting: China (May 2012)

**4. ASEAN+3**

Permanent meeting body between
ASEAN (10 countries to date) and the
ROK, China, and Japan, which started in
1997. Along with the ASEAN+3, a
separate ROK, China, Japan trilateral
summit meeting is being held since
1999.

**5. Asia Security Summit [(]ASS[)]**

A defense dialogue forum at the highest
level with Asia-Pacific and 27 European
Defense ministers and national security
experts has been held annually at the
Shangri-La Hotel in Singapore. ASS is
also termed as the Shangri-La Dialogue.


-----

Refer to Status of Neighboring
Countries’ Military Strength

**China**

**Number of Troops: Approx. 2,285,000**
**Key Weapon Systems: 1 aircraft carrier, 71**
submarines, 1,751 fighters and bombers
**Defense Budget: USD 89.8Bn.**

**Chart 1-1. The Military Strength of the 4 powers surrounding the Korean Peninsula**

**Russia**

**Number of Troops: Approx. 956,000**
**Key Weapon Systems: 1 aircraft carrier, 65**
submarines, 1,765 fighters and bombers
**Defense Budget: USD 52.7Bn.**
**Force Upgrades: Nuclear capability enhancement,**
development of stealth fighters and new missiles, **Japan**
strengthening of space capabilities

**Number of Troops: Approx. 248,000**
**Key Weapon Systems: 6 Aegis-class ships, 18**
submarines, 348 fighters and bombers
**Defense Budget: USD 58.4Bn.**
**Force Upgrades: Strengthening of the MD [(]missile**
defense[)] system, introduction of next generation
fighters, enhancement of Aegis ship capabilities

1 aircraft carrier, 71

[(]DF-4D[)], and **United States**

[)], strengthening of **Number of Troops: Approx. 1,569,000**

**Key Weapon Systems: 11 aircraft carriers, 71**
submarines, 3,191 fighters and bombers
**Defense Budget: USD 739.3Bn.**
**Force Upgrades: Force upgrade of the Pacific**
Command, rotational force deployment in the
Asia-Pacific region, realignment of U.S. Forces in the
ROK and Japan, pursuit of strategic flexibility


*[ Source: ][The Military Balance 2012][ (London: The International Institute for Strategic Studies, March 2012) and ]

others (defense budgets are for 2011)

*[ Number of fighters and bombers includes naval aircraft. Number of submarines includes strategic nuclear ]

submarines

demarcation disputes including the scope of Economic Exclusive Zones
(EEZ) are also potential sources of conflict, as countries in the region

continue to adhere to a position that put forward their own national

agendas.

**2. Defense Policy and Military Status**

In Northeast Asia, the United States continues to maintain military

superiority while China and Japan are in competition to increase their

naval and air force capabilities. With China emerging as the third space

power after the United States and Russia, competition in outer space is


-----

becoming overheated between the countries in the region. Chart 1-1

summarizes the military strength of the four major countries in the region

surrounding the Korean Peninsula.

**| The U.S.’s Defense Policy and Military Status | The United States**

is currently pursuing a new military strategy in order to meet the

demands of a changing strategic environment, characterized by defense

cuts, end of war in Iraq, ongoing drawdown of U.S. forces from

Afghanistan, and the increase of China’s influence and Asia’s importance.

In January 2012, the U.S. Department of Defense issued the new

‘Defense Strategic Guidance,’[6] which evaluates the current strategic

environment and lays out the strategy for each region in order to

maintain its global leadership. In the ‘Defense Strategic Guidance,’ the

United States noted its intention to maintain or increase the level of U.S.

forces in the Asia-Pacific region, as it evaluated the Asia-Pacific region

as the top priority region in its global strategy.

The U.S. military is focusing on stabilizing Afghanistan following the

completion of its withdrawal from Iraq – withdrawal from Afghanistan is

scheduled to conclude by 2014. In conjunction with the withdrawal from

Afghanistan, the United States Army plans to reduce its standing army

from 570,000 to 490,000. At the same time, the United States Army is

transforming itself into a more efficient force by modernizing its network

systems, land combat vehicles, joint tactical vehicles, and personal

equipment.

The U.S. Department of Defense, evaluating China’s A2/AD[7] capability

as a key challenge, is continuing to strengthen its naval and air force

capabilities that can execute new operational concepts such as ‘Air-Sea

Battles’[8] in order to effectively counter such capability. In particular, the

U.S. Navy is strengthening its capabilities in the Asia-Pacific. It plans to

operate a maximum of six aircraft carriers in the Asia-Pacific by 2020,[9]

while maintaining its existing aircraft carrier strike groups and carrier air

wings. Moreover, the U.S. Navy plans to deploy more than half of its

submarine force, including the new Virginia-class strategic nuclear

submarines, to the Asia-Pacific region. The Air Force is continuing to

enhance its long-range strike capabilities and is steadfastly pursuing the

transition of its forces in the direction of unmanned platforms, while


**6. Defense Strategic Guidance**

Original Title: ‘Sustaining U.S. Global
Leadership: Priorities for 21[st] Century
Defense.’

**7. Anti-Access and Area-Denial [(]A2/**
**AD[)]**

Concept developed after the conflict
over the Taiwan straits between the U.S.
and China in 1996.
*[ Anti-Access (A2): Prevention of entry ]
of U.S. forces into Chinese areas of
operation
*[ Area-Denial (AD): Denial of ]
unrestricted military acts by U.S.
forces in Chinese areas of operation

**8. Air Sea Battle**

Joint operational concept between the
U.S. Navy and Air Force to overcome the
A2/AD capabilities, through utilization
of air power, naval aircraft, and
submarine/surface-launched missiles.
*[ Development of this concept began in ]
2006 to counter China’s A2/AD
capabilities in relation to Taiwan and
the East and South China Seas

**9. U.S. Navy’s Operation of Aircraft**
**Carriers in the Asia-Pacific**

In a speech given at the Asia Security
Summit (Shangri-La Dialogue) in June
2012, U.S. Secretary of Defense Panetta
stated that the U.S. will adjust the ratio
between its naval forces in the Pacific
and Atlantic from the current ratio of 5:5
to a 6:4 ratio by 2020. Secretary
Panetta also stated that the U.S. plans
to deploy six aircraft carriers to the
Pacific region as part of this initiative.


-----

additionally deploying the newest fighters, strategic airlifters, aerial

refueling aircraft, and unmanned reconnaissance vehicles to key force

projection bases in the Asia-Pacific: Guam and Hawaii.

The United States is increasing the role and activities of its forces in the

Asia-Pacific region by strengthening its rotational force deployments and

combined exercises. In particular, a significant portion of Marines

currently in Okinawa, Japan, are scheduled to redeploy to Guam, Hawaii,

and Darwin, Australia, by 2014.

Meanwhile, the ROK and the U.S. agreed to maintain the current level

of USFK forces through the Joint Communiqué issued at the 44[th] ROK-U.

S. Security Consultative Meeting(SCM) held in October 2012. In addition,

the ROK and the U.S. are continuing to maintain close cooperation to

transition the wartime operational control (OPCON) to the ROK by 1

December 2015, as agreed during the ROK-U.S. Summit in June 2010.

**| Japan’s Defense Policy and Military Status | Japan’s basic policy**

for national defense is to prevent direct invasion, to defeat such invasion

in the event it occurs, and to uphold Japan’s independence and peace.

Japan has observed the Three Non-Nuclear Principles and adhered to the

principle of civilian control of the military while maintaining the

Exclusively Defense-Oriented Policy[10] in accordance with its Consti
tution.

In the 2010 National Defense Program Guidelines, Japan identified the

challenges from China and North Korea as its main security issue, and

changed its defense force concept from a Basic Defense Force Concept to

a Dynamic Defense Force[11] to prepare for such challenges. Force

enhancement in accordance with the new concept of Dynamic Defense

Force on the southwest archipelago in response to the challenges posed by

China, while in the past a northern focus was taken in response to the

challenges posed by Russia. In terms of its ground forces, Japan is

enhancing its mobility and its island defense capabilities while reducing its

conventional forces. As for its naval and air force capabilities, Japan is

strengthening its forces based on the concept of selection and concen
tration, improving its long-range operational capabilities with advanced

precision strike weapons.

The Ground Self-Defense Force (GSDF), which is composed of eight


The USS George Washington enters
Busan port to take part in an ROK-U.S.Japan combined naval exercise (June
2012)

**10. Exclusively Defense-Oriented**
**Policy**

Passive defense concept of employing
military forces only when attacked and
maintaining a defense force at a
minimum level required for such
self-defense.

**11. Dynamic Defense Force**

Defense concept based on operating
defense forces around the principles of
immediate response, mobility, and
flexibility, to effectively deal with
contingencies before the onset of crisis.


-----

divisions, six brigades, one armored division, and a central readiness

force, is developing an operating system capable of performing a variety

of roles, in accordance with the Dynamic Defense Force concept. In

particular, during the ‘2011 − 2015 Mid-Term Defense Program’ period,

Japan plans to reduce the number of tanks and artillery, deploy coastal

surveillance and early response units to the Southwest region, and improve

the effectiveness of its air defense capabilities by deploying upgraded

surface-to-air missiles while transitioning to an organization of seven

surface-to-air missile units from the current number of eight.

The Maritime Self-Defense Force (MSDF) is comprised of four escort

flotillas, five regional district commands, and nine air fleets (five fixed

wing, four rotary), operating 48 combatant ships, two 13,500-ton frigates

with helicopter launch capabilities, as well as 18 submarines. The

‘Mid-Term Defense Program,’ to be carried out between 2011 and 2015,

encompasses the following upgrades to Japan’s maritime capabilities:

procurement of new submarines and additional helicopter-equipped

frigates, as well as the fielding of new patrol aircraft. These upgrades are

designed to increase the MSDF’s rapid deployment and response

capabilities.

The Air Self-Defense Force (ASDF) maintains 12 flight squadrons. The

number of fighters operated by the ASDF is 348, with the F-15 being its

main aircraft. During the ‘2011−2015 Mid-Term Defense Program’ period,

Japan is pursuing the introduction of F-35 fighters to replace the old F-4,

and is upgrading its existing F-15s and F-2s. Moreover, the ASDF is

developing the next-generation cargo plane (XC-2) to replace its fleet of

obsolete cargo planes (C-1). In addition, in March 2012, the ASDF

strengthened its joint missile defense capabilities with the United States by

relocating its Air Defense Command to Yokota Air Base, home to the U.S.

Air Forces in Japan. In order to strengthen its ballistic missile defense

system, Japan is upgrading its radar systems, deploying additional PAC-3s

in Okinawa, and increasing the number of its Aegis ships equipped with

Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD) systems for the purpose of force

enhancement.

Japan is accelerating its space program with the enactment of the ‘Basic

Space Law’ in May 2008. The 2010 National Defense Program Guidelines

outlines the intention to strengthen intelligence collection and C4ISR


The Japanese government has selected
the F-35 as its next-generation fighter.

**PAC Patriot Advanced Capability**

**C4ISR Command, Control,**
Communications, Computers,
Intelligence, Surveillance and
Reconnaissance


-----

capabilities through the development and utilization of space, while Japan

amended its ‘Law concerning Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency’ in

June 2012 by nullifying a passage limiting the activities of aerospace

development agencies to peaceful endeavors. Moreover, Japan’s Ministry

of Defense is preparing itself against cyber warfare by evaluating cyber

threats, establishing dedicated cyber units, and developing cyber weapons.

**| China’s Defense Policy and Military Status | On the basis of a**

traditional active defense strategy, China advocates ‘Victory in Local

Wars through Intelligence,’ and is undertaking the initiative to modernize

its forces with the objective of making them more ‘intelligent.’

The Ground Force is streamlining its organization and structure, while

strengthening its rapid response capabilities such as intelligence-based

long-range mobility operations and amphibious operations. In 2003, the

Ground Force initiated a plan to establish army aviation groups (regiment)

at 18 Group Armies and currently there are 10 Aviation regiments at 8

Group Armies. The Ground Force operates three amphibious mechanized

divisions (brigades), in addition to one marine land combat brigade. In

terms of equipment modernization, the Ground Force has fielded

next-generation armored vehicles (ZBD-type) and Z-10 attack helicopters

since 2008, while the latest T-99 tank became operational in 2010.

The Navy has adopted four Sovremenny-class destroyers (7,900-ton)

and 12 Kilo-class submarines (3,000-ton) from Russia between 1995 and

2007 to strengthen its blue-water operational capabilities. Moreover, the

Navy has fielded two new Jin-class strategic nuclear submarines equipped

with JL-II ballistic missiles (8,000km+range) as of 2010, with a total of

six to be operational by 2017. On September 25, 2012, the Navy commis
sioned the ‘Liaoning,’ its first aircraft carrier originally acquired from the

Ukraine in 1998, after refurbishing the vessel and carrying out ten sea

trials since August 2011.

The Air Force retired the dated J-6 fighter (Chinese produced MiG-19)

as of June 12, 2010, as part of its efforts to modernize its fighter fleet. The

J-20 stealth fighter continues to be developed after its first test flight on

January 11, 2011. Moreover, the Air Force has fielded four KJ-2000 early

warning and control aircraft, which were converted from IL-76 cargo

aircraft, along with four KJ-200 early warning and control aircraft


The first Chinese aircraft carrier
Liaoning anchored at Dalian.


-----

developed based on the Y-8 mid-size cargo plane, as well as ten H-6U

aerial refueling aircraft reconstituted from the H-6 bomber.

In the space domain, the Air Force successfully destroyed an obsolete

satellite using a ballistic missile in a test carried out in January 2007.

Following the successful launch of a moon-exploration satellite in 2007

and 2010, and the third manned spacecraft in 2008, China launched the

experimental space station Tiangong 1 as well as its fourth manned

spacecraft in 2011 to conduct testing on docking procedures. With the

success of its fifth manned spacecraft launch and space docking in 2012,

China continues to pursue a course towards becoming a major space

power.

**| Russia’s Defense Policy and Military Status | Since October 2008,**

Russia has been actively undertaking defense reforms with the goal of

creating a defense force that can rapidly respond to future security

threats. In May 2009 and February 2010 respectively, Russia announced

its ‘National Security Strategy to 2020’[12] and ‘Military Doctrine,’[13] each

providing a blueprint for its mid to long-term defense policy.

The basic framework of Russia’s defense reform is to transform its

armed forces into a million men standing army. Moreover, the command

structure will be reorganized from a four-stage structure (military district –

army – division – regiment) to a three-stage structure (military district –

operations command – brigade) with six military districts being dissolved.

In addition, four regional commands have been established that can

operate joint forces towards the direction of threat.

The modernization of Russia’s weapons system is being carried out in

accordance with the ‘Weapons System Acquisition Plan for the Russian

Armed Forces 2020,’ whereby Russia will retain its nuclear deterrent,

while focusing on the modernization of its conventional weapons in

response to possible low-intensity conflicts. Russia is modernizing its

outdated equipment investing 186 billion USD by 2015. Russia has

additionally deployed one strategic nuclear submarine (Borei-class, 19,400

ton) and ten fighter bombers (Su-34) in order to strategically expand its

force projection capabilities, while also planning to deploy an additional

strategic nuclear submarine before the end of 2012. Moreover, Russia

plans to deploy multi-purpose fighters (Su-30SM), air defense missile


**12. National Security Strategy to 2020**

Policy paper that includes an extensive
security structure encompassing
politics, economy, and society. This
policy paper replaced the ‘Russian
National Security Doctrine’ of 2000 and
outlines the strengthening of Russia’s
‘stature as a global power’ as the
objective of Russia’s national security,
while proposing means for Russia’s
entry into the top five largest global
economies, as well as its stable
economic development against the
backdrop of a multi-polar international
order.

**13. Military Doctrine**

Strategic doctrine regarding national
defense, revised for the third time
following previous revisions in 1993 and
2000. The Doctrine identifies the
eastern expansion of NATO, the
establishment of the United States’
Missile Defense system, and the
proliferation of WMD as the most
serious military challenges. The New
Doctrine also includes an overseas
troop deployment clause aimed at
protecting Russian nationals living
abroad, while defining nuclear weapons
as a means of deterrence. The Doctrine
further emphasizes the increase of
advanced conventional weapons in
preparation for possible low-intensity
conflicts.


-----

systems (S-400), as well as French Mistral-class transport ships in the

future.

The Russian Ground Forces are in the process of fielding 30,000

multiple-launch rockets (Tornado-G, range of 90km) and 10,000 armored

and mechanized vehicles in an effort to modernize their forces. This move

is to meet the requirements of rapid response forces being organized in the

newly established military districts. In 2012, the Ground Forces deployed

the light armored vehicle Lynx, known for its superior defense

capabilities, to the Southern Military District, and are planning to replace

their current tanks and infantry combat vehicles (BMP-class) with

defensively superior, new weapon systems.

In February 2012, the Navy announced its ‘Mid to Long-term Navy

Development Plan,’ which indicated a move away from a concept of

quantitative increase of existing ships, towards the construction of forces

optimally aligned to the combat environment of each fleet. Moreover, the

Navy has deployed new strategic nuclear submarines equipped with the

latest Liner intercontinental ballistic missiles, and for the long-term, plans

to modernize all weapons and equipment of their coastal defense units and

naval infantry (marines).

The Russian Air Force is upgrading its precision strike and air defense

capabilities. To this end, it is upgrading the capabilities of its Tu-95

long-range strategic bombers, as well as its Tu-160 fourth generation

supersonic strategic bombers. In addition, the Air Force plans to field 48

Su-35 multi-purpose fighters between 2010 and 2015, while developing

and operationally deploying the T-50 fifth generation stealth fighter. The

Air Force is also deploying S-400 surface-to-air missiles in the suburbs of

Moscow and other important areas.

Russia continues to improve its space technology and capabilities based

on the idea that achieving supremacy in space is a critical element of

victory in modern warfare. Russia is utilizing its 100 plus satellites for

intelligence gathering, communications, and local navigation, while also

possessing the capability to intercept satellites.

Russia’s Eastern Military District Command, located in Khabarovsk,

near the Korean Peninsula, is comprised of the Ground Forces (consisting

of four armies), the Pacific Fleet Command, and the 3[rd] Air and Air

Defense Forces Command. The key assets that are operational under this


Topol-M (Russian ICBM)


-----

District Command consist of land weapon systems including

self-propelled artillery and MRLs, naval assets including submarines and

destroyers, as well as fighters and reconnaissance aircraft including the

MiG-31 and Su-27.


-----

**North Korean Situation and**
**Military Threats**

Following its third generation power succession, North Korea has focused
on solidifying the regime and internal unity, while maintaining its large
conventional military forces, developing and increasing the number of its
weapons of mass destruction to include nuclear weapon, and continuing
armed provocations such as the attack on the ROK Ship Cheonan as well as
the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island), thereby posing a significant threat to
the security of the Republic of Korea.

**1. North Korean Situation**

**| Internal Situation | North Korea is a single party dictatorship**

regime ruled by the Korean Workers’ Party (KWP), espousing a socialist

state based on its Juche and Military First Ideologies. As the regime

instability increased after the 1990s due to the structural deficiencies of

socialism, aggravation of economic difficulties, and international

isolation, the North Korean regime strengthened its Military First Policy,

while devoting efforts to constructing a ‘strong and prosperous nation.’

North Korea focused on preparing the power succession following the

decline of Kim Jong Il’s health in 2008, and on September 28, 2010, at

the third Party Delegates’ Conference held in 44 years, it formalized the

third generation power succession. Upon Kim Jong Il’s death on

December 17, 2011, Kim Jong Un was selected as the Supreme

Commander on December 30, before assuming the title of First Secretary

of the Korean Workers’ Party on April 11, 2012, and First Chairman of

the National Defense Commission on April 13, 2012, de facto

completion of the power succession process.


**Section**
# 3


-----

Although North Korea pursued a reform and open policy, albeit limited

in nature, while maintaining its socialist economy since the issuance of its

‘7·1 Economic Management Reform Measures,’[1] it has failed to revive its

economy. Moreover, the continuation of its socialist planned economy

system was at jeopardy due to the exacerbation of the already ailing North

Korean economy and the deepening of its financial difficulties caused by

the international sanctions placed on North Korea following its second

nuclear test and long-range ballistic missile launch. To overcome this

crisis, North Korea swiftly initiated the ‘150 day battle’[2] and other full

mobilization-based economic revival efforts, as well as a currency

reform.[3] However, a rapid rise in consumer prices, contraction of

economic activities, and estrangement of public support led to the failure

of these initiatives, thus, intensifying social unrest despite the regime’s

original intentions. Furthermore, it is assessed that although North Korea

is attempting to implement new economic management reform measures

after the launch of the Kim Jong Un regime, inadequate conditions are

delaying the full scale implementation of these measures.

The inflow of outside culture such as capitalism are contributing to the

decline of the North Korean people’s beliefs and the erosion of their

loyalty towards the regime, while incidents of corruption of officials,

civilian crimes, and other deviant behavior are increasing. In response,

North Korea is aggressively carrying out measures focused on

strengthening internal unity within the regime – organizing various public

rallies and indoctrination sessions, intensifying surveillance and control

through the use of public intelligence agencies, and implementing a policy

of monitoring defectors along its border.

**| Policies towards South Korea | Since the summit meeting between**

the two Koreas in 2000, North Korea has attained economic benefits

from South Korea emphasizing the spirit of ‘by ourselves’ which focuses

on North and South Koreans both being ‘Koreans.’ However,

immediately after the inauguration of President Lee Myung-bak in 2008,

North Korea criticized South Korea’s policy as being hostile and unilat
erally suspended inter-Korean dialogues, and since then has maintained a

hard line policy towards South Korea. In 2010, North Korea committed

two acts of provocation, which were the sinking of the ROK Ship


**1. 7·1 Economic Management Reform**
**Measures**

Economic reform measures adopted
from July 1, 2002, partially incorporating
elements of a market economy,
designed to rehabilitate an economy
weakened during the 1990s.

**2. 150 Day Battle**

Nationwide labor mobilization
movement aimed at overcoming the
economic crisis of 2009.

**3. Currency Reform**

Measure implemented on November 30,
2009, mandating the exchange of the
old currency to a new currency at the
exchange rate of 100:1.


-----

_Cheonan by a torpedo, and the indiscriminate shelling of Yeonpyeongdo_
(island).

In 2011, North Korea employed a dual policy of hard-line and soft-line

strategy of rhetorically threatening military provocation while aggres
sively calling for dialogue with South Korea. Since the beginning of the

year, North Korea has proposed the resumption of dialogue with South

Korea through its New Year’s Joint Editorial, as well as through combined

statements from its government, party, and organizations. On January 20,

a proposal for a high level inter-Korean military meeting to ease tensions

was even made through an open letter from North Korea’s Minister of

People’s Armed Forces. Although a preliminary meeting was held in

February, North Korea caused the talks to break down by repeating its

stance on the provocative attack it carried out on the ROK Ship Cheonan

and the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island). Afterwards, North Korea

strongly criticized the ROK-U.S. combined exercises (KR/FE), while on

March 23, it threatened to ‘aim, fire and destroy’ balloons launched by

South Korean civilians containing propaganda materials. In June, North

Korea disclosed records of closed-door between the two Koreas, declaring

an end to dialogue with the South Korean government.

Between August and September, North Korea called for a change in

South Korea’s North Korean policy, the cessation of the UFG exercise, as

well as the resignation of the South Korean Minister of Unification. In

October, North Korea criticized South Korea’s normal naval activities as

well as the deployment of propaganda balloons by South Korean civilian

organizations as ‘acts of war’ and threatened to launch military strikes.

Following Kim Jong Il’s death on December 17, 2011, North Korea

began to slander South Korea for its decision to limit the dispatch of

condolence delegations to the North through nationwide large-scale public

rallies. Through various media outlets, North Korea criticized South Korea

on approximately 400 occasions in January 2012 alone, and in March,

continued its criticism by directing it against the South Korean armed

forces’ slogan as well as the KR/FE exercise. In April, North Korea

strengthened its propaganda campaign against South Korea by vehemently

criticizing the South Korean government and the ruling party in relation to

the National Assembly elections. With the failure of its long-range missile

launch, North Korea issued a crude criticism of the South Korean


**KR/FE Key Resolve/ Foal Eagle**

**UFG Ulchi Freedom Guardian**


-----

government through its Supreme Command on April 18, while increasing

the level of its threat by threatening to carry out attacks against South

Korean government departments and some media agencies in Seoul.

Moreover, tensions between the two Koreas continued as North Korea

issued military threats on South Korea through a Special Operations

Action Group of the Supreme Command on April 23, as well as through

an open notice issued by the General Staff Department on June 4.

In this manner, North Korea aims to unify the Korean Peninsula under

communism by attempting to divide public opinion in the South and drive

a wedge in the ROK-U.S. Alliance, and by continuing its military threat to

South Korea through developing nuclear weapons and missiles among

other means. Meanwhile, no efforts are being taken by North Korea to

build military confidence that would ease tensions and establish a

foundation for peace.

**| Foreign Policy | North Korea considers weapons of mass**

destruction, including nuclear weapons, as tools for regime survival.

Despite the imposition of sanctions through resolution 1874[4] of the UN

Security Council following its second nuclear test in May 2009, North

Korea has used brinksmanship[5] to sustain the regime, making full use of

the nuclear weapons card.

North Korea attempted to improve its relations with the United States by

taking advantage of the amicable atmosphere following the U.S.-China

summit meeting of January 2011. The atmosphere for dialogue for

resolving the North Korean nuclear issue was maintained following the

first and second talks of July and October, respectively, the groundwork

for which was laid by former U.S. President Carter’s earlier visit to North

Korea. Even with the death of Kim Jong Il, the third round of talks was

held in February 2012, resulting in the ‘2·29 U.S.-North Korea

Agreement.’[6] However, the United States invalidated the Agreement

following North Korea’s launch of a long-range missile on April 13, 2012,

and the UN Security Council issued a presidential statement warning

North Korea of strong sanctions.

North Korea is focusing on circumventing the sanctions imposed by the

international community by strengthening its relations with China, and

securing political and economic assistance in the process. From 2010 until


**4. UN Security Council Resolution**
**1874**

Resolution adopted unanimously by the
UN Security Council on June 12, 2009,
following North Korea’s second nuclear
test.

**5. Brinksmanship**

Extreme negotiation tactics employed
by North Korea during the nuclear talks
with the United States.

**6. 2·29 U.S.-North Korea Agreement**

Agreement following the 3[rd] U.S.-North
Korea high level talks (February 23−24)
held at Beijing, outlining North Korea’s
commitment to halt its nuclear and
long-range missile tests, its uranium
enrichment program, and implementing
preparation measures for
denuclearization such as re-admitting
IAEA inspection teams to North Korea.
The Agreement also outlines the United
States commitment to provide 240,000
tons of food aid to North Korea in
return.


-----

his death, Kim Jong Il sought to strengthen North Korea’s political and

economic relationship with China through three summit meetings. North

Korea is continuing its high level diplomatic efforts with China after the

launch of the Kim Jong Un regime, exemplified by Chang Sung Taek’s

visit to China between August 13 and 18.

The first North Korea-Russia summit in nine years was held on August

24, 2011 during which agreements were reached on issues including the

resumption of the Six-Party Talks, economic cooperation, and the

construction of gas pipe lines. Since then efforts to strengthen economic

cooperation between the two countries have continued. North Korea is

continuing its efforts to improve relations with Japan through talks on the

repatriation of Japanese citizens abducted to North Korea, as well as the

return of Japanese remains.

In addition to countries within the region, North Korea is strengthening

its exchange and cooperation with non-allied countries in Southeast Asia

and other regions, while continuing efforts to attract more investment from

European countries.

**2. Military Strategy and Military Command Structure**

**| Military Strategy | North Korea espouses the principle of**

‘Self-Sufficient National Defense’ based on the principles of its Juche

ideology, while continuing to build-up its military power. Since the

adoption of the Four-Point Military Lines in 1962, North Korea has

maintained a Military First Policy, which was maintained by Kim Jong Il

after he took power. This policy calls for the maintenance of military

superiority over South Korea as the highest priority. In the short-term, it

seems unlikely that Kim Jong Un, who came to power following Kim

Jong Il’s death, will make a shift from the previous pursuit of the Military

First Policy.

North Korea’s fundamental objective, which is the unification of Korea

under communism, seems unlikely to change under Kim Jong Un. To

achieve this objective, North Korea maintains a military strategy based on

surprise attacks, hybrid warfare, and lightning warfare while seeking

changes to a variety of tactics to counter South Korea’s advanced forces


North Korea-China Summit (Beijing, May
25, 2011)


-----

and comply with the characteristics of modern warfare. North Korea is

pursuing a concentrated upgrade of its asymmetrical forces including

weapons of mass destruction, special operation forces, long-range artillery,

underwater warfare forces, and cyber attack capabilities, while selectively

upgrading its conventional forces. In particular, as a means of local

provocation during armistice and as a primary means of attack during

wartime, North Korea’s asymmetrical forces pose a significant threat to the

ROK military.

**| Military Command Structure | The Central Military Committee of**

the KWP deliberates and rules on the means to attain the Party’s military

line and policies, as well as exercising overall purview over national

defense projects, including projects designed to strengthen armed

revolution and the war industries. The National Defense Commission is

North Korea’s supreme entity on military guidance (‘KWP Charter’

Article 3, Section 27, amended on September 28, 2010). With Kim Jong

Il given the title of eternal General Secretary of the KWP and Chairman

of the National Defense Commission, Kim Jong Un exerts command and

control over North Korea’s military organization as the de facto head,

through his capacity as the First Secretary of the KWP, First Chairman of

the National Defense Commission, Supreme Commander of the Korean

People’s Armed Forces, and Chairman of the Central Military Committee

of the KWP (North Korea’s ‘Socialist Constitution,’ Article 6, Section 3,

Clause 106, adopted on April 13, 2012).

The National Defense Commission is comprised of the General Political

Bureau, the General Staff Department, and the Ministry of the People’s

Armed Forces, which are arranged in parallel structure relative to one

another. The General Political Bureau oversees the military’s party organi
zation and political ideology, while the General Staff Department

exercises command over military operations. The Ministry of the People’s

Armed Forces exercises administrative control over the military,

encompassing diplomacy, logistics, administration, and finances, as the

representative of North Korea’s armed forces to the outside world. Chart

1-2 summarizes North Korea’s military command structure.


-----

**Chart 1-2. North Korea’s Military Command Structure**

**National Defense**
**Commission**

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|

|Body Guard Command General Political Gener Bureau Depar|Col2|Col3|Military Security Command al Staff Ministry of the People’s tment Armed Forces|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|x xxx xxx xxx||xx xx xx xx|||


Regular Corps Mechanized Corps Pyongyang CommandDefense CommandSecurity Border Corps11[th] CommandStrategic Rocket Armored Division Cavalry and DivisionInfantry DivisionArtillery DivisionAircraft Anti- CommandNaval CommandAir Force


(9)


(2)


(4)


xxx: Corps, xx: Division, PDC: Pyongyang Defense Command, Strategic Rocket Command: Former Missile

Directorate, Anti-Aircraft Division: directly subsumed under the General Staff Department in 2011 from being under

the Pyongyang Defense Command

**3. Military Capabilities**

**| Ground Force | The Ground Force is comprised of nine regular**

corps, two mechanized corps, the Pyongyang Defense Command, the

Border Security Command, the 11[th] Corps, and the Strategic Rocket

Command, for a total of 15 corps-level units organized under the General

Staff Department.

With 70 percent of the Ground Force positioned south of the

Pyongyang-Wonsan line, North Korea is maintaining a military posture

capable of conducting a surprise attack at any time. In particular, the

170mm self-propelled artillery and 240mm MRLs in forward positions are

capable of surprise, concentrated fire on South Korea’s Seoul metropolitan

area. Moreover, North Korea is strengthening its provocation capabilities

towards South Korea’s five islands on the West Sea and surrounding areas

by forward deployed amphibious and air assets in addition to the existing

artillery and MRLs in the northern coastal regions along the Northern

Limit Line (NLL).

The armored and mechanized units are continuing to modernize their

equipment, retiring their main T-54/55 tanks and replacing them with the

Cheonma tank as well as an upgraded variation of the Cheonma tank.

Moreover, by continuing to increase its armored and mechanized forces,


-----

the Ground Force is significantly augmenting its mobility and strike

capabilities as well as improving its operational flexibility.

North Korea’s special warfare forces are currently estimated at 200,000

strong. The Ground Force has a diverse array of strategic, operational, and

tactical special warfare units, including the 11[th] corps, the light infantry

division of the forward corps, and the light infantry regiment of the

forward divisions. These special warfare units are expected to penetrate

South Korea’s rear areas during wartime through various means including

the use of underground tunnels and AN-2 aircraft, attacking key targets,

assassinating key personnel, causing general disruption and executing

other hybrid operations. Chart 1-3 summarizes the key assets of the North

Korean Ground Force.

**Chart 1-3. Key Assets of the North Korean Ground Force**


**River-crossing**
**Equipment**
**approx. 3,000**


**Tanks**
**approx. 4,200**


**Armored Vehicles** **Field Artillery** **MRL**
**approx. 2,200** **approx. 8,600** **approx. 4,800**


**| Navy | Organized under the Naval Command, the Navy is comprised**

of two Fleet Commands on the East and West Seas, 13 squadrons, and

two maritime sniper brigades.

60 percent of the Navy is forward deployed to the south of the

Pyongyang-Wonsan line, allowing to maintain a surprise attack capability.

However, the geographic separation of the Eastern and Western Fleets

makes flexible operations difficult for the North Korean Navy, while its

composition of small, high-speed vessels further limits deep sea

operations.

The Navy’s surface forces are mainly comprised of small, high-speed

vessels such as guided missile patrol boats, torpedo boats, small patrol

boats, and fire support patrol craft, that will carry out missions supporting

Ground Force advancement (in connection with ground operations), as

well as coastal defense missions. Although these small vessels lack deep

sea operation capabilities, majority are forward deployed and can execute


-----

surprise attacks in offshore waters with support from radar stations, coastal

artillery, as well as surface-to-ship missile units.

The Navy’s underwater forces are comprised of 70 Romeo-class, and

shark-class submarines, as well as salmon-class submersible vehicles. The

mission of these underwater forces is to cut off sea channels, deploy

mines, attack surface vessels, and support the penetration of special

warfare units. In particular, North Korea is upgrading its underwater attack

capabilities through the development of asymmetrical capabilities

including submarines and the latest mines.

The Navy’s landing forces include some 260 air-cushioned personnel

landing crafts. By providing rapid transportation for special warfare units

such as the maritime sniper brigades as they penetrate South Korea, these

vessels will support operations designed to strike against key military and

strategic facilities and secure key areas. Chart 1-4 summarizes the key

assets of the North Korean Navy.

**Chart 1-4. Key Assets of the North Korean Navy**


**Surface**
**Combatants**
**approx. 420**


**Mine**
**Sweeping Boats**
**approx. 30**


**Submarines** **Landing Vessels**
**approx. 70** **approx. 260**


**Other Vessels**
**approx. 30**


**| Air Force | Under the Air Force Command, the North Korean Air**

Force is comprised of four flight divisions, two tactical transport

brigades, two air force sniper brigades, and an air defense unit.

The Air Force divides North Korea into four zones, and deploys its

forces accordingly. Although the majority of the North Korean Air Force

aircraft are outdated models, approximately 40 percent of the 820 combat

aircraft are forward deployed south of the Pyongyang-Wonsan line.

Without the need for further adjustment to its aircraft deployment, the

North Korean Air Force is capable of staging a sudden strike on South

Korea’s key command and control facilities, air defense assets, supply

routes, as well as industrial and military facilities. Moreover, the Air Force

is capable of infiltrating special warfare units into key strategic facilities in


-----

South Korea’s rear area, using AN-2 aircraft and helicopters that are suited

for low altitude infiltration.

The air defense system of North Korea centers on the Air Force

Command, consisting of aircrafts, ground-to-air missiles, anti-aircraft

artillery, and radar air defense units that are jointly organized. Primary air

defense is delegated to each flight division responsible for one of the four

zones dividing North Korean airspace. North Korea has deployed SA-2

and SA-5 ground-to-air missiles in the forward and coastal areas, while it

has concentrated SA-2 and SA-3 ground-to-air missiles and anti-aircraft

artillery in the Pyongyang area, forming a multi-layered air defense net.

Numerous tactical and strategic anti-aircraft artilleries have been deployed

throughout North Korea, the former to protect mobile units of the Ground

Force, and the latter to protect key cities, ports, and war industry facilities.

North Korea’s numerous radar air defense units, such as ground

controlled interception bases and early warning bases, which are deployed

throughout North Korea, are capable of covering the entire Korean

Peninsula. Chart 1-5 summarizes the key assets of the North Korean Air

Force.

**Chart 1-5. Key Assets of the North Korean Air Force**

**Reconnaissance** **Transport Aircraft**

**Combat Aircraft** **Helicopters** **Training Aircraft**

**Aircraft** **(including AN-2’s)**

**approx. 820** **approx. 300** **approx. 170**

**approx. 30** **approx. 330**


**| Reserve Forces | The North Korean reserve force is comprised of**

the Reserve Military Training Unit, the Worker and Peasant Red Guard

organized around the workplace and regions, the middle school military

organization known as the Red Youth Guard, as well as para-military

units. The age eligibility of mobilization is between 14 and 60 years old,

which corresponds to 7.7 million people or roughly 30 percent of the

population.

The Reserve Military Training Unit consists of some 600,000 members,

who can play a key role in augmenting the combat capability to the regular


-----

armed forces during wartime. The Unit maintains a level of training that is

commensurate with the regular armed forces. The reserve force acquires

certain equipment from the regular armed forces after the equipment is

replaced through the process of modernization. The reserve force uses this

equipment to increase its capabilities. Chart 1-6 summarizes the current

status of the North Korean reserve force.

**Chart 1-6. North Korean Reserve Force**

|Division|Strength|Note|
|---|---|---|
|Total|approx. 7.7 million||
|Reserve Military Training Unit|approx. 600,000|Subject to combat mobilization - men between 17 and 50 - women between 17 and 30|
|Worker and Peasant Red Guard|approx. 5.7 million|Equivalent to the ROK’s Homeland Reserve Forces|
|Red Youth Guard|approx. 1 million|middle school military organization – boys and girls between 14−16 years of age|
|Para-military units|approx. 400,000|Ministry of the People’s Security, Speed Battle Youth Assault Troops etc.|



**| Strategic Weapons | North Korea continues to develop nuclear and**

ballistic missiles, as well as chemical and biological weapons to secure a

strategic offensive capability. From the beginning of the construction of

the Yongbyon nuclear facility in the 1960s to the 1970s, North Korea

focused research on refining, converting, and processing nuclear fuel.

From the 1980s, North Korea secured nuclear material through

reprocessing spent fuel rods from the operation of its 5MW nuclear

reactor, a process through which North Korea was able to accumulate the

technology to carry out two nuclear tests in October 2006 and May 2009.

It is estimated that North Korea possesses roughly 40kg of plutonium

from four rounds of reprocessing. Furthermore, it is likely that North

Korea is operating a Highly Enriched Uranium (HEU) Program,

considering that a Foreign Ministry spokesman mentioned the term

‘uranium enrichment’ in 2009, and the revelation of a uranium

enrichment facility in November 2010.

Since beginning the development of ballistic missiles in the 1970s,

North Korea produced and fielded SCUD-B (range of 300km) and

SCUD-C (range of 500km) missiles in the mid-1980s. In the 1990s, North


A North Korean long-range missile ready
for launch (April 2012)


-----

**Chart 1-7. Ranges of North Korea’s Missiles by Type**

**Alaska**

**Moscow**

**SCUD**

**Japan**

**China** **Nodong**

**500Km**

**1,300Km** **Musudan**

**Hawaii**

**India**

**Daepodong**
**Guam**

**3,000Km**


**6,700Km**

**Australia**

Korea tested and fielded the Nodong missile (range of 1,300km), while in

2007, it fielded the Musudan missile (range of over 3,000km). Following

these deployments, North Korea has gained direct strike capabilities

against South Korea, Japan, Guam, and other surrounding countries. In

addition, North Korea began development of Intercontinental Ballistic

Missiles (ICBMs) in the late 1990s, leading to the test launch of the

Daepodong 1 missile in 1998 and the Daepodong 2 missile in 2006. In

April of 2009 and 2012, North Korea carried out test launches of

long-range missiles that used the Daepodong 2 as propellants, which failed

both times. On April 15, 2012, North Korea revealed what appeared to be

a new missile in development, during a military parade. Chart 1-7

summarizes the various ranges of missiles currently in North Korea’s

possession.

North Korea began developing chemical weapons following Kim Il

Sung’s ‘Declaration for Chemicalization’ in December 1961 by establishing

its own policy and installing chemical weapons research and development


**Hawaii**

New missile unveiled during a parade
marking the 100[th] anniversary of Kim Il
Sung’s birth (April 2012)


-----

facilities. Following the commencement of production in the 1980s, it is

estimated that North Korea has a stock of 2,500−5,000 tons of various

chemical weapons stored in multiple facilities throughout the country.

Moreover, North Korea likely has the capability to produce a variety of

biological weapons including anthrax, smallpox, pest, francisella

tularensis, and hemorrhagic fever virus.

**| Sustained War Fighting Capability | In order to maintain its**

capacity to carry out prolonged war and to mobilize armaments, North

Korea is placing priority on growing its defense industry above others,

even against the backdrop of energy and economic crisis. North Korea

possesses some 300 armaments factories, while civilian factories

designated for transition to armaments production in wartime are capable

of making such a transition in a short period of time.

The majority of North Korea’s wartime material is stored in underground

facilities, while the stockpile of these materials is estimated to last 2−3

months. However, North Korea’s ability to sustain a prolonged operation

will be limited without further external purchase or assistance.


-----

-----

-----

##### Chapter 2
**National Security**
**Strategy and Defense**
**Policy**

Section 1 National Security Strategy
Section 2 National Defense Policy


40
43


-----

**National Security Strategy**

The National Security Strategy is an action plan covering comprehensive
and systematic use of nation’s capabilities to ensure national security. The
National Vision[1] of the Lee Myung-bak Administration is to build ‘a World
Class Nation through Advancement,’ as it aims to guide the nation towards
becoming a ‘Global Korea.’[2] The administration proposes a ‘National Security
Strategic Guidance’ as the means to attain its vision of national security. The
Ministry of National Defense is concentrating its efforts on attaining the
nation’s security objectives and supporting national policies.

**1. National Vision and the National Security Objectives**

The Lee Myung-bak Administration designated ‘World Class Nation

through Advancement’ as its National Vision. This Vision is based on the

basic principles of the ROK Constitution: liberal democracy and market

economy. A ‘World Class Nation’ is a nation where economic development

and social integration are achieved through mature civic consciousness

and culture, as well as advanced science, technology, and industries.

National Security Objective is a goal that must be attained to achieve

national security at all costs based on an evaluation of the prevailing

security environment and national powers. The government has defined

the objectives of national security as ‘maintaining peace and stability on

the Korean Peninsula, guaranteeing the people’s safety and establishing a

foundation for national prosperity, and increasing the nation’s international

influence and advancing its status.’

First, ‘maintaining peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula’ is a

commitment to uphold stability and guarantee peace on the Peninsula on

the basis of ROK’s self-defense capabilities and the ROK-U.S. Alliance, as


**Section**
# 1


**1. National Vision**

The Lee Myung-bak Administration
adopts a vision calling for a prosperous
people, a caring society, and a strong
nation in order to construct a ‘World
Class Nation through Advancement.’

**2. Global Korea**

This is one of the government guidelines
set by the Lee Myung-bak
Administration towards achieving this
vision, regarding national security.
The basic concept of this vision is to
contribute to world peace and joint
development through an active and
open foreign policy that engages various
nations around the world, for exchange
and cooperation in the areas of
economy, culture, environment, and
other global issues. ‘Global Korea’
represents a shift away form a narrow
foreign policy and security strategy that
centers on the North Korean nuclear
issue and on the Korean Peninsula.


-----

well as through inter-Korean exchange and cooperation and wide ranging

engagements with neighboring countries.

Second, ‘guaranteeing the people’s safety and establishing a foundation

for national prosperity’ is defined as protecting citizens from a variety of

security threats while simultaneously obtaining economic and social

security that provide the basis for national prosperity.

Third, ‘increasing the nation’s international influence and advancing its

status’ refers to Korea becoming a ‘soft strong power’[3] by actively

contributing to world peace, liberal democracy, and prosperity, while

strengthening the bonds of cooperation with the international community.

**2. Tenets of the National Security Strategy**

The government has specified the tenets of national security strategy

into three areas in order to obtain its national security objectives. The three

areas are: the creation of a new peace structure, the advancement of

pragmatic diplomacy and an active open-door policy, and the pursuit of

further contribution to the international security.

First, ‘the creation of a new peace structure’ entails the future-oriented

pursuit of inter-Korean relations in a manner that would provide mutual

benefits. It also entails the pursuit of a ‘21[st] century Strategic Alliance’[4 ]

with the United States that will contribute to peace on the Korean

Peninsula, stability in the region, and peace throughout the globe, as well

as the pursuit of close, cooperative relationships with neighboring

countries.

Second, the advancement of ‘pragmatic diplomacy and an active

open-door policy’ includes strengthening Korea’s practical diplomacy in

order to vitalize the economy. It also includes strengthening Korea’s

energy diplomacy in order to secure the foundations for economic growth,

while undertaking international cooperation and diplomacy befitting the

size of Korea’s economy and its diplomatic stature.

Third, ‘the pursuit of an advanced, globally-oriented system of security’

entails the attainment of an advanced national defense management

system capable of actively dealing with changes in the security

environment and the demands of future warfare. It also entails the


**3. Soft Strong Power**

A world class advanced nation
possessing both economic and cultural
capabilities on the basis of strong
national power. It is both soft and
strong, and it actively contributes to the
stability of the Korean Peninsula and
Northeast Asia, as well as to world
peace.

**4. 21[st] Century Strategic Alliance**

A new vision for the ROK-U.S. Alliance.
An Alliance that (1) advances the shared
ideals of liberal democracy, market
economy, and humanitarianism on the
Korean Peninsula, in Northeast Asia,
and in the world. An Alliance that (2)
expands the mutual relationship
between the two countries to areas
encompassing the economy, society,
and culture on the basis of the
underlying military alliance. An Alliance
that (3) contributes to building world
peace and trust by strengthening
strategic cooperation with neighboring
countries.


-----

establishment of capabilities within the sphere of comprehensive security

in order to respond to diverse threats, while actively participating in

international peacekeeping and reconstruction efforts.

The government is pursuing ‘the attainment of a future-oriented security

capability’ as one of six strategic tasks under the tenets of the national

security strategy.


-----

**National Defense Policy**

In order to realize national security and national defense objectives in a
rapidly changing security environment, the Ministry of National Defense has
adopted ‘Advanced Elite Military’ as its vision, outlining eight policy frameworks towards its attainment. Furthermore, the Ministry has identified and
is implementing three policies designed to better respond to not only direct
acts of provocation such as the attack on the ROK Ship Cheonan and the
shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island), but also security threats emanating from
the vulnerabilities and uncertainties of the North Korean regime.

**1. National Defense Objectives**

The National Defense Objective is ‘to protect the country from external

military threats and invasions, to support peaceful unification, and to

contribute to regional stability and world peace.’ The specific interpretation

of the objective is as follows.

First, ‘protecting the country from external military threats and invasions’

means being prepared to meet North Korea’s real military threat and at the

same time being prepared to meet potential threats to our peace and

security. North Korea poses a serious threat to our security by developing

and increasing its large scale conventional military power, its nuclear

program, missiles, and other weapons of mass destruction, and by

continually perpetrating acts of armed provocation such as the attack on

the ROK Ship Cheonan and the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island). As

long as these threats persist, the North Korean regime and its armed

forces, which are the entities who pose these threats, are our enemies.

Second, ‘supporting peaceful unification’ means contributing to a

peaceful unification by deterring war, alleviating military tensions, and


**Section**
# 2


-----

establishing peace on the Korean Peninsula.

Third, ‘contributing to regional stability and world peace’ means

contributing to the stability of Northeast Asia and world peace by

advancing our friendly and cooperative relationships with neighboring

countries, and through active participation in international peacekeeping

efforts on the basis of the ROK’s national power and military capabilities.

**2. Tenets of the National Defense Policy**

The ROK military has adopted ‘Advanced Elite Military’ as its vision to

achieve the objectives of national security and national defense. To this

end, the ROK military has identified the following eight policy tenets,[1]

which it is actively pursuing. (1) Establishing a defense posture for

comprehensive security. (2) Strengthening the ROK-U.S. Military

Alliance and expansion of defense diplomacy and cooperation. (3)

Providing military support for the advancement in inter-Korea relations.
(4) Bolstering advanced military capabilities. (5) Nurturing highly

qualified military personnel and improving the training and education

system. (6) Enhancing management efficiency. (7) Nurturing an attractive

and rewarding military. (8) Striving to become a defense force that serves

the people.

**3. Pursuing Three Priority Policies**

North Korea poses threats to our security by perpetrating direct and

reckless acts of provocation such as attacking the ROK Ship Cheonan,

shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island) in 2010, and shelling of our waters near

_Yeonpyeongdo (island) in 2011 as well as launching a long-range missile_

in 2012. Acknowledging such realities of the security environment, the

ROK military has identified the following three priority policies:

maintaining an immediate and resolute retaliation posture against enemy

provocations, developing an elite and combat-oriented military, and

improving the working conditions for service members.


**1. Tenets of the National Defense**
**Policy**

The tenets of the defense policy are
established in consideration of the
national security strategy, national
defense objectives, the outlook for
security and future warfare, and the
current state of national defense.


-----

**| Maintaining an Immediate and Resolute Retaliation Posture**

**against Enemy Provocation | The attack on the ROK Ship Cheonan**

and the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island) were provocative actions that

served as unequivocal reminders that the ROK military needs to retaliate

immediately and resolutely against enemy provocation. In the future, the

ROK military will decisively strike not only the origin of enemy

provocation, but also the command and support forces behind the

provocation.

To this end, the ROK military is not only reinforcing its precision

surveillance, target acquisition, and precision strike capabilities in the

Northwest Islands and the surrounding areas, but is also significantly

strengthening its ‘immediate retaliation forces’ including air defense and

anti-missile defense capabilities, as well as airborne and standby forces.

In June 2011, the ROK military established the Northwest Islands

Defense Command and fortified defensive structures including K-9

encampments, helicopter hangars and vehicle shelters. Additionally, in

order to guarantee and protect the safety and lives of civilians in the

Northwest Islands region, the ROK military is reinforcing evacuation

centers and improving the region’s capacity to withstand provocations.

Moreover, the ROK military is continuing to develop the ‘Counter
Provocation Plan’ so that the ROK and the United States can jointly

respond to local provocations.

In response to the enemy’s threat to ROK’s rear areas, the ROK military

is strengthening its defense of key national facilities in close cooperation

with the civil, government, and police authorities. Furthermore, in

response to cyber threats and other forms of terrorism, the ROK military is

sharing intelligence with relevant agencies as well as establishing a multi
layered defense system.

The ROK military is conducting field training exercises based on the

most likely provocation scenarios as well as realistic and intense exercises

designed to increase the proficiency of the military to automatically

respond to all forms of enemy provocations.

**| Developing an Advanced, Combat Mission Oriented Military | The**

ROK military is developing into an advanced, combat mission oriented

military, capable of conducting peacetime and wartime missions. To this


-----

end, the ROK military is firmly establishing the roots of a combat
oriented military while establishing a training and education system that

simulates actual combat in order to cultivate competent cadres and

warrior-minded soldiers. Moreover, the ROK military is developing its

military personnel operation and management system.

First, the ROK military is operating its units focused on combat

missions in order to lay the foundation for a combat-oriented military. By

drastically reducing administrative duties of service members, more time

has been given to service members to focus on training and education. In

so doing, the ROK military is creating an environment and military culture

where their way of life is combat-focused.

Second, the ROK military is revising its education system in order to

cultivate outstanding cadres who possess expertise and understand

jointness which are the key characteristics of developing a combat
oriented military. In order to increase occupational specialties, the

education system is being improved in the direction of connecting the

school and the field, and is being carried out in the form of actual

simulated combats realistic training and education corresponding to

wartime scenarios. Furthermore, in order to strengthen the basis for

jointness, the ROK military established the Joint Forces Military

University and designed an education program to jointly educate first-year

cadets of the Army, Navy, and Air Force Academies.

Third, in order to develop a combat-oriented strong military, the ROK

military is developing strong individual service members capable of

immediately demonstrating their combat capabilities as well as unit

activities that develop their field orientation. To this end, the ROK military

is focused on developing ‘true warriors’ by improving the training and

education programs for new recruits and by implementing a combat

capability certification program. Moreover, in order to improve unit

exercises that simulate actual tactical combat, training curriculums based

on key combat skills that can immediately be used on the battlefield are

devised with service members gaining proficiency in these skills through

repetition. Furthermore, units in the field are being allowed to devote their

efforts on improving their combat capabilities – the organization and

equipment of sub-battalion units are being augmented to increase the

combat strength of spearhead units, while combat-oriented education


-----

training is being designated as the highest priority.

Fourth, the ROK military is developing a system that can effectively

recruit and operate outstanding personnel who can be leaders on

tomorrow’s battlefields. The ROK military is establishing the framework

for maintaining suitable personnel structure centered on cadres, which will

increase job stability and the ability to utilize their expertise. Additionally,

the ROK military developed and is implementing a ‘personnel

management system that emphasizes military expertise,’ so that

outstanding personnel may be utilized at the right place at the right time.

**| Improving the Working Conditions for Service Members | The**

Ministry of National Defense is improving the working conditions of

service members so that they can fully concentrate on combat missions.

To this end, the MND has selected the enhancement of welfare, modern
ization of military facilities, innovation in medical system, advancement

of military culture, and the guarantee of productive working conditions

as key implementation tasks.

First, a comprehensive welfare policy is under implementation based on

‘The Basic Plan for Military Personnel Welfare,’ designed to enhance the

welfare and morale of service members to a level they can actually

appreciate.

The payroll system of military personnel has been revised to better

reflect their rank, mission, and service environment while various

allowances and benefits are either being created or increased in addition to

the implementation of an interest-free tuition loan program for active duty

enlisted service members.

The MND is also expanding the home loan program to improve the

welfare of military families as well as continually improving its home

buying assistance program. Moreover, in order to improve the unfavorable

educational conditions faced by the children of military personnel,

provisions have been made to allow these children to enter elementary,

middle, and high schools that have already been filled to their student

capacities (within a margin of 2−5%) and they may also apply to univer
sities through a separate admissions program. Additionally, the Ministry is

improving its post-military job training for cadres scheduled to leave

active duty while developing and expanding future job opportunities for


-----

departing military personnel after completion of military duty. Also, the

MND is creating a pension system which incorporates the unique charac
teristics of the military in order to provide stability in living conditions and

improving the quality of life for retired service members.

Second, the Ministry of National Defense is improving and modernizing

outdated and spatially-limited military facilities in a phased manner, in

keeping with the general improvement of national living standards and

social development. In particular, in order to guarantee a convenient

environment, the modernization of military barracks aims to reduce the

discrepancy between military barracks and the type of environment to

which young enlisted service members are accustomed. Moreover, the

standard of living quarters for cadres is being improved to a level on par

with the average standard of civilian housing, and through this military

quarter modernization initiative, the pride of cadres who are leaders within

the military is uplifted. Furthermore, in accordance with the increase in the

number of junior cadres following the restructuring of the military, new

quarters are being built and inadequate ones are being expanded.

Third, the Ministry of National Defense is significantly improving the

military medical system. For this initiative, systems for disease prevention

are being upgraded and the accessibility of medical services for military

personnel as well as the medical support at division level units and below

are being improved in order to increase the level of satisfaction of service

members. Concurrently, cooperation with civilian medical services is also

being improved through a strategic cooperation network. The number of

preventive vaccines has increased from seven to eight in order to

strengthen systems for disease prevention while efforts are being made for

a hygienic barracks environment focused on prevention. Furthermore, in

terms of improving medical accessibility for service members, medical

consultations have been made mandatory for all incoming new recruits.

This ensures that each recruit is afforded one-on-one consultations with a

medic. Medical services and shuttle buses to medical facilities off-base are

being offered to remotely located units. Improving the quality of battalion,

regiment, and division medical services, which serve as the first point of

treatment for the majority of service members, is an initiative on which the

Ministry of National Defense places great emphasis. As part of this

project, the Ministry has simplified the existing multi-layered treatment


-----

system into a two-step treatment system (battalion/regiment – division),

thereby expediting the treatment time. Moreover, the Ministry has

assigned additional medical specialists to division medical facilities while

also expanding the scope of medical examinations as well as providing

step-by-step tailored medical services. Additionally, the Ministry is

building a system of cooperative treatment between civilian and military

medical hospitals.

Fourth, the Ministry of National Defense is making efforts to cultivate

an advanced military culture that provides the basis for a combat-oriented

military that will emerge as victors in all battles. To this end, the Ministry

prepared the ‘Code of Conduct for Military Life.’ Based on this Code, each

Service is making efforts to create a ‘wave’ to eradicate bad customs by

gathering opinions and thoughts and holding discussion sessions in order

to foster an environment conducive to communications at all unit levels.

Moreover, the Ministry is revising relevant laws and regulations to

establish a framework to further protect individual rights of service

members while also improving individual rights education programs. The

Ministry is also implementing a system to resolve the predicaments of

many service members and to care about misfits within the military.

Fifth, the Ministry of National Defense is implementing a variety of

policies designed to ensure productive military working conditions. The

Ministry is providing support to service members so that they can prepare

for post-military lives while remaining committed to their task. The

Ministry of National Defense is providing educational opportunities that

allow service members to continue earning academic credits towards

degrees they were pursuing prior to entering the military, prepare for the

General Educational Development test, and take advantage of e-contents

and other learning opportunities. Furthermore, the Ministry is assisting

many service members in obtaining national skill certifications by

providing education and practical training. The Ministry is also developing

an ‘academic credit recognition system’ designed to have the service

members’ education and training experience from the military recognized

by academic institutions after they are discharged.


-----

|1|2|
|---|---|
|4|3|
|||


-----

##### Chapter 3
**Defense Posture for**
**Comprehensive Security**

Section 1 Robust Military Readiness Posture
Section 2  Integrated Civilian-Government-MilitaryPolice Defense Posture
Section 3  Development of a Readiness Posture
against Transnational and Non-military
Threats


52
63

67


**1  Integrated fires combat training (Seungjin**
Range, June 2012)

**2 Air Force fighters on patrol over the West Sea**
**3  Boarding and inspection team in operation**
during the 2012 PSI maritime interdiction
exercise ‘Eastern Endeavor 12’ (High seas
southeast of Busan, September 2012)

**4  Bird’s-eye view of the Jeju Civilian-Military**
Complex Port


-----

**Robust Military Readiness**
**Posture**

The ROK military is maintaining an immediate and firm readiness posture in
preparation against complex and diverse provocations such as North Korea’s
attack against the ROK Ship Cheonan and shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island).
In order to maintain this posture, the ROK military is maximizing the efficiency of its existing forces by first reinforcing the vulnerable areas of the
forces that are currently in operation and at the same time continuously
acquiring forces capable of responding to a wide array of enemy provocation. Additionally, by ensuring a rapid response mobilization capability for
contingencies and maintaining the ROK-U.S. combined defense posture, the
ROK military is maintaining a robust military readiness posture.

**1. Military Organization and Forces**

**| Reinforcement of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Organization | The**

Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) carries out joint and combined operations by

executing operational command over joint units[1] and operations

commands. In preparation for wartime operational control (OPCON)

transition, and to establish an ROK military led war fighting system, the

JCS has been reorganized to execute all operations in the ROK theater[2]

simultaneously in an integrated manner. As of 1 January 2011, the

organization of the JCS was strengthened from one vice chairman, three

central directorates, and four offices to one vice chairman, four central

directorates and four offices. The organizational chart of the Joint Chiefs

of Staff is shown in Chart 3-1.

By strengthening jointness,[3] the JCS will continue to develop its mission

execution system that will enable close mutual support between the Army,

Navy, and Air Force and the integration of the Services. Furthermore, the

JCS will establish and develop a coordination organization with the United

States Forces Korea (USFK) and strengthen this organization in order to


**Section**
# 1


**1. Joint Unit**

A unit consisting of two or more
Services.

**2. Theater**

A geographical space where ground,
naval and air operations are carried out
to achieve military strategic objectives

**3. Jointness**

A concept to guarantee decisive victory
by maximizing the synergy of combat
powers attained by effectively
integrating and operating the forces and
activities of each Service.

Completion of the new JCS building
equipped with command facilities to
lead operations in the Korean theater
(August 2012)


-----

attain the capabilities required for the ROK military to lead the war

fighting effort by 2015.

**Chart 3-1. Organizational chart of the Joint Chiefs of Staff**


Korea Defense

|Col1|Vice Ch|Col3|airman|Col5|Col6|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||e Chairman Office of Judge Advocate||Combat R Office of Public Affairs Inspectio||||
|Office of th|e Chairman||||Combat R Inspectio|eadiness n Office*|
||||||||
||||||||

Intelligence Agency [(]KDIA[)]


Central Directorate for
Joint Operations [(]J-3[)]


Central Directorate for
Military Support


Central Directorate for
Strategic Planning [(]J-5[)]


*[ As of 1 January 2013, the JCS Combat Readiness Inspection Office will be deactivated and a National Defense ]

Combat Readiness Inspection Group will be established under the Minister of National Defense (MND).

**| Organization of Three Services and Forces |**

The Army consists of the Army Headquarters (HQs), two Field Army

Commands, Operations Command, Capital Defense Command, Special

Warfare Command, Army Aviation Operations Command, Army Missile

Command, and other supporting units. The organizational chart and forces

of the Army are shown in Chart 3-2.

**Chart 3-2. Organizational chart and forces of the Army**



Logistics Command


Command Command


Army Training and Doctrine
Command [(]TRADOC[)]

|Army|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Army|||
|ommands (2) ommand (1) s (8)|Capital Defense Army Aviation Command Operations Command Special Warfare Army Missile||
|||Army|


Tanks
Vehicles / MLRS


Troops


Field Artillery
/ MLRS


Guided
Weapons


Helicopters


K-2 tank (120mm main gun)


**approx. 506,000** **approx. 2,300** **approx. 2,600** **approx. 5,300** **approx. 30** approx. 600


-----

The First and Third Field Armies execute defense missions in their

respective frontline area of responsibility (AOR) all the way up to the

Military Demarcation Line (MDL). The Second Operations Command
(2OC) carries out missions to maintain stability in the rear area and war

sustainment capabilities. The Capital Defense Command executes

missions to maintain the functions of the capital such as protecting major

facilities and municipal infrastructures. Other commands carry out

missions pertaining to special warfare, aviation operations, logistics

support and education and training.

In the future, the Army will maximize the efficiency of its existing

forces by first reinforcing those forces required to respond to North

Korea’s local provocations while attaining the capability to execute joint

operations. As such, the Army will continue to acquire surveillance, strike,

and maneuver forces such as reconnaissance UAVs, K-2 tanks, K-21

infantry fighting vehicles, MLRS,[4] and utility and attack helicopters.

The Navy consists of the Navy HQs, Naval Operations Command,

Marine Corps HQs/Northwest Islands Defense Command (NWIDC), and

other supporting units. The organizational chart and forces of the Navy are

shown in Chart 3-3.

**Chart 3-3. Organizational chart and forces of the Navy**


K-21 light infantry vehicle (40mm main
gun)

**4. Multiple Launch Rocket System**
**(MLRS)**

A weapon system that launches multiple
rockets arrayed in a box-shaped or
cylinder type launch pad enabling
simultaneous and large quantity fire
power

Submarine (loaded with heavy
torpedoes, underwater-to-surface
missiles, mines)

**5. Anti-surface operations**

Operation to acquire and maintain
maritime control using surface
combatants, submarines and aircraft or
to destroy or neutralize the enemy’s
surface force

**6. Anti-submarine operations**

Operation to guarantee unimpeded use
of the sea by destroying or neutralizing
enemy submarines


**Navy HQs**

Naval Operations Marine Corps HQs/
Logistics Command
Command NWIDC

Naval Education and
Fleet Commands [(]3[)] Divisions [(]Brigade[)] 2[(]1[)]
Training Command


Submarines


Surface
combatants


Auxiliary
Vessels


Helicopters/
Maritime patrol
aircraft


**approx. 68,000** **approx. 10**


**approx. 140**


**approx. 20**


**approx. 60**


The Naval Operations Command commands overall naval operations

and executes anti-surface operations,[5] anti-submarine operations,[6] mine


-----

and counter mine operations,[7] and amphibious operations. The Fleet

Commands operate surface combatants such as destroyers, frigates, patrol

vessels, and Patrol Killer Mediums (PKMs), and carry out defense

missions in their responsible waters. The Marine Corps HQs executes

wartime amphibious operations as its main mission and the NWDIC[8]

carries out peacetime security and defense missions in and around the

Northwest Islands. Other commands carry out logistics support and

education and training missions.

The Navy is focused on reinforcing its capabilities based on the lessons

learned from the attack against the ROK Ship Cheonan and plans to

transform into a navy that can carry out multi-dimensional underwater,

surface, and air operations as one of the pillars for joint operations. In

order to achieve this, the Navy will acquire next generation submarines,

destroyers (DDX), frigates (FFX), PKMs (PKX), and maritime

operational helicopters. The Marine Corps will develop into a force that

can readily adapt to carry out a variety of tasks based on situations and

missions such as multi-dimensional high-speed landing, rapid response,

and ground operations.

The Air Force consists of the Air Force HQs, Air Force Operations

Command, and other supporting units. The organizational chart and forces

of the Air Force are shown in Chart 3-4.

**Chart 3-4. Organizational chart and forces of the Air Force**

**Air Force HQs**


**7. Mine and counter mine operations**

Operation to interdict or neutralize
enemy naval forces using mines, or to
deny the use of mines by the enemy

**8. Northwest Islands Defense**
**Command [(]NWIDC[)]**

Established on 15 June 2011 under the
Marine Corps Headquarters to counter
North Korean threats towards the five
islands that make up the Northwest
Islands (Baekryeongdo, Daecheongdo,
_Socheongdo, Yeonpyeongdo, Woodo)._
The Marine Corps commandant
concurrently serves as the NWDIC
commander.

Aegis class destroyer (possesses
capability to simultaneously execute
anti-aircraft, anti-missile, anti-surface,
and anti-submarine warfare)

F-15K fighter

Airborne Early Warning & Control
(AEW&C) aircraft (Peace Eye)

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|Education and Training Command Logistics Command Command ommands Air Defense Artillery Air Defense and ) Command Control Wing Airlift Wings Training Wing Compos||


Combat
Aircraft

Air mobility
aircraft

ISR Aircraft

**approx. 65,000** **approx. 460** **approx. 40** **approx. 40**


Trainers


Helicopters


**approx. 190**


**approx. 40**


-----

**9. Counter Air operations (CA)**
Operations to acquire and maintain air
superiority by destroying or neutralizing
the enemy’s aerospace forces and air
defense systems

**10. Air Interdiction operations (AI)**
Operations to limit the enemy’s
reinforcement, resupply and maneuverability by interdicting, harassing,
delaying and destroying the enemy’s
military capability before this capability
is effectively used against the ROK Army
and Navy.

**11 . Close Air Support operations**
**(CAS)**
Operations to guarantee the
survivability of friendly forces and the
successful execution of the military
objective by supporting the friendly
force’s offensive, counter-offensive or
defensive operations through attacks on
enemy forces that are engaging the
friendly forces in close proximity

**12. Flexible Deterrence Options**
**(FDOs)**

Deterrence options in the CFC Crisis
Acton Standard Operating Procedure
(CASOP) that need to be promptly
executed before an unambiguous
warning of war

**13. Time Phased Force Deployment**
**Data [(]TPFDD[)]**

Force deployment list and data of the
U.S. augmentation forces required for
executing the ROK-U.S. combined
operation plans


The Air Force Operations Command (AFOC) controls air operations in

a centralized manner and carries out counter air,[9] air interdiction,[10] and

close air support operations.[11]

Northern and Southern Air Combat Commands, under the AFOC’s

centralized command, execute decentralized missions in order to defend

the airspace of their respective areas of operation. The Air Defense

Artillery Command (ADAC) carries out all-directional air defense

missions in preparation against air attacks by enemy aircraft and missiles.

The Air Defense and Control Wing executes missions such as air control

within the ROK theater, air surveillance and aircraft identification, and air

support operations. Other commands carry out logistics support and

education and training missions.

In the future, the Air Force will develop into an aerospace force with

increased operational reach capabilities, air superiority, and precision

strike capabilities. In order to realize this initiative, the Air Force will

acquire next-generation fighters, indigenous Korean fighters, aerial

refueling tankers, a reconnaissance intelligence collection system, a Korea

Air and Missile Defense system, and a space surveillance system.

**| USFK and augmentation forces | USFK consists of the Eighth U.S.**

Army (EUSA), the U.S. Naval Forces-Korea, Marine Forces-Korea
(MARFOR-K), Special Operations Command-Korea (SOCKOR), and

U.S. Air Forces-Korea (USAFK). The USFK Commander serves concur
rently as the Commander of the United Nations Command (UNC) and

Commander of the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command (CFC). The

organizational chart and forces of USFK are shown in Chart 3-5.

The U.S. augmentation forces that will be deployed to support the

defense of the ROK in the event of a war consist of approximately

690,000 troops from the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines, approxi
mately 160 vessels, and approximately 2,000 aircraft. U.S. augmentation

forces will be deployed based on Flexible Deterrence Options (FDOs)[12] or

the Time Phased Force Deployment Data (TPFDD)[13] depending on the

crisis situation. The purpose of the forces that will be deployed based on

FDOs is to swiftly deter enemy provocations in a crisis situation before

war breaks out on the Korean Peninsula. The purpose of the augmentation

forces that will be deployed based on TPFDD is to execute ROK-U.S.


-----

operation plans in case deterrence fails.

**Chart 3-5. Organizational chart and forces of USFK**

**USFK Headquarters**


AH-64 (Apache) Attack Helicopter

ATACMS (Army Tactical Missile System)



Brigade

|Col1|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|.S. Army U.S. Naval U.S. Marine Forces- Special Operations U.S. Air Forces-Korea Korea (MARFOR-K) Command Korea (SOCKOR) Korea ( Infantry 19th Expeditionary 35th Air Defense 501st Military U.S. 7th sion Sustainment Command Brigade Intelligence Brigade 65th Medical st th st|||
|||st|


ATACMS/
Patriot
missiles

**approx. 40/60**



Armored
Vehicles

**approx. 110**


Troops


Fighters


Attack
helicopters


**approx. 28,500** **approx. 90** **approx. 20** **approx. 50**

**2. Military Readiness Posture**


**| Establishing early warning and crisis management systems |**

The ROK military maintains a 24-hour surveillance and early warning

system on the Korean Peninsula and its adjacent islands including North

Korea. In order to maintain this system, the ROK military is maintaining

a combined intelligence surveillance system by operating ROK-U.S.

combined intelligence assets such as signal and imagery assets and

satellites. Additionally, the ROK and the U.S. are jointly identifying and

assessing threat indicators such as North Korea’s long-range missile

launches and nuclear tests.

Furthermore, the ROK military is maintaining a crisis management

system to effectively respond to diverse types of threats posed by North

Korea and various crisis situations. In particular, the situation reporting

and dissemination system was improved after the 2010 attack against the

ROK Ship Cheonan and the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island), and the

crisis management system was reinforced in an overall manner with the


-----

introduction of a crisis action manual for different types of enemy

provocations and the initiation of a daily, weekly and monthly Planning
Decide-Execute (PDE) cycle.[14]

The ROK and the U.S. are maintaining a seamless coordination system

to manage combined crises by improving the interoperability of the C4I

system and carrying out combined crisis management exercises.

**| Maintaining readiness posture against infiltration and local**

**provocations | North Korea is continuously carrying out provocations**

in the West Sea as seen during the 2010 attack against the ROK Ship

_Cheonan, shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island), and the artillery firing into_

the ROK territorial waters in 2011. These armed provocations not only

inflicted material damage to the ROK but also took the lives of many

military service members and civilians. In particular, the 2010 shelling of

_Yeonpyeongdo (island) was not only the first direct attack on the ROK_

territory since the signing of the Armistice Agreement in 1953 but also

an indiscriminate artillery shelling of an area mainly resided by civilians.

This highlighted the gravity of this provocation.

Furthermore, despite the condemnation by the international community,

North Korea launched a long range missile in 2012 and is continuing its

preparations for another nuclear test. At the same time, North Korea is

carrying out non-military provocations such as GPS jamming.

As such, considering the changes in the operational environment due to

the types of provocations carried out by the North Korean military and the

changes in the North Korean military’s force posture, the ROK military has

reinforced its military readiness capability and posture by fully equipping

its immediate response force and establishing a rapid, precise, and

sufficient response posture against enemy provocations while

strengthening its readiness posture against threats in the rear area.

With the establishment of the Northwest Island Defense Command
(NWIDC) on 15 June 2011, the ROK military’s response capabilities in the

Northwest Islands area have been strengthened significantly. In particular,

efforts were made to reinforce precision surveillance and strike

capabilities, the Air Force alert forces, anti-submarine operational

capabilities near the NLL, and the fortification of positions to ensure

survivability.


**14. PDE cycle**

Planning-Decide-Execute cycle

**C4I Command, Control,**
Communications, Computers &
Intelligence


-----

**The Territory of the Republic of Korea**

Ulleungdo 30 August 1953, the NLL

Dokdo has been observed as the

_de facto maritime boundary_
between South Korea and
North Korea. The waters
south of the NLL are under

East Sea

**Northern Limit Line[(]NLL[)]**

38° 37´N 133° 00´E

**Military Demarcation Line [(]MDL[)]**

**15**

**Northern Limit Line(NLL)**

38° 03´N 123° 45´E

Ulleungdo

Dokdo

Anti-submarine training in
the northwestern waters

West Sea Patrolling of Dokdo

Territorial
Waters

South Sea

Marado

Patrolling of Marado

_Ieodo Ocean Research Station_


*[ Map acquired from the National Geographic Information Institute]


-----

In addition, the ROK military established a rapid, precise, and sufficient

response posture in order to retaliate against the enemy in a firm manner

without hesitation if the enemy launches a provocation. Accordingly,

enemy movements are tracked and monitored through the integrated

operation of surveillance and reconnaissance assets and the acquired

targets are updated on a daily and weekly basis. Also, a tailored response

plan that will precisely strike enemy areas and targets in a selective

manner has been developed.

Furthermore, the ROK military is planning to reinforce the fences in the

contact areas, install additional surveillance equipment in blind zones, and

establish a technologically advanced security system ahead of schedule in

order to strengthen border security. Also, anticipated threats of provocation

such as terrorism against key national facilities and cyber attacks have

been simulated to support the planning efforts to effectively respond to

these threats, and training activities to respond with available assets in an

integrated manner against these threats have been strengthened. In

particular, an integrated civilian-government-military-police defense

posture led by local government heads has been established, and

integrated protection trainings at key facilities are being carried out

without prior notice.

Also, by conducting maneuver training to deal with diverse

provocations that could be carried out by North Korea and by

strengthening the ROK-U.S. joint response system and training, the ROK

military is maintaining a rapid operational readiness posture to

immediately retaliate the enemy during a provocation.

Also, a thorough readiness posture is being maintained to resolutely

safeguard ROK territory, territorial waters and airspace in the East, West

and Southern Seas including the five Northwest Islands, as well as

_Marado, Ulleungdo, and Dokdo. In particular, the ROK military is_

maintaining a strong readiness posture based on the unwavering resolve to

safeguard Dokdo, which is undoubtedly the territory of the ROK in terms

of geographical and historical facts and international law.

**| Establishing readiness posture against an all-out war | The ROK**

military is strengthening its jointness by cultivating the joint operational

capabilities of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines in order to deter


-----

North Korea’s armed provocations. In addition, based on the ROK-U.S.

Alliance, a combined defense system is being maintained in preparation

against an all-out war by North Korea.

If North Korea starts a war, the ROK-U.S. Alliance will deny North

Korea’s surprise attack through its combined early warning system and

rapid response measures. At the same time, the ROK-U.S. Alliance will

secure the safety and security of the greater Seoul metropolitan area by

carrying out precision strikes against North Korea’s key forces such as

long range artillery and missiles at the earliest stage of war and seize the

initiative within the earliest time possible.

In particular, in order to effectively prepare against North Korea’s

nuclear and ballistic missile threats, the ROK government expanded its

missile range from 300km to 800km so that it can strike any target or area

in North Korea by revising the Missile Guidance with the U.S. in October

2012. Also, through this revision, it is now possible to load up to 2,500kg

of payload unto unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) making it possible to

equip UAVs with weapons. The ROK military plans to attain compre
hensive military response capabilities in order to resolutely prepare against

North Korea’s nuclear and missile threats.

In order to attain these capabilities, the ROK military is fine-tuning its

doctrines so that the combined and joint operational capabilities of the

ROK military is maximized, and is regularly carrying out realistic

combined and joint exercises and training. Also, a JCS operations support

plan has been prepared to guarantee the execution of combined operations

plans.

In preparation for wartime OPCON transition on 1 December 2015, the

ROK military, through coordination with the U.S., is developing

operational plans for wartime and peacetime including ROK-U.S. joint

operations plans in order to acquire the key military capabilities such as

the capability to develop independent theater operations plans. In

preparation against North Korea’s war provocation, the ROK and the U.S.

plan to transfer the wartime OPCON with a new combined defense system

fully emplaced.

**| Establishing Rapid Response Mobilization Posture | Mobili-**

zation[16] is a key element that guarantees the capability to sustain forces


**16. Mobilization**

A national level activity to efficiently
manage and control national resources
such as manpower, materials, goods,
and services in times of war or national
emergency situations equivalent to war


-----

during war by efficiently organizing and gathering available national

resources such as manpower, materials, and other resources in order to

achieve the war objectives. Accordingly, the ROK government is

maintaining a rapid response posture in order to efficiently mobilize

available national resources during wartime and national emergencies.

The MND improved the national mobilization system by introducing a

partial mobilization system in July 2011, which allows the military to

carry out partial mobilization before a full mobilization. Accordingly,

numerous potential problems associated with carrying out a full mobili
zation from the unambiguous warning stage such as limitations in the

conditions to prepare for combat at the onset of war, the contraction of the

economy due to full mobilization, the depletion of national resources if

war does not break out after mobilization, have now been eliminated.

Furthermore, the time phased assembly (M+12~24H) method based on

the time of mobilization declaration has been improved so that forces can

assemble at their designated areas, time, and date after mobilization

declaration. Through this improvement, it is now possible to achieve full

combat capacity immediately following the mobilization with reserve

forces and vehicle owners having better knowledge of the time they need

to assemble and with the assembly times of manpower and vehicles being

synchronized.

Concurrently, the material mobilization system has been improved to

accommodate the changes in the social environment and future warfare

patterns. First, the vetting process for identifying and deciding mobili
zation requirements is expected to be improved with the establishment and

operation of an MND mobilization requirement deliberation committee,

and the standard for assessing mobilization requirements has been

improved to consider the capabilities of production companies and the

changes in the physical size of reserve service members. In addition, the

ROK military established a peacetime emergency preparation system by

holding a ‘government-military conference on mobilization development’

twice a year between the government agencies in charge and the MND,

and between the local governments (15 metropolitan cities, provinces) and

the units executing mobilization.


Vehicles on the move to an assembly
area during a mobilization exercise (35[th]
Division, May 2012)

Government-Military conference on
mobilization development (Third ROK
Army Command, November 2011)


-----

**Integrated Civilian-Government-**
**Military-Police Defense Posture**

As transnational and non-military threats continue to increase amidst
continuous military threats from North Korea, the importance of unified
efforts and actions between the civilian sector, government, military and
police to prepare for such threats has increased greatly. Accordingly, by
taking actions such as amending the relevant laws and regulations, the MND
is exerting a variety of efforts to establish an integrated civilian-governmentmilitary-police defense operation posture.

**1. Integrated Defense System**

With the initiation of the local government system in 1995, the ROK

government has been developing the integrated defense system in the

direction of expanding the role and functions of the heads of local

governments pertaining to homeland defense.

The integrated defense system, with the integrated defense headquarters

at the center, consists of national defense elements including the central

integrated defense committee, regional integrated defense committee,

integrated defense support headquarters, regional military commanders,

local police commissioners, and national key facilities.[1]

The Integrated Defense Headquarters, chaired by the Chairman of the

Joint Chiefs of Staff, is the supervising organization for integrated defense

operations. The Integrated Defense Headquarters establishes and

coordinates integrated defense policies, confirms and supervises the

integrated defense posture, and carries out overall analysis of the

integrated defense operational situation and establishes countermeasures.

In addition, it coordinates and controls the planning and implementation of


**Section**
# 2


**1. National Key Facilities**

Facilities that have a significant impact
on national security and the livelihood of
the public if occupied, destroyed or
rendered dysfunctional by the enemy.
Public institutions, airports, harbors,
transportation facilities related to the
military are some of the national key
facilities

Central Integrated Defense meeting
(Blue House, February 2011)


-----

**2. Integrated Defense Conditions**

A system where phased integrated
defense condition levels are declared to
respond to enemy infiltration,
provocation or the threats incurred by
such infiltration or provocation. Levels
are classified into ‘Gop-jong,’ ‘Eul-jong’
and ‘Byeong-jong.’ Metropolitan cities
and provinces can only declare ‘Eul-jong’
and ‘Byeong-jong.’

-  _Gop-jong situation: An emergency_
situation where an enemy with a
certain organization is carrying out a
large-scale infiltration or WMD are
being used. In this situation, integrated
defense operations are executed under
the control of the head of the
integrated defense headquarters or the
relevant regional military commander.

-  _Eul-jong situation: An emergency_
situation where it will be difficult to
restore public peace and order within a
short period of time due to enemy
infiltration or provocation in one or
more areas. In this situation,
integrated defense operations are
executed under the control of the
relevant regional military commander.

-  _Byeong-jong situation: An emergency_
situation where an enemy infiltration
or provocation is expected or a
small-scale infiltration has occurred,
and public peace and order can be
restored in a short period of time. In
this situation, integrated defense
operations are executed under the
control of the relevant local police
commissioner, military commander, or
fleet commander.

Regional Integrated Defense meeting
(Daegu and Kyeongsangbukdo, March
2012)


training plans, and coordinates and consults the execution of missions and

tasks with the related integrated defense agencies.

Integrated Defense Support Headquarters are located in all adminis
trative districts from metropolitan cities and provinces to towns and

villages. Integrated defense support headquarters prepares integrated

defense regulations and standard operating procedures at the local

government level, and establishes and implements support plans for

integrated defense operations and training. It also establishes and operates

an integrated defense situation room, cultivates and supports national

defense elements such as the military, police, reserve forces, local

governments and civil defense forces, and establishes local reporting

systems at vulnerable integrated defense areas.

The Central Integrated Defense Committee is the highest decision

making organization pertaining to integrated defense. It is established

under the Office of the Prime Minister and deliberates and decides

national level integrated defense policies, integrated defense operations

and training guidance, and the declaration or lifting of integrated defense

conditions.[2]

Regional integrated defense committees are located in 17 metropolitan

cities and provinces including Seoul and in more than 230 cities, counties,

and districts. As regional integrated defense organizations, these

committees deliberate and decide integrated defense response plans, the

declaration or lifting of integrated defense situations (Eul-jong and

_Byeong-jong), various support measures for integrated defense operations_

and training, the designation or removal of vulnerable areas, and efficient

training, operation and support plans for national defense elements.

Regional military commanders and local police commissioners are the

executors of integrated defense operations. Military commanders and

police chiefs are appointed as operational commanders when an integrated

defense situation is declared and executes integrated defense operations.

The ROK government holds regular central integrated defense meetings

and regional integrated defense meetings multiple times a year to maintain

a robust integrated defense posture by evaluating the progress and results

of the integrated defense policies enforced by the government and regional

elements and by devising appropriate response measures.


-----

**2. Integrated Defense Operation Posture**

The ROK government is maintaining an integrated defense operations

posture to prepare for enemy infiltrations or provocations during

peacetime and to carry out homeland defense operations in the rear area

during wartime. As the chairperson of the regional integrated defense

committee, heads of local governments can declare an integrated defense

situation after deliberation by the regional integrated defense committee.

Once an integrated defense situation is declared, the local police commis
sioner or military commander of the relevant region is appointed as the

operations commander in accordance with the relevant integrated defense

laws and regulations. The operations commander executes integrated

defense operations by integrating all defense elements in the region and

unifying the command relationships. Heads of metropolitan cities and

basic local governments establish integrated defense support headquarters

and provide support for integrated defense operations.

The ROK government is exerting its efforts to establish a flawless

regional integrated civilian-government-military-police defense operation

posture. First, a rapid response system for contingencies is maintained

through the integrated defense situation room. Also, by installing Wide

Area Networks (WAN), the ROK government is developing an

information sharing system capable of two-way broadcasting and video

conferencing between integrated defense situation rooms. In addition,

support cells and individuals related to integrated defense are provided

with a mission execution chart to ensure their full awareness of measures

appropriate to the situation in a realistic and efficient manner. In order to

enhance the capabilities required to protect key national facilities, tailored

protection plans for each facility have been prepared and reinforcements

have been made to surveillance equipment, situation rooms and security

facilities. Managers of key national facilities are charged with developing

integrated defense plans for their respective facilities and strengthening the

level of training by concluding security agreements with the military and

police.

In order to effectively respond to the diverse security threats that are

gradually on the rise, the integrated defense headquarters is improving the

integrated defense training system. The integrated defense headquarters


National Key Facility Protection Training
(August 2011)


-----

issues training guidance and, with the relevant central government agency,

jointly establishes and operates an integrated observation group. Control

and evaluation of training is delegated to each operations commander

allowing each subordinate unit to prepare and execute realistic training

plans and objectives best suited for the wartime and peacetime missions of

the unit. Also, improvements have been made through the Hwarang

Exercise since 2009 so that the front area corps of the First and Third

ROK Armies, local governments (integrated defense support headquarters

at the city, county, and district levels), and police can become proficient

with the procedures related to integrated defense situation room operations

and the situation actions of the integrated defense support headquarters in

preparation against enemy infiltration or provocation.

Simultaneously, the MND is continuously refining the relevant

integrated defense laws and regulations. The ‘Spy Containment Measures,’

a Presidential Directive, was enacted in December 1967 to efficiently

respond to North Korean infiltrations and provocations which were

frequent in the 1960s and this Directive was revised as the ‘Integrated

Defense Guidance’ in January 1995. Also, as the need for legal bases for

integrated defense operations and support arose with the Gangneung

submarine infiltration incident in September 1996, the ‘Integrated Defense

Law’ was enacted in January 1997.

Since then, a total of seven amendments were made to the relevant

integrated defense laws and regulations in order to accommodate the

changes in the operational environment. In particular, after the 2010 attack

on the ROK Ship Cheonan and the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island), the

‘Emergency Resources Management Law’ was amended to guarantee the

efficiency of integrated defense operations. Accordingly, it is now possible

to ‘request the participation of manpower and usage of materials if there is

a need to protect the people and property from damage once an integrated

defense situation is declared.’

The integrated defense headquarters published the Integrated Defense

_Handbook to assist integrated defense personnel in furthering their_

knowledge and understanding of integrated defense operations, tasks and

procedures.


_Integrated Defense Handbook_
(February 2012)


-----

**Development of a Readiness**
**Posture against Transnational**
**and Non-military Threats**

The recent security environment is seeing an increase in transnational and
non-military threats such as terrorism, cyber attacks and natural disasters,
and these threats, if carried out, will not be manageable by a single agency
of a government or a single nation. Especially, if a cyber attack or terrorism
is committed on the military, it will have a fatal impact on the national security. Thus, it is imperative for the military to establish resolute response
measures to counter these threats above all things. Accordingly, the ROK
military is building its response capabilities and posture by strengthening
not only the whole-of-government cooperation system but also coordination
with the international community to prepare against these newly emerging
threats.

**1. Maintaining Rapid Response Capabilities and Readiness**
**Posture**

The ROK military is establishing an immediate response posture against

transnational and non-military threats that are currently on the rise such as

acts of terrorism, cyber attacks, and large scale disasters. In addition, it is

enhancing its response capabilities through information sharing with the

related government agencies and joint training and exercises. Interna
tionally, the ROK military is participating in efforts to overcome disasters

by participating in disaster relief training, as well as supporting and

transporting relief personnel and support equipment to disaster sites.

As witnessed through recent DDoS[1] attacks on government agency

servers, it is assessed that cyber threats against the military will increase in

the future. Accordingly, the ROK military established the ROK Defense

Cyber Command in January 2010 to counter threats against national


**Section**
# 3


**1. Distributed Denial of Service [(]DDoS[)]**

An act of infringement to interrupt or
disable certain information services
using random computers.


-----

defense intelligence systems. In addition, the ROK military is establishing

a proactive and systematic response capability against cyber threats by

carrying out various initiatives such as the reorganization of the MND

Intelligence Protection Team into a larger Cyber Protection Policy Team in

March 2012.

Meanwhile, the ROK military is also developing response measures

against terrorism. With the need for an in-depth understanding of

terrorism, the ROK military published the ‘IED[2] Terror Response Data

Book’ in cooperation with the relevant agencies. Considering the

importance of initial actions during a real anti-terrorism operation, the

ROK military designated an anti-terrorism initial action unit, and

strengthened its response capabilities by designating a Chemical,

Biological and Radiological (CBR) anti-terrorism special mission unit in

preparation against CBR terror. In addition, by holding an anti-terrorism

joint tactical discussion session annually, the ROK military is sharing the

most recent intelligence on terrorism with government ministries and

agencies dealing with terrorism, and is consolidating the cooperation

system with these ministries and agencies through productive and

meaningful discussions. The experience, knowledge, and coordination

system acquired through this process enabled the ROK military to

contribute significantly in the success of the International Association of

Athletics Federations (IAAF) World Championships in Daegu in August

2011, the Nuclear Security Summit in Seoul in March 2012, and the

International Exposition Yeosu 2012.

The ROK military’s support capacity for large scale calamities and

disasters is also being strengthened. The ‘Disaster Crisis Response

Handbook’ was revised in order to proactively prepare for unexpected

large scale calamities and disasters such as localized torrential downpour,

landslides, heavy snowfall, and food and mouth disease. In particular, with

the large scale black out on 11 September 2011, the ROK military attained

the capability to prevent blackouts at all times by establishing a readiness

system to prepare against challenges in supplying power, gas, and tap

water to key military infrastructures.

Regiments and upper echelon units are strengthening the civilian
military cooperative response capability by participating in the ‘Safe Korea

Exercise’[3] with local governments.


**2. Improvised Explosive Device [(]IED[)]**

All explosive devices made in an
improvised manner using explosive
parts, to kill, destroy, or attack a target.

**3. Safe Korea Exercise [(]SKX[)]**

An exercise carried out annually to
strengthen civilian-government
cooperation, evaluate the disaster
management system, and review the
command system. Central government
agencies, local governments, public
institutions, and other organizations
participate in this exercise.

Safe Korea Exercise (SKX) (11[th] Fighter
Wing, April 2012)


-----

The ROK military is exerting its efforts to minimize setbacks in

providing public services for the people and protect the right to live a basic

life by preventing and preparing against illegal activities of personnel

working in key national infrastructures. As such, the ROK military is

continuously training and managing military technicians who will be

deployed to these infrastructures as replacement personnel.

**2. Maintaining a Close Coordination System with the Inter-**
**national Community**

Transnational and non-military threats such as terrorism, piracy, and

large scale natural disasters are not only wide-ranging in terms of how and

by whom these acts are carried out, but also extremely broad in terms of

the size and damage caused by such threats. In addition, there are many

limitations in responding to such threats because the speed in which these

kinds of threats travel is extremely fast due to globalization and the rapid

spread of data and information, and because forecasting the occurrence of

these threats is also very difficult.

In order to effectively respond to these newly emerging threats, the

ROK government is actively participating in not only bilateral cooperation

with individual nations but also in international cooperation systems

through multilateral security cooperation forums.

The ROK military is participating in government level overseas

emergency relief activities in order to support overseas disaster relief

activities. For example, the ROK military actively participated in disaster

relief activities by providing military transport aircraft, relief materials,

and military medical personnel when large scale natural disasters occurred

overseas such as the 2008 Sichuan earthquake in China, 2009 typhoon in

Cambodia, 2010 earthquakes in Chile and Haiti, and the 2011 earthquake

in Japan.

The ROK government is also actively involved in the Asia-Pacific

region’s efforts centered on multilateral security forums such as the

ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and the ASEAN Defense Ministers’

Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus) to jointly respond to transnational and

non-military threats. In particular, there are expert working groups (EWG)


-----

**4. Marine Electronic Highway Project**

The ROK signed a Memorandum of
Understanding to provide USD 850,000
for the marine electronic highway
project which is an integrated maritime
security information system designed to
provide maritime security in the waters
of Southeast Asia, and to jointly carry
out the project annually with the
International Maritime Bureau.

**5. Global Peace Operation Initiative**
**(GPOI) Capstone Exercise**

A regional level PKO exercise focused on
humanitarian activities to enhance PKO
capabilities and effectiveness.

**6. Cobra Gold Exercise**

A multinational peacekeeping exercise
focused on humanitarian assistance
jointly hosted by the U.S. and Thai
militaries since 1981. The seven
participating nations are Thailand,
Japan, Singapore, Indonesia, Malaysia,
the U.S., and the ROK.

The ROK Marines participating in the
Cobra Gold exercise (Thailand, February
2012)

**7. Khaan Quest Exercise**

Exercise focused on carrying out
training based on the UN standard
training model and applying UN PKO
guidance and standards. This exercise
was initially started as a bilateral
exercise between the U.S. and Mongolia
in 2006. Currently, it has been
expanded to a multinational exercise.

**PKO Peacekeeping Operation**


working to bring about real cooperation in the five areas under the

ADMM-Plus. The EWG was launched in 2010 and includes humanitarian

assistance and disaster relief, maritime security, military medical support,

anti-terrorism, and peace keeping activities in which the ROK MND is

also playing an active role.

In addition, the ROK government is strengthening its cooperation with

ASEAN nations by providing financial and technical support for various

projects such as the piracy information sharing center to attain security in

the Strait of Malacca and the Marine Electronic Highway Project.[4]

Furthermore, the ROK military is continuously participating in

multilateral PKO exercises and training such as the GPOI Capstone

exercise,[5] Cobra Gold exercise[6] and the Khaan Quest exercise.[7]

The MND is also gradually expanding the level of cooperation with the

international community by sharing information on various security

threats through regular working level conferences on defense policy

hosted by the MND with the defense authorities of each nation, and by

carrying out joint exercises and training.

As transnational and non-military threats continue to increase, the

military’s role is also expected to further expand to counter such threats in

the future. As such, the MND will continue to closely work with the

international community by actively participating in bilateral and

multilateral security cooperation activities.


-----

-----

-----

##### Chapter 4
**Development of the**
**ROK-U.S. Alliance and**
**Expansion of Defense**
**Diplomacy and**
**Cooperation**

Section 1  Development of a Future-oriented
ROK-U.S. Alliance
Section 2  Wartime OPCON Transition and Building
a New Combined Defense System
Section 3  Expansion of Defense Diplomacy and
Cooperation
Section 4  Contributions to International
Peacekeeping Operations


74

82

90

110

|1|Col2|
|---|---|
|2||


**1  The 44[th] ROK-U.S. SCM**
(Washington D.C., October 2012)

**2  Minister of National Defense Kim, Kwan Jin**
and U.S. Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta
holding a joint press conference after the 44[th]
SCM


-----

**Development of a Future-**
**oriented ROK-U.S. Alliance**

The ROK-U.S. Alliance has deterred North Korea’s military threat for the past
60 years and concurrently contributed greatly to the stability of Northeast
Asia. In particular, it served as a robust foundation for the ROK’s rise from the
ashes of the Korean War and the ROK becoming a fully industrialized and
democratized nation. The ROK-U.S. Alliance is stronger than ever, and it is
evolving into a comprehensive strategic alliance beyond a military alliance.

**1. Development of a Comprehensive Strategic Alliance**

**| Creating the Foundation for a Comprehensive Strategic Alliance |**

As global security threats become more complex and diverse, the

international community also needs to find new methods that depart

from the past to guarantee peace and stability.

For this reason, the ROK and the U.S. adopted the ‘Joint Vision for the

Alliance of the Republic of Korea and the United States of America’ in

2009 to counter transnational and non-military threats as well as regional

and global security challenges, and agreed to develop the relationship to a

comprehensive strategic alliance. A comprehensive strategic alliance

pursues a value-based alliance that shares common values such as liberal

democracy, human rights, market economy, and an alliance of mutual trust

in the areas of military, diplomacy, security, economy, society, and culture.

Additionally, a comprehensive strategic alliance aims to become a peace
building alliance that reaches out beyond the Korean Peninsula to

contribute to peace and prosperity of East Asia and the world.

In order to develop the defense aspect of the ‘Joint Vision for the


**Section**
# 1


-----

Alliance of the Republic of Korea and the United States of America,’ the

ROK Minister of National Defense and U.S. Secretary of Defense agreed

to the ‘Guidelines for ROK-U.S. Defense Cooperation’ at the 42[nd] Security

Consultative Meeting (SCM) in 2010 that outlines the future direction for

the two countries’ defense relationship. The Guidelines provide future

directions for strengthening the combined defense posture on the Korean

Peninsula and expanding the strategic contribution towards security in

East Asia and the world. With regard to North Korea’s provocation and

asymmetric threats, the two nations agreed to establish a ‘Counter
Provocation Plan,’ and develop a tailored deterrence strategy to effectively

counter North Korea’s asymmetric threat such as weapons of mass

destruction (WMD) including nuclear capabilities.

**| Towards a Comprehensive Strategic Alliance | During the**

ROK-U.S. summit on 26 June 2010, President Lee Myung-bak and

President Barack Obama agreed to delay the timing of wartime

operational control (OPCON) transition to the ROK government from 17

April 2012 to 1 December 2015.

As a result, the ROK Defense Minister and the Defense Secretary

approved and signed ‘Strategic Alliance 2015’ at the 42[nd] SCM that would

provide a basic framework for wartime OPCON transition. They

reaffirmed that the progress of transition will be evaluated and monitored

regularly, of which the findings will be reflected throughout the transition

process.

At the 43[rd] SCM in 2011, the Minister and the Secretary agreed to

establish the ‘ROK-U.S. Integrated Defense Dialogue (KIDD),’ a senior

level policy consultation framework, co-chaired by the Deputy Minister

for Defense Policy, MND and the Undersecretary for Policy, Office of the

Secretary of Defense (OSD), to integrate, coordinate, and manage various

ROK-U.S. security consultative mechanisms.[1] In accordance with the

agreement, important alliance issues, directions for future security

cooperation, and guaranteeing the effectiveness of extended deterrence

against North Korea’s WMD, including North Korea’s nuclear capabilities,

were discussed at the first KIDD meeting held in Washington D.C. in

April 2012, and the second meeting in Seoul in September 2012 advanced

the ROK-U.S. alliance into a future-oriented alliance.


The 43[rd] SCM (Seoul, October 2011)

**1. ROK-U.S. Security Consultative**
**Mechanisms**

**ROK-U.S. SCM**

|Korea-U.S. Defense Dia|Integrated logue (KIDD)|
|---|---|
|||


**Security Policy Initiative [(]SPI[)]** **Committee Deterrence Policy Extended [(]EDPC[)]**


The 2[nd] KIDD Meeting (Seoul, September
2012)


-----

ROK-U.S. Foreign Affairs and Defense (2+2) Ministerial Talks (Washington D.C., June 2012)

‘Strategic Alliance 2015,’ which focuses on wartime OPCON transition

and enhancing the capabilities of the ROK military, and the KIDD play

crucial roles in the process of developing the ROK-U.S. alliance into a

comprehensive strategic alliance.

Held in Washington D.C. on 14 June 2012, the second ROK-U.S.

Foreign and Defense Ministers’ Meeting (2+2) has reaffirmed the ‘Joint

Vision for the Alliance of the Republic of Korea and the United States of

America,’ which was agreed by the two Presidents in 2009, and the

alliance’s efforts to respond to the changes in both the U.S. strategy, laid

out in U.S. ‘Defense Strategic Guidance’ in 2012, and the global security

threats.

At the meeting, the ministers agreed that the strong deterrence strategy

led by the ROK has been effectively deterring North Korea’s provocation.

Also, the two nations agreed to start developing comprehensive response

capabilities for the alliance to counter North Korea’s growing missile

threat. Furthermore, the ROK Ministers and U.S. Secretaries evaluated

that the process of transferring wartime operational control (OPCON) to

the Republic of Korea in 2015 was on schedule, and reaffirmed that the

United States will maintain its current troop level and is determined to


-----

provide bridging and enduring capabilities to the ROK.

The Ministers emphasized that North Korea must respect the human

rights of its citizens, address humanitarian issues, and invest in the welfare

of its people, including nutrition and education.

At the same time, the two countries agreed to make efforts to enhance

peace and stability in the region and the world through regional

mechanisms such as the Association of South East Asian Nations
(ASEAN), Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), East Asia

Summit (EAS), and the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF).

At the 44[th] SCM held in 2012, the ROK and the U.S. established a

foundation for comprehensive alliance response system to prepare against

diverse threats by North Korea. In addition to the existing operational plan
(OPLAN) for an all-out war, the ROK and the U.S. decided to develop a

Counter-Provocation Plan to jointly deal with North Korean local

provocations. It was also agreed that a tailored deterrence strategy will be

developed to enhance the effectiveness of extended deterrence against

North Korea’s asymmetric threats such as nuclear and WMD threats, and

to work towards significantly enhancing the alliance’s counter-missile

capabilities.

Furthermore, the two countries agreed to fully cooperate in dealing with

new threats such as in space and cyberspace domains, and to jointly

develop a more efficient command structure that will be applied after the

completion of wartime OPCON transition scheduled for 2015.

Additionally, the ROK and the U.S. agreed to promote various events in

2013 to commemorate the 60[th] anniversary of the Korean War Armistice

and the ROK-U.S. Alliance. They also agreed to initiate a joint study on

the ‘Defense Vision of the Alliance,’ set to be completed by 2030, to

develop a future-oriented strategic alliance.

Through the 44[th] SCM, the ROK and the U.S. upgraded the alliance to a

new level that is capable of effectively responding to any North Korean

threat, and established a foundation to develop the alliance into a future
oriented strategic alliance.

The ROK and the U.S. plan to develop the ROK and U.S. Alliance into

a comprehensive strategic alliance of the 21[st] Century that goes beyond the

Korean Peninsula in order to contribute to peace and stability in the

Pacific region and the world. Also, ROK-U.S. alliance security consul

-----

tative bodies such as the Foreign and Defense Ministers Meeting, the

SCM, and the KIDD will be further developed and concurrently, the

agendas and contents discussed by the two nations will be expanded to

encompass all areas of mutual interests, thereby further deepening and

reinforcing bilateral cooperation.

**2. Ensuring Secure Basing of United States Forces**
**in Korea (USFK)**

**| USFK Realignment | The ROK and the U.S. governments are**

consolidating, closing and relocating the U.S. military bases scattered

nationwide in order to ensure a balanced development of land and stable

stationing conditions for the U.S. forces in the ROK. The USFK base

relocation project consists of two plans: the Yongsan Relocation Plan
(YRP)[2] and the Land Partnership Plan (LPP)[3] which focus on consoli
dating USFK facilities nationwide. The discussions on YRP began in

March 1998 and were agreed to by the presidents of the two countries at

the ROK-U.S. Summit Meeting in May 2003. With the signing of the

YRP Agreement in 2004, the execution of the plan took off in full scale.

The Agreement for the LPP was signed in 2002 and was amended in

2004 to incorporate the U.S. 2[nd] Infantry Division into the plan.

In March 2007, the ROK and the U.S. agreed on a ‘Facility Master Plan’

that governs the relocation of major USFK bases such as the Yongsan

Army garrison and the U.S. 2[nd] Infantry Division to Pyeongtaek, and in

November of that year, the two nations held a groundbreaking ceremony

in Pyeongtaek. In March 2011, the ROK and the U.S. agreed to complete

the construction by 2015 and the realignment by 2016. As of September

2012, land development and the construction of infrastructure such as

roads, electricity, gas and waterworks are either completed or in progress.

In accordance with the ‘Special Act on Providing Assistance to Pyeongtaek

City in Relation to the Relocation of USFK Bases,’ the ROK government

is also constructing residential support facilities and amenities including

roads, waterworks, sewerage facilities, and town halls for those residents

in Pyeongtaek who were displaced due to the relocation.

Meanwhile, the ROK and the U.S. are working closely to resolve


**2. Yongsan Relocation Plan [(]YRP[)]**

This plan is to relocate the UNC/CFC/
USFK Commands to Pyeongtaek. The
‘YRP Agreement’ and its ‘Implementation
Agreement (IA)’ were ratified by the
National Assembly in December 2004.

**3. Land Partnership Plan [(]LPP[)]**

This plan spells out the details for
consolidating and closing USFK facilities
nationwide and for the return of
unnecessary facilities and land. A letter
of intent was signed during the 33[rd] SCM
held in November 2001. The LPP
Agreement and its amendment were
ratified by the National Assembly in
January 2002 and December 2004,
respectively.


-----

environmental issues in the facilities to be returned in accordance with the

‘Joint Environmental Assessment Procedure’ agreed in March 2009. In the

process of realigning USFK bases, a total of 49 USFK installations
(approximately 138.04 million m[2]) have been returned as of September

2012 and 31 more are to be returned. (Approximately 40 million m[2] of

land.)

Once the USFK realignment is completed, 241.98 million m[2] of USFK

facilities scattered around the ROK will be consolidated into two areas,

one in central ROK and the other in southern ROK, amounting to 76.66

million m[2] of land. The realignment of USFK bases is anticipated to not

only guarantee stable stationing conditions, but also enable the ROK

people and government to efficiently utilize the returned land.

**| Defense Cost Sharing | Defense cost sharing refers to the ROK**

government providing financial support for a portion of the stationing

costs of U.S. forces in the ROK. Prior to 1990, the U.S. had borne not

only the stationing costs but also the construction costs for most of its

facilities and installations. With the growth of the ROK economy and

national strength, the ROK government, acting in good faith of the

alliance, decided to share the costs. Since 1991, the ROK has shared the

USFK stationing costs by signing the Special Measures Agreement
(SMA)[4] pertaining to Article 5 of the Status of Forces Agreement
(SOFA).[5]

There have been eight SMAs from 1991 to 2012. At first, the MND was

the lead government agency but since the 6[th] SMA in 2005, the MND has

been supporting the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MOFAT) in

the negotiations. The size of ROK’s share is determined by taking into

account various factors, including the ROK’s financial capacity, guaran
teeing stable stationing conditions for the USFK, and the USFK’s contri
bution to the defense of ROK. The cost shared by the ROK is put into use

for financing labor, Military Construction (MILCON) and logistics

support projects. As of 2009, the Combined Defense Improvement Project
(CDIP), which was included as items of support under defense cost

sharing until 2008, has been integrated into MILCON as most of the

requirements for CDIP were met. Until 2004, the defense cost sharing

funds were paid in both U.S. Dollars and Korean Won, but since 2005, all


**4. Special Measures Agreement [(]SMA[)]**

SMAs have been concluded every 2 to 5
years since 1991

**SOFA Status of Forces Agreement**

**5. Status of Forces Agreement Article 5**
**(Facilities and Areas - Cost and**
**Maintenance[)]**

1. It is agreed that the United States will
bear for the duration of this
Agreement without cost to the
Republic of Korea all expenditures
incident to the maintenance of the
United States armed forces in the
Republic of Korea
2. It is agreed that the Republic of Korea
will furnish facilities and districts for
the duration of this Agreement
without cost to the United States


-----

payments are being made in Korean Won enabling the ROK government

to manage a stable budget independent from foreign exchange rate fluctu
ations.

In accordance with the 8[th] SMA[6] in March 2009, the ROK and the U.S.

agreed to reflect the consumer price of two years ago when increasing the

annual defense cost sharing amount with a limitation not to exceed a four

percent increase. It was also agreed that the payment for MILCON would

be made in kind instead of cash, thereby enhancing transparency. In

accordance with the 8[th] SMA, the ROK will pay 812.5 billion in Korean

Won (KRW) in 2011 (applying an inflation rate of 2.8% in 2009) and

836.1 billion KRW in 2012 (applying inflation rate of 2.9% in 2010).

An appropriate level of defense cost sharing between the ROK and the

U.S. is crucial in fostering a stable stationing environment for the USFK

service members and solidifying the ROK-U.S. combined defense posture.

Additionally, monetary support for USFK stationing costs generates

demand for equipment, services, and construction from USFK, as well as

employment, which in turn contributes to boosting domestic demand and

the development of the local economy.

**| Strengthening Friendship Activities | The ROK and the U.S.**

militaries carry out various programs to strengthen friendship. The MND

runs ‘Friends Forever Program’ which is a culture and history introduc
tion program provided to the USFK personnel who have been in the

ROK for less than a year. The program was initiated in 1972 and since

then a total of 17,000 service members took part in the program as of

2011. In 2011, six events took place at locations such as historic palaces

in Seoul, the Korea Folk Village, and the ROK Navy Second Fleet as

part of this program. In particular, the ‘temple stay’ program, which

started for the first time in 2011, received tremendous feedback from the

participants as the foremost way to introduce ROK’s traditional culture.

Additionally, the participants paid keen interest to the security situation

on the Korean Peninsula during their visit to the memorial of the ROK

Ship Cheonan.

The ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command is enhancing mutual

friendship through ‘the Good Neighbor Program’ by carrying out cultural

exchange events between the two countries and promoting friendship


**6. Effective Period of the 8[th] SMA**

2009-2013

Temple Stay event. The ‘Friends Forever
Program.’


-----

activities with the local communities.

The Good Neighbor Program is jointly led by the USFK, the ROK

component of the Combined Forces Command (CFC), and various

ROK-U.S. friendship associations. The USFK runs the Executive

Orientation Program, which introduces the role and current tasks carried

out by the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command to leaders from the

ROK government, the media, businesses sector, and academia. Other

activities and events carried out by the USFK include the Good Neighbor

English Camp for ROK high school students, the Good Neighbor Award

Ceremony in honor of individuals and organizations who dedicated

themselves to promoting friendship between the ROK and the U.S., an

advisory council for the CFC Commander, and meetings between high

school students and war veterans.

Exchange programs led by the ROK component of the CFC include,

ROK introduction programs for USFK service members, visits to battle

sites and military units, tactical discussions, cultural tours, CFC

establishment commemoration events, and support activities for various

social welfare facilities and local residents.

The ROK-U.S. friendship associations composed of former public

officials, heads of local governments, and entrepreneurs express their

gratitude to the USFK for its contribution to the peace and stability on the

Korean Peninsula and enhance friendship by hosting various activities

such as cultural excursions to industrial facilities and to morale-boosting

events.


-----

**Wartime OPCON Transition**
**and Building a New**
**Combined Defense System**

The ROK and the U.S. agreed on the transition of wartime OPCON to the
ROK government on 1 December 2015. The two countries will establish a
strong new combined defense system to deter war on the Korean Peninsula
and defend the ROK during contingencies even after OPCON transition.

**1. Background and Chronology of Wartime OPCON Transi-**
**tion**

Discussions between the ROK-U.S. and a joint study on the transition of

wartime Operational Control (OPCON) began in the late 1980s.

Consequently, it was agreed at the 13[th] ROK-U.S. Military Committee

Meeting (MCM) in 1991 to transfer armistice operational control
(Peacetime OPCON) sometime between 1993 and 1995, and to commence

discussions on the transition of wartime OPCON after 1996. In accordance

with this agreement, the armistice OPCON was transferred to the ROK

government on 1 December 1994.

Since 2000, there has been a growing perception within the ROK

society that a stable and steadfast alliance needs to be developed which

reflects the growth of the ROK national power and military capabilities,

and the changing security environment. At the same time, the U.S. has

been pursuing a military reform in order to counter various threats such as

terrorism and WMD that have newly emerged since the 9/11 terrorist

attacks. The transition of wartime OPCON was initiated with the goal of


**Section**
# 2


-----

improving the combined command structure that can address such

changes in the security environment.

Wartime OPCON transition was fully initiated with the ROK Minister

of National Defense and the U.S. Secretary of Defense agreeing to

‘accelerate discussions on command relations and wartime OPCON

Transition’ during the 37[th] ROK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting
(SCM) on 21 October 2005. During the ROK-U.S. Summit on 16

September 2006, the two presidents agreed on the basic principles for

wartime OPCON transition, and on 23 February 2007, the Minister of

National Defense and the Secretary of Defense agreed on the transfer date

of 17 April 2012. Accordingly, the two countries were able to pursue the

execution of the wartime OPCON transition initiative in earnest.

At the Permanent Military Committee (PMC) meeting on 28 June 2007,

the Chairman of the ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff and the SUSMOAK
(Senior United States Military Officer Assigned to Korea) signed the

‘Strategic Transition Plan (STP),’[1] which was approved by the ROK

Minister of National Defense and the U.S. Secretary of Defense on 7

November 2007 at the 39[th] SCM, and provided a concrete basis for

implementing wartime OPCON transition.

On the other hand, North Korea committed a series of military

provocations including a nuclear test and a long-range ballistic missile

launch in 2009 and the attack on the ROK Ship Cheonan in 2010.

Additionally, the instability of the North Korean regime was further

deepened with the failure of its currency reform and the exacerbation of

Kim Jong Il’s ailing health. Also, it was expected that 2012 would be a

period of high volatility in terms of politics and security, with leadership

changes in several countries in the region including the ROK. Against this

backdrop, there was growing public concern that the transition of wartime

OPCON should be deferred. Consequently, the ROK government raised

the issue of adjusting the timing of wartime OPCON transition to the U.S.

government.

After close consultation, it was agreed at the ROK-U.S. Summit on 26

June 2010 that the timing of wartime OPCON transition would be

readjusted from the 17 April 2012 to 1 December 2015.


**1. Strategic Transition Plan [(]STP[)]**

An ROK-U.S. strategic document which
contains tasks and timelines leading up
to wartime OPCON transition.


-----

**Chart 4-1. Chronology of OPCON Transition**

|Date|Major Content|
|---|---|
|14 July 1950|President Syngman Rhee transfers OPCOM over the ROK military to the UN Commander.|
|17 November 1954|OPCON over the ROK military delegated to the UNC Commander.2|
|7 November 1978|CFC is established; OPCON is transferred to the CFC Commander.|
|1 December 1994|Peacetime operational control of the ROK military is transferred to the ROK Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.|
|16 September 2006|Agreement on wartime OPCON transition at the ROK-U.S. Summit Talks.|
|23 February 2007|ROK Minister of National Defense and U.S. Secretary of Defense agree on the timing (17 April 2012) of wartime OPCON Transition.|
|28 June 2007|ROK-U.S. agree on the Strategic Transition Plan|
|26 June 2010|ROK-U.S. Summit Talks in which the two nations agree to adjust the timing of transition to the end of 2015.|
|8 October 2010|ROK-U.S. agree on ‘Strategic Alliance 2015’|



Following the agreement, the two countries agreed to adopt ‘Strategic

Alliance 2015’[3] at the Foreign and Defense Ministers Meeting (2+2) on 21

July 2010. Subsequently, the ROK Minister of National Defense and the

U.S. Secretary of Defense signed the ‘Strategic Alliance 2015’ at the 42[nd]

SCM in October 2010, which provides a comprehensive guidance to

project the new alliance as a joint strategic vision by 2015.

In order to promote a seamless transition of wartime OPCON, the

Ministry of National Defense, placed the ‘Wartime OPCON Transition

Group’ under direct supervision of the ROK JCS Chairman effective 1

January 2012, and established the ‘New Combined Defense Transfor
mation Group’ by merging the ‘Wartime OPCON Transition Group’ and the

‘High-Echelon Command Structure Transformation Group’ on 21 March

2012.

**2. Significance of Wartime OPCON Transition**

With the transition of wartime OPCON on 1 December 2015, the

ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command (CFC) will be disestablished and

the military structure of the ROK-U.S. Alliance will transform from the

CFC-led system into a new combined defense system where the ROK JCS

leads and the U.S. KORCOM[4] supports.


**2. OPCON over the ROK military**
**delegated to the UNC Commander**

To guarantee the defense of the ROK by
UN forces even after the Armistice
Agreement was signed, the ROK and the
U.S. agreed to place the ROK military
under the OPCON of the UNC
Commander to guarantee the defense of
the ROK by UN forces.

**3. Strategic Alliance 2015 [(]SA 2015[)]**

A comprehensive ROK-U.S. strategic
document which includes military
measures and development plans for
alliance issues leading up to the
transition of wartime OPCON in 2015.
SA 2015 replaced the existing STP.

**4. U.S. KORCOM**

A U.S. combat command to be
established under a new combined
defense system on the Korean Peninsula
after the transition of OPCON,
succeeding the USFK.


-----

**Chart 4-2. Alliance Military Structure after Wartime OPCON Transition**

**Current Combined Defense System** **New Combined Defense System**

**ROK MND** **SCM** **U.S. DoD** **ROK MND** **SCM** **U.S. DoD**

**ROK-U.S.** **Functions**

**ROK MND** **SCM** **U.S. DoD**

**ROK JCS** **MC** **U.S. JCS**

**CFC**

**ROK-U.S.**
**Component**
**Commands**

**ROK MND** **SCM** **U.S. DoD**

**MC** **U.S. JCS**

**ROK JCS**
**(Supported)**

**U.S. KORCOM**

**Military** **(Supporting)**
**Coordination**
**for Units and**
**Functions**

**Operations** **Component**
**Commands** **Commands**


The current combined defense system is a unified command structure

where the Commander of the CFC operationally controls designated

forces of both the ROK and the U.S. militaries upon declaration of

DEFCON-III. However, in the new combined defense system, the ROK

JCS will lead with the U.S. KORCOM in the supporting role. The ROK

JCS and the U.S. KORCOM will have military coordination elements

across all units and functions. The significance of wartime OPCON

transition is as follows.

First, it will provide an opportunity for the ROK-U.S. Alliance to

develop into a comprehensive strategic alliance. A comprehensive

strategic alliance will contribute to the ROK leading the defense of the

Korean Peninsula thereby building a new cooperative security order in the

East Asia region for peace and coexistence, and expand the ROK-U.S.

partnership. Based on this shared consensus, the ROK and the U.S. are in

the process of restructuring the alliance through the transition of wartime

OPCON.

Second, wartime OPCON transition will enhance the ROK armed forces

to become a stronger, more combat-oriented military. Wartime functions

executed by the CFC will be transferred to the ROK JCS, which means

that the JCS will have command and control over both peacetime and

wartime operations. As such, the Chairman of the ROK JCS will be a

theater commander during wartime and will be responsible for leading

combined operations. To conduct such roles, the ROK military is

dedicating its efforts to strengthen jointness around the JCS.

Third, the status of the ROK military will be enhanced both at home and


-----

abroad, as it will possess the capabilities to be responsible for its own

security of the Korean Peninsula. The ROK military will take the leading

role in establishing and developing a theater level operational plan
(OPLAN), and executing ground, naval, and air operations, along with the

U.S. forces.

**3. Progress of Wartime OPCON Transition**

Based on the ‘Strategic Alliance 2015,’ the ROK and the U.S. are

systematically implementing wartime OPCON transition in the areas of

organization, capabilities and systems, exercise, and certification in order

to facilitate the process.

In order to facilitate the transition of wartime OPCON, the ROK and the

U.S. are operating a whole-of-government ROK-U.S. combined

implementation governance system, which includes not only the military

aspects, but also alliance issues, as shown in Chart 4-3. The governance

system is composed of three subcommittees: Military Transition, Plans

and Policy, and Alliance Management. Each subcommittee has consul
tative meetings at the working and colonel levels, and the implementation

status of related tasks is regularly evaluated by consultative bodies: the

subcommittee, Steering Committees, Joint Working Group, the MCM, and

the SCM.

**Chart 4-3. Monitoring System for Combined Implementation for SA 2015**

Military Field Alliance Issue


**SA 2015 Secretariat**


|SC|CM for Implementation|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|M/ Joint W ent MC Gro Coordi Comm|Information sharing and orking coordination SOFA up Joint Committee nation ittee and Policy Alliance Management mittee Subcommittee|||
|||SOFA Joint Committee||
||||anagement mittee|
|ransition Planning mittee Subcom||||


-----

The ROK JCS, as shown in Chart 4-4, manages and coordinates the

implementation tasks and integrates the relevant efforts through a

working level evaluation meeting presided by the Director of the New

Combined Defense Transformation Group (monthly) and an implemen
tation evaluation meeting (quarterly) chaired by the Chairman of the ROK

JCS.

**Chart 4-4. The JCS Implementation System under SA 2015**

**Implementation**

**Chairman ROK JCS** **Evaluation Meeting** **Director General**

**(Quarterly)**

**Head, New Combined** **Working Level**
**Defense Transformation** **Evaluation Meeting** **Working Level Staff**
**Group** **(Monthly)**

**Combined Military** Coordination **Division Responsible**
**Coordination Group** Control **for Task**


The progress of each area is summarized below.

**| Organization | The organizational aspect involves reorganizing the**

structure of the ROK JCS to enable the ROK JCS to lead theater level

operations on the Korean Peninsula and to establish a new alliance

command structure that will allow smooth cooperation between the ROK

and the U.S. In particular, the new alliance command structure will be

vital in maximizing the efficiency of combined operations after wartime

OPCON transition.

During the 44[th] SCM held in October 2012, both the ROK and the U.S.

agreed that a command structure that can maintain the efficiency of the

combined operational command structure of the current CFC even after

wartime OPCON transition where the ROK will be leading the operations

would be needed. Accordingly, a joint working group will be formed to

study options for a future command structure and certify the effectiveness

of such options during UFG exercises between 2013 and 2015.

**| Capabilities and Systems | This is an area to acquire alliance**

military capabilities[5] to conduct theater level operations and to establish


**5. Alliance Military Capabilities**

Comprehensive capability of ROK core
military capabilities and U.S. bridging
and enduring capabilities


-----

a combined operations execution system. The ROK, which will be

leading the Korean Peninsula theater operations, and the U.S., which will

be supporting, are acquiring necessary capabilities through close consul
tation. The military capabilities of the ROK and the U.S. will be briefed

each year during the MCM and the SCM until the transition of wartime

OPCON.

**| Exercise and Certification | In June 2011, the ROK and the U.S.**

agreed on the exercise and certification methods that will enable the

ROK to attain the capabilities required to lead a combined exercise. To

this end, the ROK and the U.S. will apply the command structure for

post-OPCON transition during UFG exercises from 2013 to 2015 and

validate the results. Additionally, the ROK JCS is constructing new

Opposing Forces (OPFOR) simulation facilities and the Joint War

fighting Simulation Center (JWSC) at the ROK JCS, as part of a plan to

establish an infrastructure for a combined exercise system.

Starting from UFG 2013, certification will be comprehensively

conducted in phases in the areas of organization, personnel, training,

resources, planning, procedures, and capabilities of the ROK JCS and the

U.S. KORCOM. An ROK-U.S. Combined Certification Team will be

established to evaluate the implementation progress at each stage and

report the final certification result at the SCM in 2015.

**| Plans | The ROK and the U.S. aim to complete an OPLAN, which**

incorporates countermeasures for both low-intensity provocations and an

all-out war before wartime OPCON transition. The ROK and the U.S.

are concurrently developing a plan to counter local provocations and an

OPLAN which will be executed during war after OPCON transition.

These new OPLANs will be used during military exercises from 2013

and after updating any shortcomings, the final plans will be completed

before December 2015.

**| Strategic Documents | In accordance with the ‘Strategic Alliance**

2015,’ the ROK and the U.S. are drafting the ‘Terms of Reference
(TOR)’[6] and ‘Strategic Directive[7] No. 3,’ which will be incorporated after

OPCON transition. These documents will be implemented into the UFG


**6. Terms of Reference**

Overarching strategic document,
containing the strategic guidance given
by the ROK-U.S. Defense Minister and
Secretary of Defense at the SCM and
ordered to the MC.

**7. Strategic Directive**

A strategic document, specifying
strategic orders based on the TOR given
from the MC to theater command.


-----

exercises from 2013 to 2015 and any shortcomings to the documents will

be revised. These documents, once signed at the MCM and SCM in

2015, will go into effect on 1 December 2015.

**| Alliance Issues | Important alliance issues include the realignment**

of USFK and strategic communications.[8] The realignment of USFK is

implemented in two parts: the first is the ‘Yongsan Relocation Plan
(YRP)’and the other is the ‘Land Partnership Plan (LPP)’ aimed at consol
idating USFK facilities scattered all over the ROK. Coordination

meetings for strategic communications are held every six months to

update important agenda and messages, and a detailed quarterly

implementation plan and evaluation system have been established.

**4. The Way Ahead**

With the set goal of 1 December 2015, the ROK military aims to fully

equip itself with the ability to lead theater level operations on the Korean

Peninsula before the transition of wartime OPCON.

To this end, the ROK and the U.S. have established the foundation for

wartime OPCON transition by 2012 in accordance with the ‘Strategic

Alliance 2015,’ and will assess and certify the mission capability of the

ROK JCS and the U.S. KORCOM at each level from 2013 to 2015 and

address any shortfalls. Additionally, the ROK military will operationalize

the Allied Korean Joint Command & Control System (AKJCCS), which

is an essential requirement for the ROK JCS to lead theater level

operations, complete a new theater OPLAN, and establish a new

combined defense system that will maximize the efficiency of military

operations.


**8. Strategic Communications**

A whole-of-government effort to take
the lead in shaping a favorable security
environment and achieve the goals by
utilizing the plans, themes, messages
and activities that have been
established through close integration of
the elements of national power.


-----

**Expansion of Defense**
**Diplomacy and Cooperation**

The Ministry of National Defense (MND) is enhancing its exchange cooperation with Japan, China, and Russia by building upon the foundation provided
by the ROK-U.S. Alliance, thereby promoting peace and stability on the
Korean Peninsula and Northeast Asia. The MND is expanding the boundaries
of defense diplomacy from Northeast Asia to the global arena, including
Southeast Asia, the Middle East, Africa, and Latin America. It is contributing
to global peace and security by actively participating in multilateral security
consultative bodies and international conventions.

**1. Defense Exchanges and Cooperation with Neighboring**
**Countries**

**| Exchange and Cooperation with Japan | As allies of the United**

States, the Republic of Korea and Japan[1] share the same basic values of

liberal democracy and a market economy. Based on this, they have

continued to raise the level of cooperation in various areas. However, the

different historical perspective held by Japan, and its unjust claim over

_Dokdo, which is ROK sovereign territory, remain factors that must be_

overcome to ensure the development of future-oriented defense

exchanges and cooperation between the two countries.

The defense authorities of the two nations have held regular Defense

Ministers’ Meeting since 1994. At the 14[th] Defense Ministers’ Meeting held

in 2009, the defense authorities of the two countries signed the ‘Letter of

Intent on Defense Exchanges between the Republic of Korea and Japan.’

At the 15[th] Defense Ministers’ Meeting held in Seoul in January 2011,

the Ministers agreed that substantial progress had been made in various

areas of defense cooperation. Also, the ministers agreed to initiate a


**Section**
# 3


**1. Development of ROK-Japan**
**Relationship**

-  21[st] century ROK-Japan Joint
Partnership (1998)

-  Future-oriented ROK-Japan
relationship (2005)

-  Future-oriented mature partnership
(2008)

_Dokdo is undoubtedly the ROK’s territory_
in terms of geography, history, and
international law.

The 15[th] ROK-Japan Defense Ministers’
Meeting (Seoul, January 2011)


-----

working level dialogue with the goal of signing an agreement that will

serve as an institutional foundation in developing an ROK-Japan military

relationship in a future-focused direction.

At the Vice Ministers’ Meeting held in November 2011, the vice

ministers shared a view that defense cooperation needs to be reinforced for

the stability of the Korean Peninsula and improved relationship between

the ROK and Japan, and sought ways to expand defense exchange

cooperation. Additionally, senior level exchanges were activated in 2011

where the ROK Chairman of the JCS and the Chief of Naval Operations

visited Japan and Japan Ground Self-Defense Force Chief of Staff visited

the ROK.

The two nations also hold working- level talks, such as the Defense

Policy Talks, 2+2 Security Policy Dialogue (foreign affairs and defense) to

enhance mutual understanding and expand the scope of cooperation. Also,

personal exchanges take place actively between the ROK Army, Navy, and

Air Force with each respective Japanese Self Defense Forces counterpart,

including working-level meetings, exchanges among units, exchange

visits of cadets, and exchange of military students for overseas studies.

Recently, the two nations have been expanding exchanges and cooperation

in defense arena to include the ROK-Japan maritime search and rescue

exercises, reciprocal visits between transport aircraft, and mutual

cooperation in international peacekeeping activities.

In the future, the MND will solidify the existing military trust and ties

with Japan and will strive to further develop the relationship as a ‘future
oriented and mature partnership’ as provided at the ROK-Japan Summit in

April 2008.

**| Exchange and Cooperation with China | With 2012 being the 20[th]**

anniversary of diplomatic relations between the ROK and China, the

ROK-China relationship[2] has seen rapid progress in many different

areas, such as the political, economic, social, and cultural fronts. In May

2008, the relationship between the two nations was elevated to a

‘strategic cooperative partnership,’ leading to active defense cooperation

and exchange.

At the Asia Security Summit in June 2011, the ROK Minister of

National Defense Kim, Kwan Jin and the Chinese Defense Minister Liang


**2. Development of ROK-China**
**Relationship**

-  Friendly cooperative relationship
(1992)

-  Cooperative partnership (1998)

-  Comprehensive cooperative
relationship (2000)

-  Comprehensive cooperative
partnership (2003)

-  Strategic Cooperative Partnership
(2008)


-----

Guanglie exchanged views on the security situation of the Korean

Peninsula. During the Defense Ministers’ Meeting in July 2011, the

ministers shared that the ‘two countries object to any actions that disrupts

the peace and stability in the region’ and agreed to establish a vice minister

level strategic dialogue. In accordance with this agreement, the first

Defense Strategic Dialogue between the ROK Vice Minister and People’s

Liberation Army (PLA) Deputy Chief of the General Staff was held in

Seoul in the same month. In this meeting, views were exchanged with

regard to the security situation on the Korean Peninsula and ways to

improve defense cooperation and exchange. In the second Defense

Strategic Dialogue held in 2012 in Beijing, the two countries signed the

‘Memorandum of understanding (MOU) on ROK-China Defense

Exchange Cooperation’ and agreed on substantial cooperative measures

such as installing a hotline between the two ministries.

During the ROK-China Logistics Cooperation Meeting in October 2011

and July 2012, the two countries discussed the issue of signing the ‘MOU

on Mutual Support for Disaster Relief,’ and talks are held between all

military services. Exchange visits by naval vessels, military sports teams,

and military history and training institutions have also been very active. In

particular, ROK Naval Academy midshipmen made a port call to China

during a cruise training and ROK-China academic seminars were held to

commemorate the 20[th] anniversary of diplomatic relations.

In the future the defense ministries of the two nations will gradually

expand to cooperative partnership and will contribute to peace and

stability on the Korean Peninsula and in Northeast Asia.

**| Exchange and Cooperation with Russia | Since the normalization**

of diplomatic ties in 1990, the relationship between the ROK and

Russia[3] has improved in a wide array of areas such as politics, economy,

energy, science and technology. Since the promotion of the two countries’

relationship to a ‘strategic cooperative partnership’ level in 2008, the

ROK and Russia are strengthening their cooperation to resolve the North

Korean nuclear issue and to develop energy resource opportunities. For

example, the construction of gas pipe lines running from Russia, North

Korea and to the ROK with the November 2011 Moscow Summit,

Nuclear Security Summit of March 2012, and the September 2012


The 2[nd] ROK-China Defense Strategic
Dialogue (Beijing, July 2012)

**3. Development of ROK-Russia**
**Relationship**

-  Constructive and mutually
complementary partnership (1994).

-  Comprehensive partnership of mutual
trust (2004).

-  Strategic cooperative partnership
(2008).


-----

Vladivostok Summit.

The two countries are stepping up the level of cooperation and exchange

in the area of defense and security through senior level exchange visits and

cooperation in the defense industry and technology sectors. In particular, a

strategic dialogue held in March 2012 between the ROK Deputy Minister

for Defense Policy and the Russian Deputy Minister of Defense for

International Cooperation was a turning point in invigorating defense

exchanges between the two countries. In this first-ever ROK-Russia

Defense Ministry strategic dialogue, the two countries agreed to hold

defense strategic dialogues on a regular basis and reaffirmed Russia’s

constructive role and commitment to peace and stability on the Korean

Peninsula. Additionally, continued exchange visits by senior military

leaders such as visits to Russia by the ROK JCS Chairman and the ROK

Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force, and a visit to the ROK by the Russia

Eastern Military District Commander will be pursued.

Through JCS Chief Director level dialogues and joint military

committee meetings, the two nations are also enhancing mutual

understanding and are continuing to develop their military cooperation

relationship at the working level. Exchanges between the units and

educational institutions are also actively taking place such as unit

exchanges between the FROKA (First ROK Army) and the Russia’s Far

Eastern Military District Command, and Russia’s General Staff College

visit to the ROK.

Since 1994, ROK officers have been receiving education in Russia, and

Russia is planning to send military officers to ROK military educational

institutions based on mutual agreements.

The ROK and Russia will endeavor to expand defense exchange

cooperation, thereby contributing to peace and stability on the Korean

Peninsula and the East Asia region as well as enhancing friendship

between the two countries.


ROK-Russia Defense Strategic Dialogue
(Moscow, March 2012)


-----

**2. Defense Exchanges and Cooperation with Countries out-**
**side the Region**

**| Southeast Asia and Oceania | Under the banner of ‘New Asia**

Diplomacy,’[4] the ROK government is enhancing its relationship with

Asian countries and promoting co-prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region.

At the same time, the ROK is strengthening its strategic engagements

with the ASEAN[5] countries to increase security cooperation, obtain

support for its North Korea policy, and to obtain energy and natural

resources. Additionally, the ROK government is actively promoting

military diplomacy in the area of senior officers’ exchange visits, defense

industry cooperation and export, information sharing meetings, and

various other routine dialogues. Furthermore, the ROK is also pursuing a

number of defense cooperative initiatives in Oceania with Australia and

New Zealand.

President Lee Myung-bak had a summit meeting with President

Yudhoyono of Indonesia in December 2010. In this meeting, the two

Presidents agreed to strengthen close and substantive cooperative

relationships by working together in defense industry areas such as joint

production and technology transfer of major military equipment. In 2011,

the ROK – Indonesia Defense Ministers’ Meeting was held on two

occasions. In February and September, the two ministers reinforced both

countries defense cooperation by discussing ways to promote defense

industry cooperation, agreeing on the export of the T-50 advanced jet

trainer and submarines, and signing the ‘MOU on the Establishment of

Defense Industry Cooperation Committee.’

In March 2011, the defense ministers of the ROK and the Philippines

signed an ‘MOU on Defense Cooperation’ and discussed the establishment

of a regular dialogue body and exchange visits of senior military officers.

In April, the defense ministers of the ROK and Thailand agreed to

establish an institutional framework for defense cooperation and to join

efforts in the defense industry area including military trucks. Such

dialogues led to the signing of an ‘MOU on Defense Cooperation’ between

the ROK and Thailand in March 2012.

At the ROK – Vietnam Foreign Affairs and Security Strategic Dialogue

in April 2011, the two countries discussed ways to enhance senior military


**4. New Asia Diplomacy**

A policy direction which aims to expand
the ROK diplomatic activities beyond the
four major powers towards nations in
Asia including Southeast Asia,
Southwest Asia, Central Asia and South
Pacific, and strengthen friendship and
cooperation with these nations.
*[ Its goal is to develop a comprehensive ]
cooperative relationship with Asian
countries in all sectors including
political, economic, security and social
areas, thereby takes a leading role in
resolving global issues such as global
financial crises and climate changes.

**5. Association of Southeast Asian**
**Nations [(]ASEAN[)]**

An association established in 1967
consisting of ten countries from
Southeast Asia (Thailand, Malaysia,
Indonesia, Singapore, Philippines,
Brunei, Vietnam, Laos, Myanmar,
Cambodia) with the aim of promoting
joint security and regional cooperation.
It is being developed into a
comprehensive regional cooperative
framework including politics, security,
economy, society, and culture.

ROK-Indonesia Defense Ministers’
Meeting (Jakarta, September 2011)


-----

personnel exchanges, expand academic exchanges, and invigorate military

training and education exchanges, and agreed to upgrade the Defense

Policy Working Level Dialogue to a Vice Minister Level Strategic

Dialogue. Following the agreement, the first ROK-Vietnam Vice Minister

level Defense Strategic Dialogue was held in Hanoi in March 2012 where

the vice ministers agreed to reinforce cooperation in high-level

educational cooperation, work towards signing an ‘MOU on Quality

Guarantees,’ and to hold Defense Strategic Dialogue annually in rotation.

In accordance with the agreement made at the ROK – Australia Summit

in April 2011, the first Defense Ministers’ Meeting was held in Canberra in

December 2011. The ministers agreed to expand defense cooperation and

coordinate efforts for peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region. In

addition, through the signing of an ‘MOU on Defense Cooperation,’ the

institutional groundwork for further cooperation and exchange was

established, and the ministers agreed to specify the level and scope of

cooperation for each area. The first ROK – Australia Defense Ministers’

Meeting served as an opportunity to further develop the defense

cooperation in enhancing security on the Korean Peninsula and in the

Asia-Pacific region.

In April 2011, the Defense Ministers of the ROK and New Zealand

discussed the security situation on the Korean Peninsula and Northeast

Asia. The ministers also agreed to pursue a ‘General Security of Military

Information Agreement’ (GSOMIA) that is consistent with the interests of

each nation, and to enhance the level of defense cooperation. The two

ministers also discussed ways to strengthen defense industry cooperation

through ROK companies’ participation in New Zealand’s oil-tanker

replacement project.

**| Southwest Asia | The ROK government is enhancing its defense**

exchange and cooperation with Southwest Asian nations such as India

and Pakistan through exchange visits by National Defense University

graduate students, sponsored education programs, and Naval Academy

cruise training visits.

Following the March 2012 ROK-India Summit, the two countries

agreed to expand defense cooperation befitting their strategic partnership,

and to actively promote future-oriented defense cooperation for peace and


ROK-Vietnam Vice Minister Level
Strategic Dialogue (Hanoi, March 2012)

ROK-Australia Defense Ministers’
Meeting (Canberra, December 2011)


-----

stability of the Asia-Pacific region and maritime security.

The ROK and India will reinforce cooperation between the two navies

for the maritime security of the Indian Ocean, which is an important

sea-lane of communication, and promote comprehensive cooperation in

the area of security and defense industries. To this end, India established

an Indian Defense Attaché Office in the ROK in September 2012.

**| The Middle East | The Middle East is a critical region for securing**

energy resources, exporting defense industry equipment and products,

and carrying out large-scale government projects. The MND is strength
ening its defense exchange and defense industry cooperation with the

countries of the Middle East.

In January 2012, the Deputy Minister for Defense Policy of ROK MND

met the Defense Minister of Saudi Arabia and other senior military leaders

and agreed to promoting defense cooperation and holding regular senior

level dialogues. The ROK government reopened its Defense Attaché

Office in Saudi Arabia that had been closed for twenty years.

In February 2012, the ROK President met with the Defense Minister of

Saudi Arabia during his tour of three Middle East Countries and Turkey.

The ROK and Saudi Arabia agreed to comprehensively expand

cooperation in the area of defense and defense industries. In particular, the

two countries agreed to establish a cooperation mechanism for the

exchange of defense ministers and defense cooperation.

The ROK deployed the Akh Unit to the United Arab Emirates to provide

support for training UAE special warfare units and to conduct joint

training and exercises. In addition, training exchanges with the ROK

Special Warfare Command are being actively pursued in special warfare

areas requested by the Middle East countries such as Saudi Arabia, Qatar,

Kuwait, and Bahrain. Meanwhile, with the request from Libya, the ROK

sent the ‘ROK Support Team for Identification of Missing Libyan

Nationals’ to provide support in excavating and verifying identity of

missing people from the Libyan civil war.

Such expansion of defense cooperation with the Middle East countries

not only contributes to strengthening the security cooperation between the

nations, but also increases economic cooperation and energy diplomacy in

the private sectors.


ROK Deputy Minister for Defense
Policy’s Courtesy Call to the Defense
Minister of Saudi Arabia (Riyadh,
January 2012)


-----

**| Europe | The MND is deepening and advancing its defense**

exchanges and cooperation with major west European countries, who

have traditionally maintained friendly and cooperative relationships with

the ROK, while extending defense cooperation with east and north

European countries.

The United Kingdom is an important country in Europe that fought as

an ally during the Korean War and maintained a friendly and cooperative

relationship ever since. During the ROK – UK Vice Ministers’ Meeting in

April 2011, the Vice Minister of the ROK Ministry of National Defense

expressed gratitude for the UK fighting on the ROK side during the

Korean War and supporting the ROK’s position after North Korea’s

surprise attack against the ROK Ship Cheonan and the shelling of Yeonpy
_eongdo (island). In particular, the two vice ministers had an in-depth_

discussion on cooperation in the area of defense industries.

Germany has maintained a close cooperative relationship with the ROK

in terms of defense industry and military education. At the ROK –

Germany Defense Working Level Dialogue in November 2011, the two

countries assessed the security situation in the Northeast Asia region and

discussed ways in which the two countries can cooperate and exchange in

the areas of overseas deployment and defense reform. They also agreed to

conclude an ‘MOU on mutual logistics support.’

In June 2011, an ROK – Sweden Defense Ministers Meeting was held.

The ministers agreed to establish a regular director-general level dialogue,

and at this regular framework, agreed on sending a Swedish professor to

the ROK PKO Center at the National Defense University. Consequently, a

full-time Swedish professor was appointed to the ROK PKO Center in

December 2011. In addition, the first director general level ROK –

Sweden Defense Policy Working Level Meeting was held in October

2011. The two countries agreed on the institutional framework of future

meetings such as agenda for defense cooperation and exchange and the

frequency of the meetings, as well as making an assessment on the

implementation status of defense exchange cooperation and the existing

MOUs.

In July 2012, the Vice Minister of National Defense toured France,

Spain, and Turkey to promote defense diplomacy and explained the ROK’s

North Korea policy. During the Vice Ministers’ Meeting with France, the


ROK-Sweden Defense Policy Working
Level Dialogue (Seoul, October 2011)


-----

two countries agreed that defense cooperation should be improved, and the

ROK Vice Minister invited his French counterpart to visit the ROK. In the

meeting with the Vice Minister of Spain’s defense ministry, the two vice

ministers agreed to sign a ‘Mutual Logistics Support Agreement’ before the

end of 2012, and to hold the 5[th] Defense Policy Working Level Meeting in

Seoul in the first half of 2013. During the Vice Minister’s visit to Turkey,

the Turkish side expressed its desire for continued cooperation in defense

exchanges and in the defense industry sector. In return, the ROK Vice

Minister emphasized the importance of personnel exchange and invited

the Turkish Deputy Minister of Defense to Seoul.

Poland contributes to peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula as a

member of the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission (NNSC).

Defense cooperation with Poland is being promoted since the signing of a

‘General Security of Military Information Agreement’ in September 2009.

**| Central Asia | Most Central Asian countries after gaining their**

independence from the former USSR became part of the Commonwealth

of Independent States (CIS).[6] The region in which the CIS is located

covers a vast area, spanning from the Central Asian region bordering

China to the region that borders Europe. Among these countries, the five

Central Asian countries have achieved overall political stability and

economic growth through the process of organizing their national institu
tions since their independence two decades ago.

The year 2012 marks the 20[th] anniversary of ROK’s diplomatic ties with

all of the Central Asian countries and significant progress has been made

for cooperative relationships in the defense areas.

The ROK and Kazakhstan signed an ‘MOU on Defense Cooperation and

Exchange’ in September 2010, and held the first Defense Policy Working

Level Dialogue in Astana, Kazakhstan in November 2011 that established

the groundwork for further cooperation in the defense area. With

Uzbekistan, an ‘MOU on Defense Industry and Logistics Support’ was

signed in 2010 and the Defense Policy Working Level Dialogue was held

in Seoul in 2011 that strengthened the cooperative relations by expanding

the opportunities for the ROK defense industries to enter the Uzbekistan

market. Cooperation and exchange are also taking place and are being

expanded with Mongolia into various areas including personnel exchange,


**6. Commonwealth of Independent**
**States [(]CIS[)]**

A political union established after the
collapse of the USSR by 11 nations that
formerly were a part of the Soviet
Union.

ROK-Kazakhstan Defense Policy
Working Level Dialogue (Astana,
November 2011)


-----

education, academics, and participation in the ‘Khaan Quest.’

The military and education exchange with the Central Asian states have

significance in the sense that they are future oriented cooperation.

Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan send their officers to the ROK military

educational institutions for language and military education.

**| Africa | The African continent is receiving a significant amount of**

international attention as a rich repository of natural and energy

resources. The ROK government is expanding defense cooperation with

the African states in the perspective of resources and security initiatives.

In 2010, MND officials, as members of the government on-site investi
gation team, were sent to Gabon and Equatorial Guinea in West Africa to

discuss defense industry cooperation and logistics material export

opportunities with senior ranking military officials. In September 2011, a

defense cooperation envoy visited the Republic of South Africa, Nigeria

and Ethiopia for the first time to discuss the signing of an ‘MOU on

Defense Cooperation,’ cooperation in defense industries, and expanding

education programs for African officers. Such efforts to create a

foundation for defense diplomacy resulted in the signing of an ‘MOU on

Defense Cooperation’ with Gabon in October 2011. This was the first

MOU of its kind with an African nation.

**| Americas | Despite the geographical distance, the ROK is actively**

promoting defense exchange and defense industry cooperation with the

Americas. Defense cooperation is being expanded by holding regular

defense meetings with various countries in the region and reinforcing

senior level personnel exchanges.

During the ROK-Canada Defense Policy Working Level Dialogue in

December 2010, the two countries discussed regular exchange of trainees

and cooperation in arms control, and agreed to cooperate in peacekeeping

operations.

In July 2011, the Vice Minister of National Defense toured Colombia,

Peru, and Haiti and encouraged the ROK Danbi Unit involved in the

reconstruction of Haiti and other UN personnel. Colombia is the only

country in South America that fought for the ROK in the Korean War. At

the ROK-Colombia Vice Defense Ministerial Meeting, the two Vice


-----

Ministers agreed to expand defense cooperation and establish a joint

committee for cooperation in defense science and technology and defense

industry. It was also agreed that the ROK would dispatch a Taekwondo

instructor to the Colombian Military Academy. In April 2012, the defense

ministers of the ROK and Peru discussed the export of the KT-1 trainer,

and agreed to hold regular director general-level meetings.

**3. Multilateral Security Cooperation**

Multilateral security cooperation is carried out to find ways to resolve

security issues such as building mutual confidence and preventing disputes

through dialogue and cooperation. In particular, a single country on its

own would find it extremely difficult to deal with transnational and

non-military security threats such as international piracy, terrorism, and

large-scale natural disasters, and therefore the need for multilateral

security cooperation is increasing.

Likewise, more and more multilateral security related consultative

frameworks are being formed in the Asia-Pacific region. Although there

had not been a ministerial level defense and security consultative

framework in the Asia-Pacific region in the past, the ASEAN Defense

Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus),[7] with 18 Asia-Pacific defense

ministers participating, was launched in October 2010. And in 2011 its

subordinate ASEAN Defense Senior Officials’ Meeting Plus (ADSOM
Plus),[8] working level dialogue, and the five working level Experts’

Working Groups (EWGs) were established. In November 2011, the United

States and Russia became official members in the East Asia Summit,

where the ten countries consisting ASEAN along with the ROK, China,

Japan, India, Australia and New Zealand take part. As shown, major

countries are actively participating in Asia-Pacific multilateral security

consultative frameworks.

The ROK MND has continuously been taking part in important regional

multilateral security dialogues to seek joint response and international

cooperation against various security threats. The ROK MND currently

participates in the following multilateral dialogues in the Asia-Pacific

region, which are shown in Chart 4-5.


**7. ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting**
**Plus [(]ADMM-Plus[)]**

A defense ministers’ consultation
framework held every three years with
10 ASEAN and 8 dialogue partner states
(ROK, U.S., Japan, China, Russia, India,
Australia, New Zealand).

**8. ASEAN Defense Senior Officials’**
**Meeting Plus [(]ADSOM-Plus[)]**

An annual consultative framework under
the ADMM-Plus


-----

**Chart 4-5. MND Participating Asia-Pacific Multilateral Security Consultative Frameworks**

|Government Level (Track 1)|Semi-Government Level (Track 1.5)|
|---|---|
|• A SEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus) and its sub consultative framework • A SEAN Regional Forum (ARF) • T okyo Defense Forum (TDF) • N ortheast Asia Peace and Security Mechanism Working Group (NEAPSM W/G) within the Six Party Talks framework|• Asia Security Summit (ASS) • Jakarta International Defense Dialogue (JIDD) • Northeast Asia Cooperation Dialogue (NEACD)|



**| Asia Security Summit | The Asia Security Summit is a security**

dialogue where defense officials and civilian experts from over twenty

countries in the Asia-Pacific and Europe exchange views on defense

policy and security issues to enhance mutual trust.

The ROK has been participating in the Asia Security Summit since

2002, and from 2004, the Minister of National Defense became the head

of the ROK delegation to engage in active defense diplomacy by giving

keynote speeches and holding bilateral meetings with other delegations.

At the 10[th] Asia Security Summit in 2011, the Minister of National

Defense gave a speech on ‘East Asia’s New Distribution of Power and its

Implications’ to suggest a new paradigm of cooperative security

framework in Northeast Asia. Additionally, a number of bilateral dialogues

were held with other delegations to enhance the understanding of ROK

security environment and draw support and cooperation for the peace and

stability on the Korean Peninsula.

During the 11[th] Asia Security Summit in 2012, the minister conducted

active defense diplomacy activities. At the ROK-U.S.-Japan Defense

Ministers’ Trilateral Meeting, the three countries agreed on a joint response

to North Korean threats. During bilateral meetings with seven other

delegations, including Indonesia, India, and Australia, a consensus was

formed that North Korea’s provocations, including long-range missile

launches, are a serious threat to the peace of Northeast Asia and the world.

**| ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus) | In October**

2010, the ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM- Plus) was

held for the first time in Hanoi, Vietnam. In the meeting, the participants

agreed that in order to respond to transnational and non-military threats,


ROK-U.S.-Japan Defense Ministers’
Meeting (Singapore, June 2012)


-----

cooperation should be made in five areas such as humanitarian assistance

and disaster relief, maritime security, military medicine, counter
terrorism, and peacekeeping operations. Experts’ Working Groups
(EWGs)[9] were agreed to be established in these areas to realize substan
tial cooperation in the future.

At the first ADSOM-Plus meeting held in Indonesia in April 2011, the

participants discussed major defense and security issues in the region and

approved the establishment and operation of the five Experts’ Working

Groups.

The meeting is very significant in that it is the first dialogue of its kind

comprised of defense ministers in the Asia-Pacific region. It is expected to

take root as a paramount forum for regular discussions about common

security interests within the region. The second ADMM-Plus meeting will

take place in Brunei in 2013, and subsequent meeting will be held every

other year.

**| Seoul Defense Dialogue | The MND hosted the first Seoul Defense**

Dialogue (SDD)[10] to promote security cooperation and multilateral

military confidence building with regard to the Korean Peninsula and the

Asia-Pacific region. It is the first of its kind in the Asia-Pacific region

where vice minister level officials and civilian security experts from 15

countries and two international organizations take part. Under the motto

‘Cooperation for Security and Peace,’ the SDD proved to be a discussion

forum covering a wide array of comprehensive security issues including

not only traditional security threats but also transnational and

non-traditional security threats. It also provided opportunity to establish

a consensus on the need for multilateral cooperation and find solutions

for such threats.

The overarching theme of the first SDD, which was held from 14 to 16

November 2012, was ‘Cooperation for a more secure Asia-Pacific region:

Issues and Solutions,’ and the three themes for discussion were ‘Common

security challenges in the Asia-Pacific region and WMD proliferation,’

‘Current status of cyber-threats and responses,’ and ‘Enhancing efficiencies

of defense management: Successful cases and alternatives’ as agenda.

The success of the SDD marked the launching of a significant senior

level multilateral security dialogue in the Asia-Pacific region and created a


**9. Co-Chairs of Experts’ Working**
**Groups [(]2011−2013[)]**

(1) Maritime Security (Malaysia,
Australia)

(2) Military Medical Service (Singapore,
Japan)

(3) HADR (Vietnam, China)

(4) PKO (Philippines, New Zealand)

(5) Counter-Terrorism (Indonesia, U.S.)

*[ HADR: Humanitarian Assistance and ]
Disaster Relief

**10. Seoul Defense Dialogue [(]SDD[)]**

(1) A multilateral security dialogue
framework of vice minister level
defense officials and civilian experts
(Track 1.5), expanded from existing
international arms control seminars
(Track 2)

(2) Participants: ROK, U.S., Japan, China,
Russia, Singapore, Indonesia,
Vietnam, Thailand, Malaysia,
Philippines, Canada, Australia, New
Zealand, India, EU, and NATO

The Emblem for SDD


-----

foundation for maintaining peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula

and building military confidence among regional states. In addition, not

only did the SDD enhance the international community’s understanding

and cooperation on the security situation of the Korean peninsula, but also

served as an opportunity to raise the ROK’s international status by playing

a leading role in multilateral security cooperation in the Asia-Pacific

region.

For broad dialogue and cooperation among multilateral nations, partici
pating members will be expanded in the future.

**| Other Major Multilateral Security Cooperative Meeting | The**

ROK MND is actively participating in major multilateral security

consultative bodies in the Asia-Pacific region to discuss ways to respond

to transnational and non-military threats, and takes part in joint exercises

to enhance regional security and confidence building.

Since 1996, when the ROK government first participated, the ROK has

increased its level of participation in the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF).

The ROK will co-chair the ARF Inter-Sessional Meeting on Maritime

Security from 2012 until 2014 with the U.S. and Indonesia, and will

co-host the ARF Disaster Relief Exercise (DiREx) with Thailand in 2013.

The MND also first participated in Jakarta International Defense

Dialogue (JIDD), which was held in Indonesia in 2011. In March 2012,

the Vice Defense Minister participated in the second JIDD and delivered a

speech on ‘Military Operations Other Than War (MOOTW)’ and discussed

major issues such as defense exchange and cooperation, and defense

industry cooperation in bilateral dialogues with other delegations.

Additionally, the MND participates in the annual Tokyo Defense Forum
(TDF), a director general level security consultative body, which seeks to

promote military confidence building and cooperation among countries in

the region. During the 16[th] TDF, which was held in March 2012, the

participants discussed regional security cooperation, disaster relief, and

efforts to ensure maritime security.

The Northeast Asia Cooperation Dialogue (NEACD) is a security

dialogue hosted by the Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation
(IGCC) of University of California, where defense officials, diplomats,

and civilian experts from six Northeast Asian countries (the ROK, North


Delegations participating in the 1[st] SDD
(Seoul, November 2012)


-----

Korea, the U.S., Japan, China, Russia) take part. At the NEACD, members

exchange views on Northeast Asian security issues and discuss means of

building confidence among nations and promoting cooperation. At the 23[rd]

NEACD held in Dailian, China in September 2012, confidence building

between the U.S. and China and the outlook for multilateral cooperation in

Northeast Asia were discussed. The heads of delegations also expressed

their positions on the peace and development of the Korean Peninsula.

**4. International Non-Proliferation and Counter-Prolifera-**
**tion[11] Activities**

The international community is strengthening its control over countering

the proliferation of WMD and delivery vehicles through existing

non-proliferation regimes such as international organizations and

regulations. At the same time, efforts are being made to establish new

international regims such as the UN Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) on

preventing proliferation of conventional weapons. Additionally, the

international community is strengthening export control on small arms and

defense related strategic items and commodities[12] to prevent them from

being used to threaten international peace and stability. The ROK

government has participated actively in the international community’s

non-proliferation and counter-proliferation regimes since its membership

in the UN in 1991, and the extent of its participation is shown in Chart

4-6.

**Chart 4-6. ROK Participation in Arms Control Regimes**


**11. Non-Proliferation and Counter-**
**Proliferation**

Non-proliferation: Activities to prevent
horizontal (quantity) and vertical
(quality) proliferation of WMD

Counter-proliferation: Complementary
measure to non-proliferation by actively
and aggressively responding to
proliferation of WMD

**12. Strategic Items and Commodities**

This refers to not only WMD,
conventional weapons and transport
systems, but to goods, software, and
technology in general that can be used
in the development and manufacturing
of these weapons.

|Classification|Arms Control Regimes|Date Joined|
|---|---|---|
|Nuclear Disarmament/ Non-proliferation|International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)|August 1957|
||Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT)|April 1975|
||Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT)|September 1999|
|Biological/Chemical Weapons Disarmament/ Non-Proliferation|Biological Weapons Convention (BWC)|June 1987|
||Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)|April 1997|
|Missile Non-Proliferation|Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR)|March 2001|
||Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation (HCOC)|November 2002|


-----

|Conventional Weapons|UN Register of Conventional Arms (UNRCA)|March 1993|
|---|---|---|
||Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW)|May 2001|
|Multilateral Export Control Regimes|Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG)|October 1995|
||Zangger Committee (ZC)|October 1995|
||Wassenaar Arrangements (WA)|July 1996|
||Australia Group (AG)|October 1996|
|UN and Other Activities|UN General Assembly 1st Committee/UN Disarmament Commission (UNDC)|September 1991|
||Conference on Disarmament (CD)|June 1996|
||Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI)|May 2009|


**| International Non-Proliferation Activities | The ROK government**

faithfully fulfills its obligations as a credible member of the Non-Prolif
eration Treaty (NPT), and is actively showing the international

community the seriousness of the North Korean nuclear issue at the

annual NPT meeting.

In addition, as a country that faithfully performs duties as a member

state of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), the ROK is the only

Asian country that has been providing international assistance and

protection education jointly with the Organization for Prohibition of

Chemical Weapons (OPCW) since 2005. As of 2012, this education

program provided training to 171 personnel responsible for chemical

warfare response in 43 Asian OPCW member states on the response

procedure for chemical terrorist attack and accidents.

At the same time, many European countries led by international NGOs

have signed the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention (Ottawa Treaty) in

December 1997 and Convention on Cluster Munitions (CCM) in

December 2008 to completely ban cluster munitions and anti-personnel

mines. This convention not only prohibits the production, usage, storage,

and transfer of cluster bombs and mines but also stipulates the complete

disposal of cluster bombs and mines to prevent civilian casualties from a

humanitarian perspective. However, it would be problematic for the ROK

to enter into this convention given the special security environment and

circumstance where the military threat from North Korea continues.

Instead, taking into account the humanitarian aspects and the military


-----

effectiveness of cluster bombs and mines in a balanced manner, the ROK

participated in the UN CCW assessment meeting for the adoption of ‘UN

CCW Protocol on Cluster Munitions’ in November 2011, and ‘UN CCW

MOTAPM (Mines other than Anti-Personnel Mines) Expert Meeting’ in

April 2012 to actively convey the ROK position.

**| International Counter-Proliferation Activities | In order to counter**

potential threats of biological warfare on the Korean Peninsula, the ROK

and the U.S. have been conducting the annual ‘Able Response Exercise,’

which is an ROK-U.S. combined biological warfare defense exercise,

since 2011. In May 2012, fifty related ROK and U.S. agencies held a

senior leader’s seminar and tabletop exercise at the Korea Institute for

Defense Analyses (KIDA). The exercise enabled the ROK and the U.S.

to test their integrated national response system against biological

warfare threat and seek supplementation for any shortcomings, thereby

enhancing their defense capabilities against biological threat.

In addition, the ROK government, which is actively participating in

international efforts on non-proliferation of WMD, decided to officially

become a member of the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) in May

2009. Since officially participating in the PSI, the ROK MND has been

dispatching its military personnel and related experts to the Operational

Experts Group (OEG) meetings, seminars and interdiction exercises.

Notably in 2010, the ROK MND successfully hosted a PSI seminar and

a maritime interdiction exercise ‘Eastern Endeavor 2010’ with 14 countries

participating. In July 2012, a search team from CBR Defense Command

participated in an aerial interdiction exercise held in Japan to engage in air

cargo search procedure training with other member countries. For the

second time in September 2012, after 2010 the MND hosted a maritime

interdiction exercise ‘Eastern Endeavor 2012,’ which consisted of a Table

Top Exercise (TTX) and a Live Exercise (LIVEX). In the TTX, 120

experts from 19 different countries held in-depth discussions on counter
proliferation and seizure of cargos, and in the LIVEX, the ROK, the U.S.,

Japan, and Australia successfully carried out a training to strengthen their

combined interdiction capability by deploying their forces.


ROK-U.S. Able Response Exercise
(KIDA, Seoul, May 2012)

PSI Maritime Interdiction Exercise
(International waters southeast of
Busan, September 2012)


-----

**5. Reinforcing International Logistics Cooperation**

The MND is strengthening its international logistics cooperation to

ensure mutual logistics support for its allies and partners.

**| Logistics Cooperation with the U.S. | The MND is strengthening**

its mutually benefitting logistics cooperation with its U.S. ally in

accordance with the changes to the security environment on the Korean

Peninsula. To enhance the defense capability on the Korean Peninsula by

supporting the rapid deployment of U.S. augmentation forces, the ROK

and the U.S. concluded the ‘Umbrella Agreement between the govern
ment of the Republic of Korea and the government of the United States

of America concerning Wartime Host Nation Support (WHNS) in 1991.

On 12 July 2011, the ‘Act on Partial Mobilization to Overcome Crisis

and Local Provocation’ was enacted which enabled WHNS even during

partial mobilization. The two countries are working on the

‘Memorandum of Agreement between the government of the Republic of

Korea and the government of the United States of America concerning

Wartime Host Nation Support,’ which will define wartime cost sharing

responsibilities between the ROK and the U.S.

In order to ensure timely and mutual logistics support, the ROK and the

U.S. signed the ‘ROK-U.S. MLSA Standard Implementing Arrangement,’

on 30 January 2012, in accordance with the ‘Mutual Logistics Support

Agreement (MLSA).’ In addition, the two countries hold annual Logistics

Cooperation Committee (LCC) meetings, which is a sub-committee of the

SCM, to discuss various logistical issues concerning repair parts,

ammunition, and fuel supplies.

The ROK and the U.S. are jointly pursuing ammunition demilitar
ization[13] programs for the disposal of ammunition subject to demilitar
ization occurring in the ROK in an eco-friendly manner. The Agency for

Defense Development (ADD) built and operated an incinerator, which was

completely constructed in December 2007, and an ammunitions

disassembly facility, which has been running since March 2012. A

melt-out facility[14] has been operating since October 2012, after an

implementation agreement was signed on 4 November 2011. The demili
tarization facilities are shown in Chart 4-7.


**13. Demilitarization**

Demilitarization refers to measures that
prevent equipment and supplies being
used for their original military purpose,
such as amputation, destruction,
modification, or defacement such that
their original shape is altered or military
markings are removed; disposal and
removal of ammunitions is the most
common example of demilitarization.

**14. Melt-out facility**

A melted gunpowder collection facility
where a warhead is put into a melting
furnace, at 90 degrees centigrade, after
being separated from the propellant in
mid- and large-size caliber bullets.


-----

**Chart 4-7. Facilities for Demilitarization of Ammunitions**

|Category|Incinerator|Disassemble Facility|Melt-out Facility|
|---|---|---|---|
|Facility||||
|Provider of Facility|ROK|ROK|U.S.|
|Type of Ammunition|Low caliber under 20mm|mid-caliber between 20mm-100mm|mid-to-high caliber over 100mm|
|Process Method|Environmentally friendly incineration, recycling of shells|Ammunition cut, disassembled and incinerated|Melted chemicals collected (reuse), recycling of shells|
|Capacity|650 ton/annum|300 ton/annum|7,000-10,000 ton/annum|
|Amount Processed (2012 Terms)|4,455 tons|4,745 tons|77,926 tons|



**| Other International Logistics Cooperation | The MND is**

expanding its mutual logistics cooperation with friendly countries in

order to ensure the smooth execution of missions with assistance from

friendly nations that would offer aid to the ROK in contingencies and

effectively support the activities of ROK forces deployed abroad. In

particular, the ROK signed mutual logistics support agreements with

eleven countries to date in order to effectively pursue mutual logistics

support with allied nations; the U.S. (1988), Thailand (1991), New

Zealand (2007), Turkey (2008), the Philippines (2009), Israel, Australia,

Canada (2010), Indonesia, Singapore (2011), and Cambodia (2012). The

MND is also holding discussions with the United Kingdom, Spain,

Germany, and Malaysia over entering into such an agreement.

Additionally, surplus defense items resulting from the process of

weapons system modernization are transferred to friendly nations, thereby

enhancing military cooperation, and simultaneously, contributing to the

export of defense industry and resource diplomacy. The MND has

transferred naval vessels, amphibious armored vehicles, aircraft,

bulldozers and other equipment to the Philippines, Bangladesh,

Kazakhstan, Indonesia, Peru, and Ghana and transferred ammunition to

Colombia. In particular the ROK transferred one PKM (Patrol Killer

Medium) vessel and two YUBs (Yard Utility Boats) to East Timor in 2011.


ROK-Indonesia Signing of Mutual
Logistics Support Agreement (Indonesia
Joint Forces Command, December 2011)

Transfer Ceremony of ROK Disused
Equipment (Cambodia, June 2012)


-----

In June 2012, 8,743 items of 20 types of equipment including trucks,

excavators, and computers were transferred to Cambodia. In November

2012, 1,565 items of eight types of equipment including trucks and

automobiles were transferred to Mongolia.


-----

**Contributions to International**
**Peacekeeping Operations**

The ROK, with the aid and assistance of the UN and the international
community, was able to overcome the devastation of the Korean War and
achieved remarkable economic development to become a donor country. As
the ROK has become a donor country from an aid recipient country, the military is playing its part in contributing to world peace and stability through
international peacekeeping activities. As of September 2012, approximately
1,440 ROK military service members are deployed to 15 countries, and 17
regions, conducting UN peacekeeping operations, multinational forces
peace operations, and defense cooperation activities.[1]

**1. Participation in UN Peacekeeping Operations**

UN Peacekeeping Operations (PKO) began when the United Nations

Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) in Palestine was established in

1948 to resolve international dispute by peaceful means. In the course of

sixty years, a total of one million men and women from approximately

120 nations have participated in PKO activities, and as of September

2012, approximately 120,000 men and women are conducting missions

related to observing an armistice and assisting in reconstruction efforts at

16 different mission groups. As UN Peacekeeping missions become more

complex, the scope of operations have expanded to areas such as peace

building, reconstruction, security, and aid to refugees and displaced

people.

Since becoming a member state of the UN in 1991, the ROK began

participating in UN PKOs when it sent its engineering unit to Somalia
(UNOSOM II) in July 1993. Since then, the ROK has dispatched a total of

around 11,000 men to various missions in 17 different countries. As of

September 2012, there are 348 service members deployed to the


**Section**
# 4


**1. Current Status of International**
**Peacekeeping Activities**

With the approval of the National
Assembly on 27 September 2012 to
deploy troops to South Sudan and the
extension of troop deployments for the
_Ashena, Cheonghae, Akh, and_
_Dongmyeong Units, a total of five ROK_
units will be deployed overseas in 2013.

**Special Appendix 2**

Refer to 20 Years of ROK Armed Forces
Overseas Deployment, History and
Accomplishment

|Category|UN PKO|MNF PO|
|---|---|---|
|Host|Led directly by the UN|Led by a regional security organization or a particular nation|
|Command and Control|PKO Commander appointed by the UN Secretary General|MNF Commander|
|Expenses|Reimbursement by the UN|Borne by participating countries|



**UNOSOM-II United Nations Operation**
in Somalia II

**Appendix 10, 11**

Refer to current Status of Dispatch of
ROK Troops Overseas and Budget for
ROK Military Units Dispatched Overseas


-----

**Chart 4-8. ROK Participation in UN PKO**

**Lebanon**
**_Dongmyeong Unit [(]348[)]_**
UNIFIL Staff [(]4[)] **India, Pakistan**

**Western Sahara** UNMOGIP [(]7[)]
MINURSO [(]4[)]

**South Sudan/** **Haiti**
**Sudan, Darfur** **_Danbi Unit [(]240[)]_**

**Liberia** **Cote d’Ivoire** UNMIS/UNAMID [(]10[)] MINUSTAH Staff [(]2[)]
UNMIL[(]2[)] UNOCI[(]2[)]


_Dongmyeong Unit in Lebanon and 240 to the Danbi Unit in Haiti. The_

ROK is also favorably exploring the possibility of sending its engineer

unit to the newly independent South Sudan for its reconstruction. The

ROK’s participation in PKOs is shown in Chart 4-8.

**| Lebanon – The Dongmyeong Unit | In 1975, a civil war broke out**

between the Christians and the Muslims in Lebanon, and frequent

conflicts occurred between the Syrian military and the Israeli military,

which were deployed and stationed in Lebanon under the pretext of

resolving the civil war. In response, the UN passed the Security Council

Resolutions 425 and 426 in March 1978 and established the UN Interim

Forces in Lebanon (UNIFIL), which then began its supervision of the

cease-fire agreement between Lebanon and Israel.

In 2006, as the confrontation worsened between Israel and Hezbollah in

the southern region of Lebanon, the UN adopted the UN Security Council

Resolution 1701 on 11 August 2006, which significantly increased the

number of forces from 2,000 to 15,000 and requested for more partici
pation from its member states.


-----

In July 2007, the ROK government deployed the Dongmyeong Unit[2]

consisting of 350 troops to Lebanon as a part of UNIFIL with the approval

of the National Assembly. The Dongmyeong Unit is conducting cease-fire

monitoring operations in Tyre, in the southern region of Lebanon.

In addition to its truce supervision activities, the Dongmyeong Unit has

been engaging in multi-functional civil operations called the ‘Peace

Wave.’[3] Under this operation, the Dongmyeong Unit attends to the needs

of local residents, provides humanitarian assistance activities including

medical and quarantine services, paving roads, improving schools and

public facilities, among other things. The unit is also earning the trust of

the Lebanese people by strengthening ties with the locals through the

provision of Taekwondo, computer, Hangul, and sewing classes. The unit

is also promoting closer friendship with other forces from different

countries through exchange visits, sharing of information, and friendship

activities. The major achievements of the Dongmyeong Unit are shown in

Chart 4-9.

**Chart 4-9. Major Activities of the Dongmyeong Unit [(]As of September 2012[)]**

|Operational Activities|• Surveillance and reconnaissance of operational area: 16,172 • Combined reconnaissance with Lebanese military: 1,031 • Support guarding of Joint Checkpoints: 2,460|
|---|---|
|Civil Affairs Operations|• Medical support for local residents: 48,000, 5 times a week • Treatment of livestock: 9,700 • Quarantine activities: 5 times a week • Computer, Hangul, Taekwondo, Sewing class: 5 sites • Locally demanded projects (schools, sewage treatment, public facilities): 112 projects|
|Military Diplomacy|• Exchange activities with UNIFIL countries (280) - Visit other deployed units (185), Invitation from deployed country (95)|



**| Haiti – The Danbi Unit | In February 2004, public order in Haiti, a**

Caribbean Bay nation in the Central America region, deteriorated due to

massive social disturbances. In response, the United Nations (UN)

established the United Nations Stabilization Mission In Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in June 2004, and has been maintaining public order in

Haiti.

On 12 January 2010, an earthquake that measured 7.0 on the Richter

scale struck Haiti and the capital city of Port-au-Prince and the


**2. Dongmyeong Unit**

Named after the founder of Goguryo
Kingdom, which means a bright light
from the east, bright future and peace.

**3. Peace Wave**

This is Dongmyeong Unit’s civil affairs
operations, which include repairing and
refurbishing dilapidated school
buildings, building and repairing roads,
providing medical assistance to local
residents.

Surveillance and Reconnaissance
activity by the Dongmyeong Unit

**MINUSTAH (French) Mission des**
Nations Unies pour la Stabilisation en
Haiti


-----

surrounding areas were reduced to ruins and gave rise to millions of

refugees. In accordance with the UN Security Council Resolution 1908,

the MINUSTAH was expanded from 6,940 personnel to 8,940, and called

for more contribution by the member states.

The ROK government decided to dispatch an engineering unit to Haiti

in order to assist in the recovery and reconstruction of the nation. With the

approval of the National Assembly, the ROK deployed the ‘Haiti

Reconstruction Support Group’ (Danbi Unit[4]) comprised of 240 personnel

and equipment on 27 February 2010.

The Danbi Unit engages in activities such as removing the debris from

damaged buildings, restoring roads, drilling wells, dredging waterways,

providing medical care, and taking preventive measures against epidemics

in the Leogane region, where almost all the buildings were destroyed by

the earthquake. Also, the Danbi Unit was recognized as an exemplary

model for cooperation within the UN Mission, actively carrying out joint

construction work with a Japanese engineering unit such as removing the

debris, site renovations, and dredging river. The unit has also conducted

numerous civil-military operations such as medical assistance, support for

refugee camps and orphanages, providing education and vocational

training for local school teachers and students. The Danbi Unit also

engages in various friendship enhancing activities with other contingents

from member states through exchange visits, information sharing, and

friendship activities. Major activities are shown in Chart 4-10.

**Chart 4-10. Major Activities of the Danbi Unit [(]As of September 2012[)]**


**4. Danbi Unit**

_Danbi means timely rain, which will give_
hope to the people of Haiti

_Danbi Unit removing debris from_
earthquake

_Danbi Unit’s well drilling_

|Reconstruction Assistance|• Repair of road/embankment: 32 • Site clearance: 47 • Removal of building debris: 14 • Drilling of deep wells: 18 • Dredging of waterways: 17|
|---|---|
|Civil Affairs Operations|• Medical assistance to local residents: 52,600 • Quarantine service to refugee camp, orphanage, schools: 2 times a week • Refugee camp support: 39 • Orphanage support: 100 • Taekwondo training: 137 • Vocational class for heavy machinery: 36|
|Military Diplomacy|• Military cooperation and exchange with other units - Exchange visits and combined engineering operations|


-----

**| Activities as Observers and Staff in UN Missions | The ROK**

government has dispatched 31 observers and staff officers to UN

missions in major areas of conflict, such as India, Pakistan, Lebanon,

South Sudan, West Sahara, and Haiti. Observers monitor cease-fire

violations and take part in patrols, investigations, reports, and mediation

efforts, under the control of each mission headquarters. Staff officers

perform their duties in key staff offices related to intelligence,

operations, and logistics within their respective commands.

In June 2012, an ROK Army general became the Head of the United

Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) for

the third time as a Korean. This is a reflection of the increased status and

the role of the ROK in the field of peacekeeping.

**2. Peace Operations of Multi-National Forces**

The multi-national forces peace operations (MNF PO) include conflict

resolution, establishment of peace, reconstruction assistance, and so on,

which are carried out by a multi-national force formed by regional security

organizations, or a particular country, pursuant to a UN Security Council

Resolution or the support and resolution of the international community.

Together with the UN PKO, the MNF PO plays an important role in the

stabilization and reconstruction of a troubled region.

As of September 2012, the ROK government has deployed 306

personnel to the Cheonghae Unit in the waters of Somalia and 350 to the

_Ashena Unit in Afghanistan; thus, contributing to MNF peace operations._

The details of the ROK’s participation are shown in Chart 4-11.

**| The Cheonghae Unit - Waters of Somalia | Somalia has been in**

civil war since the 1990s, which has destabilized public order and

brought about chronic economic difficulties. As a result, since 2004,

under the protection of regional warlords, pirate organizations were

formed and began to conduct piracy activities in the vicinity of Somali

waters. As losses caused by piracy increased drastically in Somali

waters, the UN decided to deploy military vessels and aircraft under the

UN Security Council Resolution 1816 in June 2008, and requested the


ROK military as observers in United
Nations Operation in Cote d’Ivoire

Area of operation of the Cheonghae Unit
(The Gulf of Aden)


-----

**Chart 4-11. ROK Participation in Multinational Forces Peace Operations**

**Afghanistan**
_Ashena Unit [(]350[)]_
Staff Officers [(]4[)]

**Bahrain Combined Maritime**
**Forces**
Coordination/Staff Officers [(]4[)]

**U.S. Central Command**
Coordination/Staff Officers [(]3[)]

**Somalia Waters**
_Cheonghae Unit [(]306[)]_
Djibouti Coordination/Staff Officers [(]4[)]


participation of its member states. The ROK government, to protect and

promote national interest with the approval of the National Assembly,

dispatched the Cheonghae Unit to the Gulf of Aden off Somalia on 13

March 2009 to protect and promote national interest.

The Cheonghae Unit’s mission is to assist in the safe passage of ROK

ships, to protect its citizens, and to perform counter piracy operations as a

member of the Combined Maritime Forces. The Cheonghae Unit is

comprised of one 4,500-ton destroyer, one helicopter, three Rigid

Inflatable Boats (RIB), and approximately 310 personnel. Since the ROK

Ship Munmu the Great was dispatched in March 2009 as the first

contingent, ROK naval vessels have been rotating every six months.

The Cheonghae Unit performs convoy missions not only for ROK ships,

but also for foreign ships that pass through the Gulf of Aden. It partic
ipates in CTF-151[5] and engages in counter piracy operations. In the course

of these operations, it has rescued 25 civilian ships that were under threat

from pirates. In particular, it successfully executed ‘Operation Dawn of

Gulf of Aden’ in January 2011 where the unit rescued an ROK ship and its

crew, hijacked by pirates. In March of the same year, the unit safely

evacuated ROK nationals from politically unstable Libya to safe areas


**5. Combined Task Force-151**

Subordinate unit of Combined Maritime
Forces, which executes anti-piracy
operations in the Gulf of Aden and the
Somali waters.

Operation Dawn of Gulf of Aden (21
January 2011)

Evacuation of ROK citizens in Libya (24
February – 19 March 2011)

-  37 citizens were evacuated to nearby
Malta and Greece on two occasions


-----

such as Greece and Malta. Such accomplishments raised the status of

ROK’s armed forces in the world and increased credibility and pride to its

public.

The Cheonghae Unit also maintains military cooperation through

mutual visits with naval vessels from other nations deployed to the area

such as the U.S., Japan, China, France, Turkey, and India, and through

intelligence exchange meetings on pirates. Additionally, it maintains close

coordination with the U.S., EU, and NATO for counter piracy operations.

**| The Ashena Unit - Afghanistan | As public order in Afghanistan**

deteriorated significantly due to the indiscriminate terrors by the Taliban

following the collapse of Taliban government in 2001, the UN

established the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) under the

UN Security Council Resolution 1383, and supported the stabilization

and restoration activities in Afghanistan. Additionally, through the

October 2009 UN Security Resolution 1890, the UN urged its member

states to support the ISAF by providing personnel, equipment, and

materials.

Following the UNSC resolution and upon the request from the

Afghanistan government, the ROK government announced at the end of

October 2009 its plans to deploy a Korean Provincial Reconstruction

Team (PRT) and security unit. Accordingly, with the approval of the

National Assembly in February 2010, the ROK government deployed the

_Ashena Unit[6] of 350 troops to the Parwan Province in July 2010 in order_

to support the safe reconstruction operations of the ROK PRT. Starting

from July 2010, the ROK PRT, with civilian experts in the lead, has

conducted stabilization and reconstruction work in four areas including

medical aid, education, administrative systems, and rural development.

Since its deployment, the ROK PRT has given the people of Afghanistan

hopes and dreams by treating over 100,000 patients, providing vocational

and police training, and building schools, medical centers, and foot

bridges.

With such efforts by the ROK PRT, the local residents are calling the

ROK units ‘Korean brothers’ and the ROK is recognized as the country

that earned the most trust in the Parwan Province in a short period. This

allowed the ROK unit to be highly regarded by the ISAF allies,


The garrison where the Ashena Unit is
stationed (Camp Charika)

**6. Ashena Unit**

_Ashena means ‘friend, partner’ in Dari_
dialect.


-----

Afghanistan government, and the local population.

In order to guarantee successful activities of the PRT, nothing less than

perfection was asked of the Ashena Unit in guarding the PRT base and

carrying out escort missions. Since its deployment in July 2010, the

_Ashena Unit conducted near perfect operations without a single casualty_

by executing flexible security operations considering the level of threat,

and maintaining a seamless operational readiness posture. The major

operational achievements by the Afghan Ashena Unit are shown in Chart

4-12.

**Chart 4-12. Major Activities of the Ashena Unit [(]As of September 2012[)]**

|Category|Aerial|Col3|Ground|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||Escort|Reconnaissance|Escort|Reconnaissance|
|1st-4th Wave (July 2010-June 2012)|993|56|330|52|
|5th Wave (10 June 2012- )|219|19|12|15|
|Total|1,212|75|342|67|



**| Multi-National Force Staff and Coordination Officers | The ROK**

military has dispatched a total of 15 staff and coordination officers to

support the multi-national forces in the following locations: four service

members to the Combined Maritime Forces in Bahrain; four service

members to the Combined Joint Task Force-Horn of Africa (CJTF-HOA)

in Djibouti; four service members to Kabul, Afghanistan; three service

members to the U.S. Central Command.

Additionally, an ROK navy admiral successfully executed the mission

of commanding the MNF CTF-151 unit, which is a unit dedicated to

carrying out counter piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden and in the

waters of eastern Somalia from April to August 2010, and from June to

September 2012, respectively.

**3. Defense Cooperation Activities**

Defense cooperation activity is the deployment of ROK forces to a

non-conflict area where there is no apparent threat to our personnel and no


_Ashena Unit securing PRT_

**CJTF-HOA Combined Joint Task Force-**
Horn of Africa

Service as the Commander of CTF-151
(August 2010)


-----

threat of combat, in order to enhance military cooperation and to serve

national interest of the ROK. In this respect, it is a different type of

overseas deployment compared with UN PKO or MNF PO in conflict

areas. The deployment of the Akh Unit to the United Arab Emirates (UAE)

in 2011 is the first of its kind and is enhancing the defense cooperation

between the ROK and the UAE.

**| The Akh Unit[7] in the United Arab Emirates | Since the establish-**

ment of a Defense Attaché Office in the UAE in 2005, the ROK signed a

‘Defense Cooperation Agreement’ with the UAE and continuously

improved its relationship with the UAE. Cooperation grew in a wide

array of areas including economy and defense, raising the relationship to

a new level of ‘comprehensive and strategic partnership’ in December

2009, which brought about increased military cooperation and exchange.

In particular, when the Crown Prince of UAE visited the ROK in May

2010, he was very impressed by the ROK special forces and during the

ROK Defense Minister’s visit to the UAE in August 2010, he asked the

ROK to send its special forces to assist in enhancing the UAE special

warfare units. In response, the ROK sent an observation group in October

2010 to verify the training environment, and with the approval of the

National Assembly, it deployed the UAE Military Training Cooperation

Group, Akh Unit in January 2011 to the Al Ain region in Abu Dhabi.

The Akh Unit is providing education and training to the UAE special

warfare forces and is conducting joint training and exercises with the UAE

military. Additionally, it will protect ROK citizens in the region during

emergency situations. The Akh Unit has approximately 150 personnel and

after its first wave deployment in January 2011, the fourth wave is

currently conducting missions in the UAE.

The Akh Unit contributed to the UAE special warfare forces honing their

skills as an elite-de-corps and enhanced their special operations

capabilities. Additionally the Akh Unit also improved combined operations

capabilities and gained precious experience in conducting missions in

various operational environment to include the hot desert environment and

utilizing modern training facilities of the UAE, thereby improving their

own combat skills. Moreover, the Akh Unit was responsible for escorting

the pirates to the ROK after the ‘Operation Dawn of Gulf of Aden’ in


**7. The Akh Unit**

_Akh means ‘brother’ in Arabic to_
emphasize friendliness towards the UAE
people.

The Akh Unit in Combined Training
(special warfare, counter-terrorism,
aerial, maritime operations)


-----

January 2011.

The expansion of defense cooperation with the UAE facilitates

economic exchanges and defense exports between the two nations. It also

provides more opportunities for retired military officers and civilian

experts to utilize their skills and expertise in a foreign country, and

contributes to national interest in terms of acquiring energy such as oil and

natural gas.

**4. Expanding the Participation in PKOs**

The ROK government position is to steadily expand its participation in

international peacekeeping operations while firmly maintaining its

military readiness posture against North. To this end, it is operating a

standing military unit for overseas deployment, reinforcing the functions

of the PKO Center, and expanding its participation in PKO-related multi
national exercises.

**| Operation of a Standing Unit for Overseas Deployment | In**

December 2009, the Act on Participation in UN Peacekeeping

Operations was enacted which provides the legal basis for the ROK

government to efficiently pursue the deployment of troops for UN PKOs.

Accordingly, the MND has been reinforcing its stand-by-system for

overseas deployment by establishing a separate standing unit dedicated

to overseas deployment, in order to promptly execute the requirements

for overseas deployment.

Since December 2009, the 3,000 strong overseas deployment standing

unit has been operational, consisting of a unit dedicated to overseas

deployment, units designated as a reserve unit, and units designated for

specific overseas missions. The unit dedicated for overseas deployment,

which is comprised of 1,000 service members, is the first to prepare for

deployment in the event a need for deployment arises. Until June 2010, a

special mission group, under the Special Warfare Command, was

designated and operated as the unit dedicated for overseas deployment.

However, in July 2010, this special mission group was dissolved and the

International Peace Support Group (Onnuri Unit[8]) was established to


**8. The Onnuri Unit**

‘Onnuri’ is a Korean word, which is a
combination of ‘on’ meaning ‘all’ or
‘whole’ and ‘nuri’ meaning ‘the world’
where people are living in. This unit
spans the world, opting for peace and
hope.


-----

serve as a unit solely devoted to overseas deployment. Units designated as

a reserve unit prepare for rotations and additional deployments. Also, in

order to prepare for various deployment requirements, units such as Army

engineering units, medical units, military police, guard units (Marines),

Navy and Air Force transportation units, and UAV and helicopter units are

designated as tailored units for specific overseas missions.

The International Peace Support Group carries out deployment

preparation and training activities to be able to deploy rapidly in the event

deployment is required. Once the deployment decision is made, a portion

of the International Peace Support Group is utilized to establish a new unit

that will be deployed, and the actual deployment occurs upon the approval

of the National Assembly. The organization of the standing units for

overseas deployment is shown in Chart 4-13.

**Chart 4-13. Organization of Standing Unit for Overseas Deployment**

**Joint Chiefs of Staff**


Unit Dedicated to

|Standing Overseas D|Unit for eployment|
|---|---|
|||

Overseas Deployment


Designated
Reserve Unit


Unit to be designated for
specific overseas missions


*[ Unit to be designated for specific overseas missions: engineering, medical, military police, security units ]
(Marine), Navy and Air Force transport unit, UAV, helicopter unit, etc.

**| Reinforcing the Functions of the PKO Center | The PKO Center at**

the Korea National Defense University is the only educational institute in

the ROK dedicated to international peacekeeping activities. Originally, a

PKO department was first established at the Joint Staff College in

August 1995. In 2004, this organization was restructured into the PKO

Center which carried out pre-deployment education for the deploying

personnel. The MND reorganized the PKO Center from the Joint Staff

College to the National Defense University on 1 January 2010, and

shortly after the reorganization, it increased the number of instructors

and research personnel to reinforce the education and research functions

of the PKO Center.


-----

The PKO Center is in charge of providing pre-deployment education to

key cadres and individuals of deploying units, and also provides education

for police officers preparing for overseas postings. Once the mission of the

deployed unit and individually deployed personnel is over, the PKO

Center publishes and distributes to the related offices a booklet on the

lessons learned from the deployment and after action reports so that the

lessons and experiences from the deployment can be utilized in the future.

Additionally, the PKO Center is strengthening its exchange programs

with foreign military PKO centers. For example, in December 2011, a

visiting professor from a Swedish PKO institute was invited to teach at the

ROK PKO Center as a part of its curriculum which improved the quality

of education related to PKOs. In preparation of a national level PKO

center, which incorporates the civilian, government, military, and police

forces that could be established in the future, the PKO Center will

continue to reinforce its role and functions. The organization of the PKO

Center is shown in Chart 4-14.

**Chart 4-14. The Organization of PKO Center**

**PKO Center**

**Planning and** **Research and** **Training and**
**Operations Division** **Development Division** **Education Division**


**| Participation in Multilateral PKO Training and Exercises | The**

MND is expanding its cooperation for regional PKOs by actively partici
pating in international PKO-related multi-national training and exercises.

Every year, since 2006, the ROK has participated in the ‘Khaan Quest.’

This is a multilateral PKO exercise led by the Mongolian government and

is conducting exercises that apply the UN PKO training directives and

standard training model. Additionally, the ROK has been conducting PKO

command post exercises (CPX) and field training exercises (FTX) by

participating annually in the U.S.-led Global Peace Operations Initiative
(GPOI) Capstone Exercise since 2008. The ROK has been participating as

an observer in the U.S.-Thailand co-hosted Cobra Gold Exercise since

2002. However, starting in 2010, the ROK has been conducting multi

Signing of MOU on Dispatch of PKO
Instructor between the ROK National
Defense University and Swedish Joint
Forces Command (PKO Center,
December 2011)


-----

national combined and humanitarian civil affairs training with the Navy

and the Marine corps of six countries and are participating in maneuvering

training exercises involving amphibious forces (amphibious landing ships,

amphibious assault vehicle), during the Cobra Gold Exercise.

The ROK will continue to enhance its military execution capabilities for

diverse missions and strengthen the cooperation in the field of PKO by

participating in various PKO-related multilateral exercises and training

with other countries.


-----

-----

-----

##### Chapter 5
**Military Support for the**
**Development of Inter-**
**Korean Relationship**


Section 1  Inter-Korean Military Confidence Building
and Arms Control
Section 2  Repatriation of ROK POWs and SouthNorth Joint Remains Recovery


126

134


-----

**Inter-Korean Military**
**Confidence Building and**
**Arms Control**

The ROK government has been pursuing a North Korea policy that promotes
co-existence and co-prosperity in order to further develop realistic foundations for peace and unification on the Korean Peninsula. The MND is also in
support of the ROK government’s North Korea policy and provides military
assistance to inter-Korean exchanges and cooperation.
However, the inter-Korean relationship is in a standstill due to North Korea’s
provocations such as the sinking of the ROK Ship Cheonan and shelling of
_Yeonpyeongdo (island). If South-North relations improve in the future, the_
MND will once again put greater efforts towards improving inter-Korean military confidence building and arms control in order to uphold military stability
and create a new peace structure on the Korean Peninsula.

**1. Military Confidence Building through South-North Mili-**
**tary Talks**

**| Status of South-North Military Relations | After intensifying its**

condemnation towards the South since the inauguration of the Lee

Myung-bak Administration, North Korea eventually launched

provocations against the South by attacking the ROK Ship Cheonan

followed by the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island) in 2010. The North,

however, changed its attitude in early 2011 and proposed to hold

South-North talks while emphasizing dialogue and cooperation and the

need to resolve the confrontational status between the South and North in

its 2011 Joint New Year Editorial. In response, the ROK proposed to

hold talks between South-North authorities to discuss North Korea’s

attack on the ROK Ship Cheonan and the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo


**Section**
# 1


-----

(island), additional provocations, and to confirm North Korea’s sincerity

towards denuclearization. As a result, the 39[th] South-North Military

Working-level Talks were held from 8 to 9 February to discuss the details

of holding a South-North high-level military meeting. However, the

Working-level Talks ended without results.

In May 2011, North Korea again started to aggressively condemn and

threaten the ROK government, this time blaming the live fire shooting of

targets and accusing the ROK military of engaging in anti-North slogans

as a pretext for its actions. On 30 May, the spokesperson of the North

Korean National Defense Commission (NDC) issued a statement saying

that the North will “never deal with the South again.” The next day, on the

31[st], the North cut off military communications in the Eastern corridor and

notified that the communication liaison office at the Kumgang Mountain

district will be closed. On 1 June, North Korea released information

regarding a closed meeting between the South and North and on 2 June,

adopted the ‘Kumgang Mountain Special International Tourism District

Act’ which rendered the previous agreements between the two Koreas

ineffective. North Korea continued its hard-line rhetoric through a

statement by the General Staff Department spokesperson on 3 June

threatening that the North ‘would launch real and full-scale retaliatory

military actions.’

The strained relations between the South and North seemed to be

thawing somewhat as denuclearization discussions commenced in

preparation for the resumption of the Six Party Talks. Between July and

October, South-North, and U.S.-North talks on denuclearization were each

held twice. Against such backdrop, the ROK government announced a

plan to commence road repair work at Kaesong Industrial Complex (KIC)

and extend commuter bus operations aimed at alleviating the difficulties of

ROK companies in the KIC.

Nevertheless, North Korea resumed intense denunciation and threats

against the ROK government using the mourning issue of Kim Jong Il’s

death on 17 December 2011 as a pretext for their harsh rhetoric. In

particular, through the statement made by the NDC on 30 December,

North Korea announced the severance of relations with the ROK

government and continued its hard-line rhetoric through the Joint New

Year Editorial on 1 January 2012 which called for a ‘stop to war exercises


-----

intended to invade the North and schemes to build up armed forces.’

Following such hostile rhetoric, North Korea increased the level of threat

through additional belligerent statements such as: a call for a ‘our type of

holy war’ by the Supreme Command Spokesperson in March; a

threatening statement by the Supreme Command’s special operation action

group on 23 April; an open ultimatum on 4 June by the General Staff; and

an open statement by the Western Front Command on 19 October.

Meanwhile, on 13 April, despite the concerns and warnings from the

international community, North Korea launched a long-range missile that

resulted in failure. The launching of a long-range missile by North Korea

clearly violated the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) Resolution

1874, which prohibits any and all launches using ballistic missile

technology. These are serious provocative acts that threaten the peace and

security of the Korean Peninsula and Northeast Asia. As such, on 16 April,

the UNSC unanimously adopted a Presidential Statement that contained

warnings of additional sanctions against North Korea.

Moreover, North Korea is continuing its psychological operations

against the ROK as a part of its unification front tactics to drive a wedge

in the ROK public opinion by exploiting the political situation in the ROK

as seen through North Korea’s intervention in the general elections held on

11 April and the presidential elections scheduled for 19 December.

**| Propelling South-North Military Talks | Although a total of three**

South-North Military Working-level Talks were held after the inaugu
ration of the Lee Myung-bak administration, they all concluded without

notable results and only confirmed the differences in positions.

The 37[th] South-North Military Working-level Talks were held at the

Peace House in Panmunjom on 2 October 2008. At this meeting, the ROK

military demanded the North to end its denunciation of the ROK

President, resume comprehensive dialogue between the South and North,

and resolve the incident at Kumgang Mountain where an ROK tourist was

shot and killed. The North threatened that the inter-Korean exchanges and

cooperation projects will not be continued under normal terms, citing the

balloon launches conducted by ROK non-government organizations as an

excuse. The talks concluded after both sides simply exchanged their

positions on the various matters brought to the table by each side.


-----

The 38[th] South-North Military Working-level Talks were held at the

Peace House in Panmunjom on 30 September 2010. The ROK military

requested the North to take responsible actions regarding the sinking of

the ROK Ship Cheonan by admitting and apologizing for the attack,

reprimanding those who were behind the provocation, and devising

measures to prevent similar incidents from recurring in the future.

However, the North made an unfounded insistence that the sinking of the

ROK Ship Cheonan was a fabricated plot against the North and instead

demanded the suspension of balloon launches by civilian organizations.

During the 39[th] South-North Military Working-level Talks which was

also held at the Peace House in Panmunjom from 8 to 9 February 2011,

the South and North discussed the issues pertaining to the procedures for

holding South-North senior-level military talks in order to discuss the

sinking of the ROK Ship Cheonan and shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island).

However, the negotiations fell apart due to disagreements on the agenda

for the senior-level talks and the rank of the senior delegates. The North

maintained its previous standpoint of avoiding the responsibilities for

sinking the ROK Ship Cheonan and shelling Yeonpyeongdo (island), and

unilaterally withdrew from the talks.

Although all three talks concluded without results, the ROK government

has continuously put forward the efforts to improve inter-Korean relations.

In particular, in accordance with the principle that ‘the door for dialogue is

always open,’ the ROK government is maintaining the position of

initiating talks at any time, on the condition that the North takes actions

regarding the sinking of the ROK Ship Cheonan and shelling of Yeonpy
_eongdo (island) that are acceptable to the ROK public in order to truly_

advance and improve South-North dialogue and relations.

**2. Military Assurance to Inter-Korean Exchange and Coop-**
**eration Projects**

The MND is establishing military assurance measures for South-North

exchange and cooperation projects and is maintaining a military readiness

posture to immediately response to contingencies. Most of the inter
Korean exchange and cooperation projects are carried out across the


-----

Military Demarcation Line (MDL), the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ), and

the Northern Limit Line (NLL), all of which are under the jurisdiction of

the ROK Military. As such, the ROK military consults and initiates

military assurance measures with the United Nations Command (UNC)

and the North Korean military while providing security and convoys for

inter-Korean crossings through the DMZ so that inter-Korean exchanges

and cooperative programs are conducted in a safe and seamless manner.

**| Military Assurance to Inter-Korean Crossing | Direct inter-Korean**

crossings occur through land, sea, and air routes. The ROK government

implemented the ‘5·24 Measures’[1] as it was revealed that North Korea

was responsible for the sinking of the ROK Ship Cheonan which

occurred on 26 March 2010. Accordingly, overall inter-Korean crossings

decreased substantially with the exception of crossings related to the

KIC.

Land crossings are carried out through the roads and railroads within the

western and eastern corridors of the South-North Joint Administrative

Areas. The ROK military executes the approval process that entails

consulting and processing crossing plans with the UNC and the North

Korean military in accordance with the Armistice Agreement and inter
Korean agreements. The ROK military also provides security and convoys

for inter-Korean crossings inside the South-North Joint Administrative

Area. Despite the dramatic decrease in inter-Korean crossings since the

implementation of the ‘5·24 Measures,’ the ROK significantly enhanced

the crossing support measures inside the Joint Administrative Areas by

making improvements to the systems in the military situation room within

the Inter-Korea Transit Office and replacing the electric-powered gates on

20 April 2012, in order to guarantee the safety of personnel and vehicles

transiting the Joint Administrative Areas and allowing for rapid

management of the situation.

Sea crossings occur through the inter-Korean navigation routes as

designated by the Agreement on Maritime Transport between the South

and the North.[2] The ROK military conducts communication checks with

North Korean vessels that are using inter-Korean maritime navigation

routes once they cross the NLL, and also executes missions to maintain

security and surveillance readiness when such vessels are navigating


**MDL Military Demarcation Line**

**DMZ Demilitarized Zone**

**1. 5·24 Measures**

-  Disapprove sailing of North Korean
vessels in ROK waters

-  Suspend inter-Korean trade excluding
the KIC

-  Disapprove visits to North Korea

-  Disapprove new investments in North
Korea

-  Suspend projects supporting North
Korea in principle

Replacing electric-powered gate

**2. The Agreement on Maritime**
**Transport between the South and the**
**North**

-  Signed on 28 May 2004, took effect on
1 August 2005

-  Opening of sea ports in South and
North Korea, Opening of the Jeju Strait
to North Korean commercial vessels


-----

through ROK territorial waters. However, since the implementation of the

‘5·24 Measures,’ the transiting of North Korean vessels through ROK

waters has been suspended.

Air crossings usually take place through the direct air route over the

West Sea. The ROK military decides whether to allow the passage or not

based on military and security considerations when North Korean aircraft

requests the use of this air route, guarantees the safety of aircraft operating

within the ROK airspace, and prepares for any contingencies.

**| Operations of Inter-Korean Military Communication Lines | Based**

on the agreement on 17 September 2002 to install communication lines

between the South-North military situation rooms, the South and North

installed a phone lines, fax lines, and a back-up communication lines at

the western corridor on 24 September 2002, and at the eastern corridor

on 5 December 2003, respectively. Through these military communi
cation lines installed between the South and North military situation

rooms at the western and eastern corridors, the South and North

militaries are conducting transit approvals and exchanging messages

between the representatives of the South-North military talks.

However, due to North Korea’s deteriorating electricity supply, lack of

adequate infrastructure, and antiquated cables, communications between

the South and North using copper cables were often interrupted. As such,

the South and North militaries initiated a military communications line

modernization project to ensure stable and rapid communications. On 22

December 2009, construction work to replace the copper cables with

optical cables at both the eastern and western corridors was completed,

and these lines were operational on 26 December. However, because

North Korea suspended military communications at the eastern corridor

and closed down the Kumgang Mountain Communications Liaison Office

on 31 May 2011, only the communication lines at the western corridor are

currently operational.

**3. Preparing for South-North Arms Control**

Arms control[3] is a strategic concept to reduce the risk of war and


**3. Arms control**

A concept that seeks to reduce the risk
of war and enhance security by
acquiring military transparency and
improving military stability through
the confirmation, limitation, prohibition,
and reduction of the construction,
deployment, transfer, management, and
usage of specific military capabilities
between and among relevant unilateral,
bilateral and multilateral actors under
mutual agreement.


-----

enhance security by building transparency for military activities and

increasing military stability. The ROK government is adhering to the

principles of implementing arms control in a gradual and phased manner,

with priority in pursuing common issues of interest, maintaining

South-North reciprocity, and improving the capacity to implement agreed

items.

The South and North have already agreed to discuss and initiate issues

pertaining to building military confidence and realizing arms control in the

1992 Inter-Korean Basic Agreement and Auxiliary Agreement on

Non-aggression, and adopted the 2004 Agreement on the Prevention of

Accidental Naval Clashes in the Western Sea and the Cessation of

Propaganda Activities. However, North Korea is not implementing the

South-North military agreements, and has been demonstrating passive

attitudes towards military confidence building and arms control.

Moreover, as shown by North Korea’s tendency to repeat military

provocations such as the sinking of the ROK Ship Cheonan and the

shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island), the South and North have not been able

to establish even a rudimentary level of military confidence in terms of

arms control.

The MND is maintaining and developing policies related to military

confidence building and arms control in anticipation of improvements in

inter-Korean relations, while strengthening the foundation for pursing

arms control through academic research projects including the publication

of the ‘Strategic Balance in Northeast Asia’ and ‘Arms Control on the

Korean Peninsula.’ Furthermore, the MND hosted the Seoul Security

Dialogue in order to build military confidence among the countries in the

Asia-Pacific region, and has been an active participant in international

disarmament and non-proliferation regimes (i.e. Convention on Certain

Conventional Weapons) that will act as an important basis for pursuing

inter-Korean arms control.

The MND is accumulating verification and inspection capabilities

through the Korea Arms Verification Agency. The Korea Arms Verifi
cation Agency of the MND is enhancing its verification and inspection

capabilities by holding verification tasks development workshops,

implementing international arms control agreements, supporting

inspections by the Organization for Prohibition of Chemical Weapons


-----

(OPCW), participating in ROK-U.S. combined inspection trainings,

carrying out integrated civilian-military nuclear and chemical weapons

verification trainings, and participating in verification education and

training, while enhancing exchange and cooperation with U.S. and

German inspection organizations.


-----

**Repatriation of ROK POWs**
**and South-North Joint**
**Remains Recovery**

Although prisoners of war (POW) of the Korean War were repatriated in
accordance with the 1953 Armistice Agreement, there are still many ROK
POWs who currently remain detained in North Korea because they were
excluded from the initial repatriation.
The ROK government has been reviewing a variety of solutions related to
confirming the fate and whereabouts of POWs remaining in North Korea,
pursuing family reunions, resolving the repatriation issue, pursuing the safe
return of those POWs and families who fled to third countries, and supporting POWs who have returned to the ROK to settle in the ROK in a stable
manner. Moreover, the ROK is pursuing a project to recover ROK POW
remains in North Korea.

**1. Resolving the ROK POW Issue**

**| Background | During the Korean War, POW exchanges between the**

United Nations Command (UNC) and the communists occurred three

times from April 1953 to January 1954. While the UNC estimated the

number of ROK service members missing in action (MIA) to be around

82,000, the total number of POWs who were returned by the communists

was only 8,343. As such, it is estimated that the majority of ROK POWs

are still forcibly detained in North Korea.

As such, from the mutual POW exchange in accordance with the

Armistice Agreement up to the 1960s, the United Nations Command

called for North Korea to resolve the issues pertaining to non-repatriated

ROK POWs through the Military Armistice Commission (MAC).

However, North Korea has continued adhering to the claim that all ROK


**Section**
# 2


Signing of wounded POW exchange
between United Nations Command and
Communist Forces (11 April 1953)

United Nations Command POWs passing
the Gate of Freedom as they were
repatriated by POW exchange after
signing the Armistice Agreement


-----

POWs were transferred to the Neutral Nations Repatriation Commission,

and that there are no ROK POWs detained in North Korea. North Korea

maintains this position to this day.

**| ROK POWs: Whereabouts, Family Reunion and Repatriation |**

Since the repatriation of the late first lieutenant Cho, Chang Ho in 1994,

the ROK government has developed government-wide plans to have

ROK POWs repatriated from North Korea and provide support to ROK

POWs who have returned to the ROK. Moreover, through various inter
Korean dialogues, the ROK government has continuously proposed to

discuss and resolve the issues related to confirming the fate and

whereabouts of ROK POWs and their repatriation as a top-priority issue

from an inter-Korean reconciliation and humanitarian perspective.

In June 2000, during the Inter-Korean Ministerial and Red Cross Talks

following the Inter-Korean Summit, the South and North agreed to discuss

and resolve the issue of ROK POWs in conjunction with the issue of

separated families. In February 2006, during the 7[th] Inter-Korean Red

Cross Talks, an agreement was reached ‘to discuss and resolve the issue of

confirming the fate and whereabouts of those who went missing during

and after the war as a part of the separated families issue,’ and this

principle was reconfirmed during the 20[th] Inter-Korean Ministerial Talks

on February 2007 and the 8[th] Inter-Korean Red Cross Talk on April 2007.

As a result, the fate and whereabouts of 33 ROK POWs were confirmed

through a separated families reunion event during which 17 of them were

reunited with their families from the South.

Meanwhile the ROK government is putting forward multi-faceted

efforts for the safe return of ROK POWs and their families who escaped

North Korea and fled to third countries. When the defection by ROK

POWs and their families from North Korea is confirmed, the ROK

government first ensures their personal safety in the perspective of

protecting ROK nationals living abroad and exerts diplomatic efforts to

repatriate them to the ROK as soon as possible. From 1994 to September

2012, 80 ROK POWs and approximately 400 POW family members

returned to the ROK after escaping North Korea and fleeing to third

countries. The status of ROK POWs is shown in Chart 5-1.


-----

**Chart 5-1. Status of repatriated ROK POWs**

**As of Septemper 2012, Unit : person**

|Year|’94|’97|’98|’99|’00|’01|’02|’03|’04|’05|’06|’07|’08|’09|’10|’11|’12|Total|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Person|1|1|4|2|9|6|6|5|14|11|7|4|6|3|1|-|-|80|



**| Supporting Former ROK POWs to Resettle in the ROK | The ROK**

MND is implementing a wide range of policies that support ROK POWs

to resettle in the ROK as quickly and smoothly as possible and allow

them to live the remainder of their lives in contentment. In accordance

with the Legislation on Repatriation and Treatment of Prisoners of War

enacted in 1998, the MND provides living and housing expenses, and

pension for POWs who have returned to the ROK, along with medical

care support up to 10 million Korean Won annually. Moreover, the

families of those POWs who have not returned and died in North Korea

are registered as ‘families of ROK POWs,’ on top of being designated as

North Korean defectors, and receive separate support funds by

household.

Nonetheless, calls for institutional improvements arose due to a variety

of problems continuously occurring contrary to the original intent of the

Act on Repatriation and Treatment of Prisoners of War. As such, the MND

improved the support system for ROK POWs in a prudent manner and

introduced personal safety measures to protect former ROK POWs by

amending the aforementioned Act while preparing various measures to

assist in the employment of ROK POW family members and to provide

respectful treatment for the ROK POWs.

Starting from late 2008, the MND has been providing social

re-integration training for ROK POWs to assist them in adapting stably to

society. Through the education and training sessions prepared by civilian

expert agencies, the ROK POWs are not only acquiring basic knowledge

for living in the ROK, but are also receiving emotional support.

Furthermore, the MND is putting forth efforts to understand the

difficulties the ROK POWs face during the process of settling down by

conducting household visits, and providing practical and realistic

assistance. Also, the MND is providing many opportunities for former

POWs and families to visit industrial and cultural sites and enhance

mutual friendship through annual former ROK POW invitation events and


-----

round tables with former POWs and their families.

**| Way Ahead | In conjunction with improved inter-Korean relations in**

the future, the ROK government plans to exert efforts to fundamentally

resolve the issue of ROK POWs, and will continue to confirm the fate

and whereabouts of POWs and hold reunions between POWs and their

families through separated family reunion events.

Moreover, diplomatic efforts such as enhancing cooperation with third

countries will continue to be made in order to ensure the personal safety of

ROK POWs and their family members who fled North Korea and

facilitate their safe return to the ROK.

Also, the ROK government will continue to develop various types of

support policies to assist former POWs in adapting to the ROK society at

an early stage through social education and to track the status of the POWs

through regular household visits and round table discussions in order to

help them stably settle down in the ROK. The ROK government will also

assist with networking and provide daily services with the Ministry of

Patriots and Veterans Affairs and the Korean Red Cross.

**2. South-North Joint Remains Recovery**

Out of all the ROK service members killed in action (KIA) during the

Korean War, the remains of approximately 39,000 service members are

estimated to be buried in North Korea and approximately 13,000 in the

DMZ.

During the 2[nd] Inter-Korean Defense Ministerial Talks in November

2007, the South and North agreed to discuss and resolve the issue of

recovering the remains of those KIA during the Korean War. The South

and the North carrying out a joint operation to recover Korean War

remains not only signifies a de facto end to war, but also the establishment

of mutual trust and resolution of humanitarian issues. The Lee Myung-bak

Administration selected joint remains recovery as a presidential election

pledge and key national task and emphasized a full-scale pursuit of the

South-North joint remains recovery initiative through the New Year’s state

of the nation address on 4 January 2010.


-----

As such, the MND is developing a detailed remains recovery implemen
tation plan to be able to initiate the South-North joint remains recovery

project without delay. Moreover, the MND is also preparing for the actual

execution of the recovery project by developing sketch maps of locations

where remains are estimated to be located in North Korea and booklets

containing various testimonies regarding the locations of remains in North

Korea based on Korean War records and various testimonies.

The MND is planning to discuss the South-North joint remains recovery

issue with North Korea as a top priority from a humanitarian and

reciprocal perspective once inter-Korean relations improve and inter
Korean military talks reconvene.


-----

-----

|1|Col2|
|---|---|
|2||


1

2


-----

**1  President Lee Myung-bak emphasizes the**
need to resolutely pursue the defense reform
initiative at the 64[th] Armed Forces Day
ceremony [(]Gyeryongdae, September 2012[)]

2  Color Guards representing the MND, ROK JCS,
Services, Units [(]the 2012 Armed Forces Day
Ceremony[)]


##### Chapter 6
**Establishing Advanced**
**Military Capabilities**

Section 1  National Defense Reform to Establish a
Multi-functional and Highly Efficient
National Defense System
Section 2  Reorganizing the Military into a Tailored
Structure
Section 3 Reforming the Force Structure for Efficiency
Section 4  Raising the Standard of the Reserve Forces
Section 5  Establishing a Defense Informatization
Environment and Enhancing the
Capabilities to Counter Cyber Threats


142

147

153
159
168


-----

**National Defense Reform to**
**Establish a Multi-functional**
**and Highly Efficient National**
**Defense System**

The Ministry of National Defense (MND) is pursuing the initiative of reforming the defense system in order to establish a ‘multi-functional and highly
efficient national defense system’ that can be effective in future warfare and
the strategic environment of the 21[st] century. The basic direction of the
defense reform initiative is to transform the Republic of Korea (ROK) military
into a military structure that is tailored to the operational environment of the
Korean peninsula by taking into account both the existing North Korean
threat and the drastic changes in the security situation and defense environment. Another direction for the defense reform initiative is to develop a
‘highly efficient advanced defense management system.’

**1. Progress of Defense Reform**

In December 2005, the MND established the ‘Defense Reform Basic

Plan 2006-2020’ to transform the ROK military into a ‘structure that relies

less on manpower and more on intelligence and knowledge.’

This plan was established based on a Korean Peninsula security

environment assessment of that time period when inter-Korean exchanges

and cooperation were on the rise while military tension was decreasing.

This plan was also based on the estimate that the instability and

uncertainty in Northeast Asia would increase due to an arms race amongst

nations in the region.

In accordance with the ‘Defense Reform Act,’ the MND is in the process

of revising and complementing the Defense Reform Basic Plan by


**Section**
# 1


-----

evaluating the domestic and international security situation along with the

implementation status of the defense reform. The Defense Reform Basic

Plan was revised on two occasions during the Lee Administration (June

2009 and August 2012).

The ‘Defense Reform Basic Plan 2009-2020’ of June 2009 is a revised

version of the ‘Defense Reform Basic Plan 2006-2020,’ and its key

contents are as follows. In the area of military structure reform,

requirements for response systems against increasing military threats, such

as North Korea’s long-range missile tests and second nuclear test, and for a

new ROK-U.S. combined defense system in preparation for wartime

OPCON transition have been included. In the area of defense management

reform, improvements have been made to include new tasks, such as

expanding the utilization of private sector resources into the reform

initiative in order to incorporate the changes to the defense environment

and national finances.

The ‘Defense Reform Basic Plan 2012-2030,’ which came out in 2012

after constructive revising and refining of the ‘Defense Reform Basic Plan

2009-2020,’ takes into account additional changes to the national defense

environment to include North Korea’s diverse military threats like the

attack on the ROK Ship Cheonan and the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo
(island) in 2010, the transition of wartime OPCON, and the decrease in

available conscripts.

The major achievements of the defense reform initiative from 2010 to

2012 are shown below in Chart 6-1.

**Chart 6-1. Major Achievements of the Defense Reform Initiative [(]2010−2012[)]**

|Area|Major Achievements|
|---|---|
|Military Structure Reform|• Transition to an ‘Active Deterrence’ military strategy in order to deter the enemy’s will to commit provocations or start an all-out war • Established the Northwest Islands Defense Command (15 June 2011) and reinforced the defense capabilities of the Northwest Islands. • Reinforced the JCS organization and functions to establish a theater operations command structure. • Reduced the number of standing troops by 45,000, increased the ratio of officers by 4.7%. • Established the Cyber Command (January 2010) and expanded its organization and personnel. • Top priority to forces to counter North Korea’s local provocations was reinforced • Timely acquisition of capabilities against North Korea’s asymmetric threat|


-----

|Defense Management Reform|• Readjusted the service period for enlisted members (December 2010) • Began female ROTC selection system and expansion of female personnel (January 2011) • Implemented the ‘promotion system based on merits’ (2011) without considering the source of commission, class of commission, and promotion year • Established the Joint Forces Military University (December 2011) and the Defense Language Institution (December 2012) • Implemented the tactical instructor system and comprehensive commissioning evaluation system (2012) • Fourteen military executive agencies are designated and in operation, including the Armed Forces Capital Hospital • Consolidated and closed units with similar functions such as the publishing depots, welfare groups, and installation organizations of each Service • Modernized military barracks (all construction orders and notifications complete as of 2012) • Established an advanced military medical support system|
|---|---|


**2. Defense Reform Basic Plan (2012−2030)**

**| Military Structure Reform | The basic direction of military structure**

reform focuses on transforming the military into a structure that is

tailored to the operational environment of the Korean Peninsula.

Reforms to the ‘command structure’ focus on transforming the current

structure into a command structure centered on strengthened joint combat

missions, taking into account the transition of wartime OPCON, changes

to the future battlefield environment, and improvements and

advancements in the military system. In particular, once the transition of

wartime OPCON to the ROK takes place in 2015, an operations command

and execution system led by the ROK military will be established under a

new combined defense system.

Regarding the ‘troop structure,’ considering the security threats, changes

to the defense environment, and the unit reorganization plan, the number

of standing troops will be gradually reduced from 636,000 personnel in

2012 to 522,000 by 2022. In addition, efforts such as increasing the

percentage of officers at each Service up to 40 percent of its total

manpower are being exerted to streamline the force structure in order to

ensure that combat power is generated in an efficient manner.

Reforms to the ‘unit structure’ will be conducted in an optimal manner

considering the threat of the enemy and the operational environment. With

the goal of acquiring the capability to execute network-centric integrated

operations, the Army will focus on establishing an operations execution

system led by corps-level units, strengthening the combat capabilities of


-----

frontline units, reinforcing the unit structure to counter threats posed by

North Korea’s special operations forces (SOF), and adjusting the coastal

security mission transition plan (transition year to be determined after

evaluating the security situation in 2017). With the goal of acquiring the

capability to operate multidimensional forces encompassing surface,

subsurface, and aerial assets in an integrated manner, the Navy will focus

on establishing a Submarine Command and reinforcing its Special

Operations Flotilla. With the goal of defending the ROK’s strategic islands

and acquiring the capability to execute multi-dimensional high-speed

landing operations, the Marine Corps will focus on establishing a Jeju Unit

that will be responsible for executing integrated operations to defend

Jejudo (island) and establishing an Aviation Wing that will reinforce the

ROK military’s capabilities to defend the Northwest Islands and conduct

amphibious operations. The Air Force will establish a Tactical Air Control

Wing, an Air Intelligence Group, and a Satellite Surveillance Control

Group to acquire air and space operational capabilities. In addition to these

efforts, the Army Missile Command and Cyber Command will also be

reorganized.

Regarding the ‘force structure,’ forces enhancement will be pursued with

a focus on acquiring the necessary capabilities to conduct future warfare

operations based on jointness, and with consideration to the security

threats and the national defense conditions.

**| Defense Management Reform | Reforms for defense management**

will be pursued with a focus on establishing a ‘highly efficient and

advanced defense management system.’

In order to improve the defense personnel management system, the

MND plans to adjust the general officer quota and optimize the military

rank system. In addition, it plans to introduce the system of reappointing

reserve officers into active service even during peacetime and to recruit

highly qualified personnel and expand the utilization of civilians through

means such as increasing the ratio of civilian faculty in the Service

academies to 40 percent of the total faculty. Furthermore, the Army will

modify its system of branch and military occupational specialty (MOS) to

befit both the future battlefield environment and the military structural

reform.


-----

To increase the efficiency of defense management, the Lean Six Sigma

concept will be expanded to be applied to each unit, and the use of civilian

resources will be increased in areas such as logistics and maintenance. In

addition, the defense procurement and defense industry support systems

will be improved by readjusting the role and structure of the MND and

Defense Acquisition Program Administration (DAPA). Through this effort,

a channel of technological cooperation between the private sector and the

military will be established, while modernizing the military acquisition

system through the establishment of regional consolidated supply depots

and improving the quality of service member’s, personal military gear.

The MND will also continue to pursue various welfare initiatives such

as expanding welfare projects for enlisted service members focused on

improving their welfare and quality of life, improving the meal quality to

better incorporate the preference of the younger generation, ushering in a

modern military health care system, enhancing the welfare infrastructure

and support for military family members, and expanding job opportunities

for service members who are being discharged after a long-term military

service.


-----

**Reorganizing the Military into**
**a Tailored Structure**

The ROK military will go through structural changes to transform itself into a
force that is capable of executing information and network-centric warfare
best suited for future combat execution. For this initiative, the ROK military
is currently undergoing a structural reform to optimize itself for combat by
tailoring the structures of its command, troop, unit, and force[1] to the
mission and function of each unit at each echelon, execution of combat
operations, and the operational environment.
The command structure will be streamlined to focus on combat missions
with enhanced jointness. The troop structure will be scaled down with a
phased decrease in the number of active-duty service members, but will be
better trained and equipped. The force structure will be reformed with the
focus on strengthening the frontline combat units and attaining victory in
battle.

**1. Command Structure**

Enhancing jointness is an essential factor in maximizing the

effectiveness of integrating the efforts of the military in the battlefield

environment of the 21[st] century. The need to coordinate and integrate each

Service’s operational effort is increasing as the ground, sea, air, and

cyberspace domains overlap with each other. As such, the ROK military is

developing a command structure that is capable of maximizing the

synergy of all functions by concentrating its efforts on a single objective.

In particular, with the transition of wartime OPCON to the ROK

military in 2015, the current combined defense system, centered around

the Combined Forces Command, will be transformed to a structure based

on the ROK-U.S. Strategic Alliance, with the ROK military taking the

leading role in both the command and execution of operations.

Accordingly, a new combined command and control structure will be


**Section**
# 2


**1. Military Structure**

Overall composition of the military in
regard to its mission.
(1) Command Structure: command
relationship structure ranging from
the MND, JCS, to the combat units
(2) Troop Structure: personnel
composition in terms of branch or
rank that form the military structure
(3) Unit Structure: organizational
structure based on units at each
echelon that facilitates the use of
combat power
(4) Forces Structure: composition of
weapon systems according to
echelon and type


-----

developed to facilitate the seamless coordination and execution of

operations between the ROK and the U.S.

Additionally, a horizontal and vertical network-centric command and

control system will be established to enable the military to be joint,

synchronized, and integrated by establishing a C4I system and developing

an operational execution system that are based on a network-centric

infrastructure that incorporates the changing security environment and

continuously advancing Information Technology.

**2. Troop Structure**

Gradually reducing the troop size and better equipping and training the

troops constitute the core of the troop structure reform. The reduction in

troop level will occur in phases in conjunction with the changes to the

security environment, the fielding of highly advanced weapon systems, the

availability of troop resources, and the plan to reorganize units. The MND

has set the goal of maintaining an active service troop level of 522,000 in

2022. The current troop size and the planned size in 2022 are depicted

below in Chart 6-2.

**Chart 6-2. Active-duty troop reduction in accordance with the Defense Reform Basic Plan**

**End of 2012** **2022**

**Total 636,000** **Total 522,000**

Army (approx. 501,000) Army (approx. 387,000)

Navy (approx. 41,000) Navy (approx. 41,000)
Marine Corps (approx. 29,000) Marine Corps (approx. 29,000)

Air Force (approx. 65,000) Air Force (approx. 65,000)

**End of 2012**

**Total 636,000**

Army (approx. 501,000)

Navy (approx. 41,000)
Marine Corps (approx. 29,000)

Air Force (approx. 65,000)

**2022**

**Total 522,000**

Army (approx. 387,000)

Navy (approx. 41,000)
Marine Corps (approx. 29,000)

Air Force (approx. 65,000)


Although the number of active-duty troops will decrease, the force

structure will transform into a structure that possesses strengthened

combat capabilities by increasing the ratio of cadres, especially those who

will serve mid- to long-term. As such, this initiative will guarantee the


-----

efficient operation of highly advanced equipment and the exertion of

optimal combat power.

**3. Unit Structure**

**| Army | By taking into account the military threat posed by North**

Korea and the ROK military’s operational capability, the Army will

optimize the requirements and the readiness disposition of its units and

develop its unit structure into a structure that befits the operational

environment of the Korean Peninsula.

Changes to the Army’s unit structure are shown in Chart 6-3.

**Chart 6-3. Changes to the Army Unit Structure [(]2012−2030[)]**


**Current**

**ROK Army Headquarters**


**Post-reform**



**Capital Defense**
**Command**

**Special Warfare**
**Command**

**Army Aviation**
**Operations Command**

**Army Missile**
**Command**

**Army Logistics**
**Command**

**Army Training and**
**Doctrine Command**

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|ROK 3rd ROK 2nd my Army Operations Command rps Corps 3) (5)||
||S|
|||
||O|
|||
|||


**ROK Army Headquarters**

**Ground** **2[nd]** **Capital Defense**
**Operations** **Operations** **Command**
**Command** **Command**

**Special Warfare**
**Command**

**Regional** **Maneuver** **Army Aviation**
**Corps [(]5[)]** **Corps [(]1[)]** **Command**

**Army Missile**
**Command**

**Army Logistics**
**Command**

**Army Training and**
**Doctrine Command**


The Army will disestablish the First and Third ROK Armies and

establish a corps-based mission execution system. Regional corps will be

expanded and tailored to the operational environment of the eastern and

western sectors of the Korean Peninsula depending on their location.

Accordingly, regional corps will defend their respective frontline areas of

responsibility at each axis as the highest tactical echelon of ground

operations. In addition, regional corps will have enhanced counter-fire

capabilities as well as improved combat support capabilities through the

formation of an aviation group, an air defense artillery group, and a


-----

logistics support brigade, so that regional corps can be operated as the

main echelon in offensive operations.

The maneuver corps will be the strategic and operational reserve and

will be used as the main echelon in high-speed multi-dimensional

maneuver operations. Given the geographical characteristics of the Korean

Peninsula, brigades will be reorganized as the basic tactical echelons

capable of executing independent operations at the bridge level.

In accordance with this reorganization plan, units will be tailored to their

respective missions with the units in the western sector becoming more

mechanized and the units in the eastern sector becoming more light

infantry-oriented. In particular, as a means to reinforce the ‘spearhead

combat power,’ the combat capabilities of the frontline units will be signif
icantly enhanced by placing priority on reinforcing the capabilities of

infantry battalions.

**| Navy | The Navy will not only prepare against existing threats by**

acquiring the capability to operate an integrated multi-dimensional

maritime force, but will streamline its structure to be able to protect the

full array of national interest, such as defending the sea lanes and

maritime resources. Changes to the unit structure of the Navy are shown

in Chart 6-4.

**Chart 6-4. Changes to the Navy Unit Structure [(]2012−2030[)]**

**Current** **Post-reform**


**ROK Navy Headquarters**

**Group**


**Navy Headquarters**

**Group**



|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|val Marine Navy Education Navy tions Corps and Training Logistics mand Command Command Command Fleet Commands (3) Dir Repo Un Submarine Flotilla Air Wing Maritime Task Flotilla Component Flotilla Special Warfare Flotilla Maritime Intelligence||

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|val Marine Navy Education Navy tions Corps and Training Logistics mand Command Command Command Fleet Commands (3) Dir Repo Un Submarine Command Air Wing Maritime Task Flotilla Component Flotilla Special Warfare Flotilla Maritime Intelligence||


-----

The Navy will expand its submarine flotilla into a submarine command

and transform its unit structure into a maritime task force by reducing its

small-surface vessels while increasing the medium- and large-surface

ships such as the next-generation destroyers, frigates, and Aegis-class

destroyers.

Meanwhile, the Marine Corps will acquire various capabilities to defend

the strategic islands and execute multi-dimensional high-speed

amphibious operations in order to transform its unit structure into a

structure that is tailored to carrying out missions, such as deterring and

responding to local provocations, deploying forces for oversea missions,

and providing support for disaster relief. Changes to the unit structure of

the Marine Corps are shown in Chart 6-5.

**Chart 6-5. Changes to the Marine Corps Unit Structure [(]2012−2030[)]**

**Current** **Post-reform**

**Marine Corps Command /** **Marine Corps Command /**
**Northwest Islands Defense Command** **Northwest Islands Defense Command**



|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|st 2nd 6th Yeonp sion Division Brigade U * Northwest Isl Defense Comman operational con||


**Jeju Defense**
**Command**
**(Under 3[rd] Fleet)**


**Amphibious** **Education**
**Support** **and Training**
**Group** **Group**


**Marine Corps Command /**
**Northwest Islands Defense Command**

**1[st]** **2[nd]** **6[th]** **_Yeonpyeong_**
**Division** **Division** **Brigade** **Unit**

*[ Northwest Island ]
Defense Command has
operational control.

**Amphibious** **Education**

**Aviation**

**Support** **and Training** **_Jeju Unit_**

**Group**

**Group** **Group**


The Marine Corps will create a unit in Jejudo (island) and establish a

system to execute the island’s integrated defense as well as ground

operations. In addition, an aviation group will be established for both

attack and mobility forces during amphibious and ground operations.

**| Air Force | The Air Force will streamline its forces in the direction of**

maximizing its capabilities to conduct effects-based air and space

operations by enhancing its precision strike capability and expanding its

operational range. Changes to the unit structure of the Air Force are

shown in Chart 6-6.


-----

**Chart 6-6. Changes to the Air Force Unit Structure [(]2012−2030[)]**

**Current** **Post-reform**

**Air Force Headquarters** **Air Force Headquarters**


**Tactical Intelligence**

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|orce Air Force Education Air Force Dir tions and Training Logistics Repo mand Command Command Un Combat Commands (2) Air Defense Artillery Command Air Defense and Control Wing Tactical Air Control Group||

**Group**


**Direct**
**Reporting**
**Units**


**Air Force**
**Operations**
**Command**


**Direct**
**Reporting**
**Units**


**Control Unit**

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|Air Force Education Air Force Di and Training Logistics Rep Command Command U Combat Commands (2) Air Defense Artillery Command Air Defense and Control Wing Tactical Air Control Wing Aerial Intelligence Wing Satellite Surveillance &||



The Air Force plans to expand the Tactical Air Control Group into the

Tactical Air Control Wing to strengthen its ability to execute joint

operations, and to expand the Tactical Information Group into the Aerial

Intelligence Wing to strengthen its aerial reconnaissance and ISR support

capabilities. Furthermore, the Air Force plans to establish a Satellite

Surveillance & Control Unit that will conduct satellite surveillance

missions over the Korean Peninsula.


-----

**Reforming the Force**
**Structure for Efficiency**

The ROK military is pursuing a force enhancement initiative to effectively
deal with North Korean threats as well as other potential threats by efficiently allocating the defense budget. Accordingly, the ROK military is in the
process of acquiring early-warning, real-time surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities. It is also establishing command and control, and communication systems that enable the execution of operations in a networkcentric operation environment (NCOE),[1] while improving the quality of its
mobility and strike systems.

**1. Direction of Force Structure Development**

The MND is developing its force structure to first prepare against threats

of local provocation by North Korea and then to acquire an appropriate

level of forces to proactively prepare against a full-scale war and other

potential threats. The areas of force structure development are battle space

awareness, command and control, ground forces, maritime and

amphibious forces, air forces, force protection, and other areas. The force

structures in these areas are being streamlined in the following direction.

First, in the area of battle space awareness, a system for surveillance,

reconnaissance, and early warning will be established for operations over

the Korean Peninsula and the surrounding areas. In addition, capabilities

to collect, analyze, process, and operate tactical information in real time

will be improved for each echelon.

Second, in the area of command and control, mission execution in

NCOE will be ensured by establishing a command and control and

communications system that guarantees jointness and interoperability.


**Section**
# 3


**1. Network Centric Operational**
**Environment [(]NCOE[)]**

Operational environment in which the
various combat elements, such as the
detection system, command and control
organization, and strike methods are
connected through a network, enabling
friendly forces to share the battle space
situation. This results in an integrated
and efficient combat capability by
enabling faster decision making, quicker
deployment, and increased lethality in
attacks.


-----

Third, in the area of ground forces, priority will be placed on acquiring

forces required to ensure the complete utilization of combat power and

prepare against local provocations. In addition, the integrity of power

projection will be guaranteed through the timely acquisition of forces

required for major units going through the streamlining process.

Fourth, in the area of maritime and amphibious forces, capabilities

required for maritime control of waters surrounding the Korean Peninsula,

protection of sea lanes, and the execution of joint operations will gradually

be expanded.

Fifth, in the area of air force, capabilities to achieve air superiority

within the area of operation and to conduct precision air strikes will be

attained along with the capability to execute long range operations.

Sixth, in the area of force protection and other areas, air defense forces

required for countering threats from the air will be acquired, and CBR

capabilities will be reinforced to increase survivability.

**2. Pursuing Force Enhancement**

**| 2011 Major Force Enhancement Projects | The defense budget in**

2011 was 31.4031 trillion KRW, of which the force enhancement budget

was 9.6935 trillion KRW. This is a 6.5 percent increase from 2010. In

2011, there were 161 major projects in progress (9.5592 trillion KRW)

and 28 new projects (134.3 billion KRW). The major force enhancement

projects are shown in Chart 6-7.

**Chart 6-7. Major Force Enhancement Projects of 2011**


Airborne Early Warning and Control
System

K-21 infantry fighting vehicle

|Weapons Systems|Projects in Progress|New Projects in 2011|
|---|---|---|
|Surveillance, Reconnaissance/ Command and Control, Communications|• Airborne Early Warning and Control System • Military Satellite Communications Equipment • Establishment of Cyber Command|• Next-generation Thermal Surveillance Equipment • Next-generation Electronic Warfare Equipment • Next-generation Military Satellite Communications System|
|Maneuver and Fire|• K-21 Infantry Fighting Vehicle • K-9 Self-propelled Artillery • Counter-fire Detection Radar|• Next-generation Light Recovery Vehicle • Hostile Artillery Locater (HALO) • Next-generation Counter-fire Detection Radar|


-----

|Vessel|• Gwanggaeto-III Class Aegis Destroyer • J angbogo-II Class Submarine • Next-generation PKG-A class patrol vessel|• Frigate (Ulsan Class Batch-II) • Next-generation Fast Combat Support Ship (AOE-II)|
|---|---|---|
|Aircraft|• F-15K Fighter • Advanced Trainer (T-50/TA-50) • C-130H Upgrade|• Light Attack Aircraft (FA-50) • KF-16 Upgrade • Boramae (KFX) Program R&D|


K-9 self-propelled Artillery

_Gwanggaeto the Great III class Aegis_
destroyer

_Jangbogo-II class submarine_


**| 2012 Force Enhancement Program | The defense budget in 2012**

was 32.9576 trillion KRW, of which the force enhancement budget was

9.8938 trillion KRW. This is a 2.1 per cent increase from 2011. In 2012,

there were 160 major projects in progress (9.6745 trillion KRW) and 34

new projects (219.3 billion KRW). The major force enhancement

projects are shown in Chart 6-8.

**Chart 6-8. Major Force Enhancement Projects of 2012**

|Weapons Systems|Projects in Progress|New Projects in 2012|
|---|---|---|
|Surveillance, Reconnaissance/ Command and Control, Communications|• Airborne Early Warning and Control System • Military Satellite Communications Equipment • Establish Cyber Command|• Tactical Reconnaissance Intelligence Collection System • Service-wide Satellite Air Defense Warn- ing System • KJCCS Upgrade R&D|
|Maneuver and Fire|• K-21 Infantry Fighting Vehicle • K-9 Self-propelled Artillery • Counter-fire Detection Radar|• Multi layer Coastal Surveillance System • Establish Ground Operations Command • Type II Night and Day Rifle Scope|
|Vessel|• G wanggaeto-III Class Aegis Destroyer • J angbogo-II Class Submarine • Next-generation patrol vessel (PKG-A)|• Special Warfare Support Ship/Special Ops Infiltration Vessel • Establish Submarine Command • Next-generation patrol vessel (PKX-B)|
|Aircraft|• F-15K Fighter • Light Attack Aircraft (FA-50) • C-130H Upgrade|• Next-generation Fighter (F-X) • Large Attack Helicopter • Maritime Operations Helicopter|



**| Mid-term Force Improvement Plan | The ROK military intends to**

build an ‘elite force that is capable of responding effectively against

North Korea as well as other potential threats.’ This goal can be achieved

by integrating the surveillance, decision making, and strike systems at all

echelons into a network, while creating a comprehensive force structure.

The structure of this plan is shown in Chart 6-9.


-----

**Chart 6-9. Targets for Force Build-up**

**Build an effective force that is capable of responding effectively**
**against North Korea as well as other potential threats**


**Surveillance and**
**Reconnaissance**
**System [(]Sensor[)]**


**Command and Control, Communications**
**Computers & Intelligence**


**Strike System**
**(Shooter)**


|Joi C|nt 4I|
|---|---|


|Gro C|und 4I|
|---|---|


|Compu|uters & Intelligenc (C4I)|Col3|ce|
|---|---|---|---|
|Intelligence Processing|Command and Control|||
||Combined C4I (AKJCCS) Joint C4I|||
|Military Intelligence Processing System (MIMS, MIMS-C)|Navy|Air Force||
||C4I Gro C|C4I und 4I||
|Tactic S|C4I for Battalion and Below Echelons al Information Communic ystem / Tactical Data Lin||ati k|


Category

Multi-purpose Satellite **ROK**

**JCS**

Airborne Early Warning
and Control System

**Operations**

**Command**

**– Regiment**

UAV

**Battalion**

**– Platoon**

Maritime Patrol Aircraft

_Hyunmu Upgrade, MLRS_

K-9, K-2 Tank

_Jangbogo-II/III class_
submarine

_Gwanggaeto-II/III class_
destroyer

F-X, F-15K

In order to meet the target of force build-up, priority will be placed on

securing capabilities to prepare against North Korean threats. However,

capabilities to counter potential and non-military threats will also be

acquired simultaneously.

The ROK military is planning to place priority on acquiring the

following capabilities: forces to prepare against threats of local

provocation by North Korea; capabilities and forces to reinforce the

combat capabilities of battalion level units and below; and forces to

counter North Korea’s asymmetric threats such as missiles, long-range

artillery, cyber threats, chemical and biological weapons, and nuclear

threats. Furthermore, each echelon’s capability will be enhanced to befit

future warfare operations in order to prepare for potential threats.

To achieve this objective, the MND will pursue a total of 290 force

enhancement projects from 2013 to 2017. 196 projects, including the K-21

Infantry Fighting Vehicle (IFV) and the second batch of F-15Ks, are in


-----

progress, while 94 projects such as the next-generation destroyer and

tanker aircraft programs will commence as new projects.

The direction of force enhancement from 2013 to 2017 is as follows.

First, regarding the surveillance and reconnaissance system, the goal

will be to acquire indigenous ROK military capabilities to carry out

battlefield surveillance and intelligence gathering over the Korean

peninsula and the surrounding region.

Accordingly, the ROK military will acquire Airborne Early Warning and

Control (AEW&C) aircraft to conduct strategic level surveillance and

early warning. The ROK military will also acquire high-altitude

unmanned aerial vehicles (HUAV) and a tactical reconnaissance

intelligence gathering system to reinforce its surveillance and

reconnaissance capabilities. In addition, the ROK military will develop a

division-level reconnaissance UAV to bolster the division’s surveillance

and reconnaissance capabilities and acquire small reconnaissance UAVs

that can be utilized at the battalion level.

Second, regarding the command and control and communications

system, the goal is to establish a network centric operational environment

by creating a strategic and tactical C4I system and battlefield network.

In order to ensure a JCS-led command and control system, the ROK

military will upgrade its joint command and control system capability,

develop and acquire the Joint Tactical Data Link System (JTDLS)[2] as well

as the Joint Fire Operation System-Korea (JFOS-K) to distribute digitized

tactical information during joint operations.

The ground tactical C4I system will undergo a second round of

improvements and the ground tactical data link and battle command

system for battalions and lower level units will be developed to ensure

real-time distribution of tactical information to small units. The ROK

military will also acquire the Tactical Information Communication

Network (TICN)[3] that will enable the high-capacity transmission of

multi-media data.

Third, regarding the strike systems, the ROK military will improve the

capabilities of its air, naval, and ground forces to conduct high-speed

multi-dimensional movements and its capabilities to carry out long-range

precision strikes. It will also acquire forces with enhanced protective

capabilities.


**2. Joint Tactical Data Link System**
**(JTDLS)**

A system to distribute joint tactical
information to the major weapon system

-  e.g., tanks, helicopters, ships, aircraft

-  of the three Services.

**3. Tactical Information Communication**
**Network [(]TICN[)]**

A tactical communication system that
incorporates the wireless network and
the telephone network including mobile
communication.


-----

In order to improve the ROK military’s long-range strike capabilities,

priority will be given to acquiring assets that can effectively strike critical

targets, such as nuclear and missile facilities, throughout the entire North

Korean region, based on the New Missile Guideline, which was revised in

October 2012.

In terms of ground forces, K-21 IFVs, K-9 self-propelled artillery,

counter-fire detection radars, and K-2 tanks will continue to be procured

while new procurements will commence for the wheeled IFVs and

next-generation MLRS systems.

Regarding the maritime and amphibious forces, the ROK military will

continue to procure next generation frigates and the Jangbogo-II class

submarines (1,800-ton class) while newly acquiring next-generation mine

laying ships and next-generation amphibious landing ships.

In terms of air capabilities, next-generation fighters (F-X), long-range

air-to-surface missiles, large attack helicopters (LAH), and maritime

operations helicopters will be procured.

In order to enhance air defense and CBRN protection capabilities, the

ROK military will acquire mid-range surface-to-air missiles (Cheongung),

an air defense command and control warning system, and next-generation

decontamination vehicles.

Fourth, in order to reinforce the deployed forces, the ROK military will

make improvements to outdated and degraded capabilities and continue to

acquire combat reserve ammunition to ensure combat sustainability.

Regarding the ground forces, the ROK military will upgrade the

capabilities of the K-1/K1A1 tanks, K-200 armored personnel carriers,

K-277 armored command vehicles, and K-55 self-propelled guns. With

regard to the naval forces, improvements will be made on anti-submarine

warfare capabilities of the combat vessels that are equal to or larger than

the PCC class. Regarding the air forces, the ROK military will improve

the weapons capabilities of the F-16s and KF-16s.


Wheeled IFV (Infantry Fighting Vehicle)


-----

**Raising the Standard of the**
**Reserve Forces**

The reserve forces, in conjunction with the active-duty forces, deter war
during peacetime and provide the necessary combat power required for
national survival during contingencies.
The MND is modifying the relevant laws, regulations, and institutions related
to mobilization and is continuing to make improvements to the mobilization
system in order to raise the standard of the reserve forces to that of the
active-duty forces. In addition, the MND has established a reserve force
operation and management system, and at the same time, it is improving
the institutional framework and conditions of reserve force training, and
building an elite force through rigorous training.

**1. Modifying the Laws and Regulations regarding Mobiliza-**
**tion**

The laws and regulations regarding mobilization are the following. The

Emergency Resources Management Act which includes provisions related

to establishing peacetime emergency response plans and conducting

surveys and training on resources to be mobilized; the Military Service

Act which includes provisions related to mobilizing and training

reservists; and the Bill on Wartime Resource Mobilization (draft) which

includes provisions related to mobilizing, controlling, and managing

personnel and material resources during wartime. Of these laws and

regulations, the Bill on Wartime Resources Mobilization (draft) is a

wartime statute[1] that can be effectuated upon an emergency declaration by

the President if the circumstances restrict the National Assembly from

deliberating and passing the Bill, or if it is initially impossible for the

National Assembly to convene.


**Section**
# 4


**1. Wartime Statute**

A statute that is effectuated during
wartime. A wartime statute stipulates
special provisions pertaining to
administration, economy, finances,
judicial actions, etc. when the nation is
at war or in a major combat situation,
and overrides peacetime legislative
procedures in accordance with Article
76 of the Constitution.


-----

In response to the attack against the ROK Ship Cheonan and the

shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island) in 2010, the Act on Partial Mobilization

to Overcome Crises and Local Provocations was enacted in 2011, which

establishes a partial mobilization system to mobilize portions of the

national resources to rapidly resolve the situation and prevent an all-out

escalation to war due to provocations such as enemy shellings, infiltrations

or provocations.

In addition, through consultation with the relevant government agencies

such as the Ministry of Public Administration and Security and the

Ministry of Government Legislation, the Emergency Resources

Management Act has been revised to allow partial utilization of national

resources, personnel, and material during an emergency situation where

integrated defense is required.

With partial mobilization now possible, the ROK military can utilize a

flexible mobilization system to respond to local provocations and prepare

for an all-out war during emergency situations, while minimizing the

public’s anxiety and concerns and the impact to the national economy that

can be caused by a full-scale mobilization.

**2. Managing Mobilized Resources and Improving the Exe-**
**cution System**

**| The Mobilization System of Troops and Materials | The MND is**

revising the Personnel Mobilization System to reduce the time needed

for the mobilized troops to conduct their missions.

The system is under revision to minimize the changes of the units to

which the reservists are assigned and also to allow the individual units to

request and receive mobilized reservists with the relevant military occupa
tional specialty (MOS) required by the units. Also, measures are being

taken to utilize the railway system to facilitate the movement of reservists

who need to travel long distances.

In addition, reservists are being managed efficiently and systematically

even during peacetime so that they can contribute to enhancing the overall

combat power when needed. Education on reservist duties is provided to

service members prior to their discharge, and after they return to their


-----

civilian lives, the bond between the reservists and their respective units

continues to be strengthened through homecoming events, social

networking systems, e-mails, and command letters.

Furthermore, in order to improve the material mobilization system,

efforts are being made to verify the validity for mobilization and

implement measures to efficiently utilize excellent civilian resources.

Companies with excellent production capabilities or new products and

technologies are placed on the mobilization list, and real time production

exercises are conducted every year. Also, the MND is working to provide

additional incentives for those companies that are designated for mobili
zation.

**| Defense mobilization information system | From 2004 to 2010,**

the MND established the Defense Mobilization Information System by

dividing the reserve force affairs into the following three categories:

management of reservists, personnel mobilization, and material mobili
zation.

The Defense Mobilization Information System was developed to

support the prompt and systematic management of resources by efficiently

managing the mobilization resources and streamlining the tasks associated

with mobilization. Accordingly, it has become possible for the MND to

provide better services to the reservists through this system by carrying out

resource management and administrative duties pertaining to training.

The Defense Mobilization Information System will continue to be

upgraded through measures such as the mobilization simulation model,

which will be developed to analyze and evaluate the mobilization

capabilities in real time. The structure of the Defense Mobilization

Information System is shown in Chart 6-10.


-----

**Chart 6-10. Defense Mobilization Information System**



**MND Synchronized**
**System**

Personnel
Information System

Logistics Information
System

Transportation
Information system

Battlefield
Management System
(KJCCS, etc.)


**Resource Management**
**Agency Synchronized System**

**Ministry of Public**
**Administration and Security**
(Emergency Response
Resource Information
Management System[)]

Ministry of Knowledge and Economy

Ministry of Land, Transport
and Maritime affairs

Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry,
Fishery, and Food Affairs

Ministry of Health and Welfare

Korea Food and Drug Administration

Korea Communications Commission


**Military Manpower Administration**
(Military Manpower Administrative
Integrated Information system[)]

|Col1|Defense Mobilization Information System|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||Reserve Forces Personnel Material Management Mobilization Mobilization Organization Troop Industry Management Mobilization Mobilization Reservist Wartime Transportation Education Labor Mobilization and Training Mobilization Construction Mobilization Mobilization Mobilization Homeland of Communications Defense Force Technicians Mobilization Mobilization Simulation Model||
||||
||||
||||
||||
||||
||||


**3. Establishing Management and Operations System for**
**Reservists**

**| Organization and resource management | Reservists are classified**

into either the mobilized reserve force or the homeland defense reserve

force depending on their mission. The mobilized reserve force is

composed of reservists who have been discharged from active duty in the

past four years. They are mobilized as personnel to support the

expansion or establishment of regular forces, or to replenish personnel

losses, and carry out regular operational missions. The homeland defense

reserve force is composed of reservists who have been discharged from

active duty five to eight years ago. They conduct homeland defense

operations in their designated areas of responsibility (AOR).

In accordance with ‘the Military Personnel Management Act,’ retired

officers, warrant officers, and non-commissioned officers are obligated to

be part of the reserve force until they reach the full retirement age[2] for

their respective ranks. For enlisted service members, they are part of the

reserve force for eight years after they are discharged. ROK citizens over

the age of 18, who are not incorporated into the reserve force, can apply to

become homeland reservists. As of March 2012, approximately 10,000

volunteers, including women, are serving as members of the homeland

reserve force. The size of the reserve force, as of March 2012, is around


**2. Retirement Age**

Retirement Age for Officers: Sergeant
1[st] Class/Chief Petty Officer (45),
Master Sergeant/Senior Chief Petty
Officer (53), Sergeant Major/Chief
Master Sergeant/Master Chief Petty
Officer (55), Warrant Officer (55),
Company Grade officer (43), Major/
Lieutenant Commander (45), Lieutenant
Colonel/Commander (53), Colonel/
Captain (56)


-----

2.9 million, and they are organized into local reserve units for each

neighborhood, township, and village as well as into the workplace reserve

units. The status of reserve forces is shown in Chart 6-11.

**Chart 6-11. Status of Reserve Forces [(]as of March 2012[)]**

**Unit: 10,000 people**

|Years Since Discharge from Active Duty|Col2|Col3|Composition|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total|Within 4 years (Mobilization Reservists)|5 to 8 years (Homeland Defense Reservists)|Total|Regional Reservists|Reservists Affiliated to Work|
|290|134|156|290|223|67|



**| Establishment of organizations to manage the reserve force |**

The MND is operating reserve force management organizations to

efficiently manage and operate reserve forces. Reserve forces

management organizations consist of the following organizations:

mobilization support groups and mobilization replacement battalions that

prepare for efficient mobilization during wartime; reserve force training

units that provide training to reservists during peacetime; and homeland

regional units that carry out homeland defense missions.

A mobilization support group will be established for each Homeland

Reserve Division. During peacetime, the support group conducts mobili
zation training and manages the troops, materials, and equipment of the

relevant mobilization replacement battalion. During wartime, the support

group is responsible for establishing mobilization replacement battalions

and providing replacements to the front lines. As of 2012, seven mobili
zation support groups have been established, and a total of 11 will be

established by 2015.

Reserve force training groups will be established by consolidating over

200 battalion-level training grounds located in cities, counties, and

districts into technologically advanced regiment-level training areas. As

such, one region will be designated as a trial area to implement this

initiative until 2015. At the same time, the ROK military plans to establish

ten reserve force training groups by 2020 in areas larger than metropolitan

cities and establish additional training groups in the city, county, and

district areas after 2020, considering the security environment and the


Establishment of a Female Reserve Unit
in the 17[th] Division (May 2012)

Establishment of the 55[th] Division’s
Mobilization Support Group (March
2012)


-----

conditions of the respective regions.

Homeland regional units will function as an intermediary echelon

between an active-duty battalion and a reserve company of the military

unit (brigade level or above) responsible for the area, and carry out reserve

forces resource management, command and control of regional reserve

unit companies, and homeland defense operations during peacetime and

wartime.

**| Providing better equipment to the reserve forces | The MND is**

planning to replace outdated individual and crew-served weapons of

reserve forces with new equipment. Old individual weapons will be

replaced with the M16A1 in line with the individual firearms initiative

for active-duty units. Legacy crew-served weapons will also gradually be

replaced with modernized weapons.

The insufficient combat gears for homeland reserve forces will also be

acquired on a yearly basis until 2015. In particular, priority will be given

to essential items for combat and survival such as bulletproof helmets and

gas masks. Old communications equipment will be replaced with new

communications equipment that can be used for integrated operations with

the civilian sector, government, military, and police.

**4. Improvements to the Reserve Force Training System**
**and Conditions**

All reservists, apart from those who are deferred,[3] undergo training to

prepare for mobilization as well as homeland defense operations during

wartime. Training for reservists can be divided into the following

categories: mobilization training, supplementary mobilization reserve

training, and homeland defense training. The training schedule by type and

training hours is shown in Chart 6-12.


**3. Personnel Deferred from Training**

These personnel are deferred from
training in accordance with the ‘Act on
the Establishment of Homeland Defense
Reserve Forces’ or by the discretion of
the Minister of National Defense, and
are treated as having completed their
training. These personnel are classified
by occupation. However, separate
qualification and criteria can be made
for selection if required. Currently, 57
occupations including policemen,
firefighters, and prison guards are
designated as occupations that are
deferred from reserve training.


-----

**Chart 6-12. Reservist Training Schedule [(]as of 2012[)]**

|Category|Col2|Col3|Mobilization Training|Supplementary Mobilization Training|Basic Training for Homeland Defense|Training under Homeland Defense OPLAN|Roll Call|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Enlisted|1st to 4th Year|Designated for Mobilization|2 nights and 3 days|-|-|-|-|
|||Non-designated|-|24 hours|-|12 hours||
||5th to 6th Year|Designated for Mobilization|-|-|8 hours|6 hours|4 hours|
|||Non-designated|||8 hours|12 hours||
||7th to 8th Year||Organized without Training|||||
|Officers and NCOs|1st to 6th Year|Designated for Mobilization|2 nights and 3 days|-|-|-|-|
|||Non-designated||2 nights and 3 days||||
||After 7th Year||Organized without Training|||||
|Volunteers||||||6 hours||



**| Improvements to the training system and conditions | The MND**

provides security education to reservists so that they can maintain firm

security and national awareness and conducts realistic training such as

survival game training to generate enhanced training experience. The

level of achievement for groups and individuals are evaluated during

training, and various incentives such as permission to depart early are

given to instill motivation for training.

Reserve force snipers have been organized to prepare for the

urbanization of the areas of operation of homeland defense reserve

divisions, and the increasing threat from the enemy’s special warfare units.

Since 2011, 30,000 reservists have been selected as snipers with the

selection being made based on active duty experience and marksmanship.

Also, strengthened marksmanship training for these snipers are being

provided in order to maintain and enhance their skills.

In addition, the MND is operating the ‘holiday reserve training system’

which provides flexibility for reservists in receiving training on holidays,

the internet-based ‘reserve training schedule selection system’ which

enables reservists to choose when they will reserve training, and the

‘nationwide reserve force training location system’ which allows reservists

to receive training at a location of their choice. The status of holiday and


Mobilization Training (Artillery Firing
Training)

Sniper Training (Effective Range
Marksmanship Training)


-----

nationwide training is shown in Chart 6-13.

**Chart 6-13. Holiday and Nationwide Training Status**


**Unit: Number of Persons (%)**


**4. Total Number of Training Reservists**

The total number of training reservists is
the sum of those taking part in
supplementary mobilization training and
basic training for homeland defense,
who can take part in holiday and
national wide training.

|Category|Total Number of 4 Training Reservists|Holiday Training|Nationwide Training|
|---|---|---|---|
|2009|1,561,259|15,561(1.00)|71,789(4.60)|
|2010|1,518,287|18,947(1.24)|98,773(6.50)|
|2011|1,145,016|18,592(1.62)|56,312(4.91)|


The MND is making improvements to three major areas that cause

inconvenience for reservists: food rationing, transportation, and

convenience facilities in the training areas. To this end, the MND is

making continued efforts such as increasing the unit price of meals and

emplacing stricter hygienic standards for lunch box suppliers, expanding

public transportation services to and from the training units, and building

convenience facilities such as new reserve force dining facilities.

In addition, for a more scientific approach to reserve forces training,

computer simulated training equipment will be procured and installed in

regiment-level training grounds for full-time operation, enabling reservists

to receive training at their convenience.

In a period of two years from the beginning of 2010 to the end of 2011,

all restrooms have been modernized in the reserve force training areas, and

starting from 2012, food allowances are also being provided to the partic
ipants of homeland defense operations training. In addition, with the

commencement of the mobile reservist information service system in

2012, reservists can look up various training information, choose and

make changes to their training schedule, and even postpone their training,

from any location at anytime.

**| Future Development of Reserve Forces Training | Reserve training**

for key reserve forces such reserve cadres need to be strengthened,

within the scope of not affecting their daily lives, so that these reserve

forces can generate combat power equivalent to that of active duty forces

during contingencies.

Compensation for reservists attending education and training will


-----

gradually increase annually to meet the actual expenses incurred by partic
ipation. Also, training allowances for additional training will be increased

considering the salary of active-duty cadres. The status of annual training

allowances provided to reservists is shown in Chart 6-14.

**Chart 6-14. Annual Training Allowance per Reservist [(]Transportation and Lunch[)]**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Unit: KRW/Day|
|---|---|---|---|
|Category|2009|2010−2011|2012|
|Amount|7,000|9,000|10,000|


-----

**Establishing a Defense**
**Informatization Environment**
**and Enhancing the Capabilities**
**to Counter Cyber Threats**

Defense informatization plays a crucial role in attaining an advanced military
capacity and an efficient defense management by applying highly advanced
information technology.
The MND’s vision for defense informatization is to establish a ‘networkcentric informatization of defense knowledge,’ and to realize this vision, it is
exerting its efforts to advance its defense informatization promotion framework and to establish a sophisticated defense information system. In addition, it is reinforcing its information security systems and response capabilities to effectively cope with transnational cyber threats.

**1. Framework to Advance the Defense Informatization Pro-**
**motion System**

**| Establishing the Basic Plan for Defense Informatization | The**

MND is promoting an objective-oriented informatization by establishing

the ‘Basic Plan for Defense Informatization,’[1] based on the ‘Act

Regarding the Foundation for Defense Information Resource

Management’ (hereafter the Act on Defense Informatization), which was

enacted in 2010.

The ‘Basic Plan for Defense Informatization’ is a comprehensive

development execution plan, which lays out the defense informatization

policies in detail. Through this plan, the MND provides the direction of

development for mid-to-long-term defense informatization and the

required guidance for coordination and control of informatization projects

of the ROK JCS, each Service, and agencies, as well as guidelines for


**Section**
# 5


**1. Main Contents of the ‘Basic Plan for**
**Defense Informatization’**

-  National, defense guideline and
analysis of environment element

-  Policy direction of defense
informatization

-  Objective, focus of development,
direction of development, mid-to-longterm roadmap of each area of Defense
Information System

-  Direction of development for
governance regarding implementation
and management of the Basic Plan

-  Tasks to promote for advancement of
Defense Information System

-  Tasks to promote for sophistication of
defense information technology


-----

drafting the Defense Mid-term Plan.

As with the ‘Basic Plan for National Informatization,’ the ‘Basic Plan for

Defense Informatization’ is published every five years. However, revisions

are made annually reflecting any major changes to the policy and plan,

and annual changes to the requirements.

**| Developing a System for Defense Informatization | The MND**

revised existing directives to establish operational procedure and

standards required for implementing the ‘Act on Defense Informati
zation,’ and consolidated them as the ‘Directive for Defense Informati
zation Affairs’ in 2011.

The MND has been promoting an experimental project on New

Information Technology since 2007 to adopt excellent new civilian

information technologies into the military in a timely manner, and in April

2012, it signed the ‘Memorandum of Agreement on Information

Technology Fusion’ with the Ministry of Knowledge and Economy.

In order to respond to the rapid changes in the information technology

environment, and to guarantee expertise and efficiency in promoting

informatization, the MND designates and operates dedicated organizations

and expert technological support organizations[2] for each area of informati
zation. In 2011, the MND designated organizations specializing in

maintenance and repairs pertaining to seven defense information systems[3 ]

that require military expertise such as logistics and supplies. In addition, it

designated expert technological support organizations in the areas of

defense interoperability and information protection in October 2010.

**| Establishing a Sophisticated Defense Enterprise Architecture (EA)** **|**

In order to prevent overlapping investments in informatization and

guarantee interoperability between information systems, the MND has

been promoting phased establishment of defense EA[4] since 2007. The

plan to establish a defense EA is shown in Chart 6-15.


**2. Specialized Organization and**
**Expert Technological Support**
**Organization**

Auxiliary Organizations that are
contracted by the MND, to carry out
tasks themselves or to provide support
to efficiently promote informatization.

**3. Defense Information System**

A structured system of equipment and
software that are used to collect,
process, store, search, transmit and
receive defense information.

**4. Defense Enterprise Architecture**

A comprehensive blueprint that
structurally lays out the various
components of defense informatization
such as tasks, system, and technology
that are needed to improve systematic
IT support across the military.


-----

**Chart 6-15. Plan to Establish a Defense Enterprise Architecture**

|Before 2008|2009|2010|2011|2012|2013|After 2014|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||EA for Each Agency|
|MND Headquarters EA|||Top le|vel Defense||EA for Each Function|
|R Inte|esource Manag Battlefield M Integra grated EA|ement Integrated anagement ted EA Joint War|Arc EA NCO game EA|hitecture E-based EA|||


**Optimization of**
**Organization**

**Optimization of**
**Task**

**Optimization of**
**Informatization**


The establishment of an architecture for the duties and tasks of the

MND was complete in 2008, and in 2011, an integrated defense enterprise

architecture was built to improve performance of battlefield and resource

management information systems and secure interoperability of the two

systems.

Starting from 2011, the MND has been building an EA based on NCOE

that will be the master blueprint for information communication networks

and information protection while establishing an overarching defense

architecture that visualizes the current and future of the entire national

defense sector.

In the future, the MND will strive to establish a sophisticated enterprise

architecture for each function and organization by focusing on the

utilization of the architecture such as complementing and developing the

informatization master plan, planning for informatization requirements,

and evaluating the results of informatization.

**2. Enhancing the Defense Information System and Guaran-**
**teeing Interoperability**

**| Improving the Information Communication Service and**

**Infrastructure | The MND is constructing a ubiquitous[5] information**


**5. Ubiquitous**

A newly coined term which has its roots
in ‘ubique,’ which means ‘everywhere’ in
Latin, it now stands to represent a
communications environment where a
user can freely connect to the Internet,
regardless of the time, place, network or
type of computer.


-----

and technology environment that applies technologies such as virtual
ization[6] to make defense information system functions user-oriented.

Accordingly, the defense broadband convergence network was

established in 2011 as a build-transfer-lease project. With the establishment

of the defense broadband convergence network, a data flow capacity of 10

Gbps can be allowed for each echelon of units, thereby creating the

foundation for creating an All-IP based integrated wired and wireless

network.[7]

The MND is also standardizing strategic and tactical networks to include

terrestrial, aerial, and satellite communications network into an IP[8] system

and developing an integrated wired and wireless network to improve its

information and technology infrastructure. The composition of the defense

information and communications network is shown in Chart 6-16.

**Chart 6-16. Composition of Defense Information Communications Network**

**Commercial Satellite** **Civilian Military Dual** **Military Satellite**

**Satellite** **Use Satellite**
**Communications**
**System**

**Airborne** **Stratosphere Relay** **Aerial Relay UAV**
**Communications**
**System**

**All-IP**
**Integrated**
**Nework** **Link-K**

**Tactical**
**Communications**
**System** **Link-K**

**Link-K**

**Maritime Operations Satellite**

**Sensor** **Communications Network** **Submarine**
**TICN** **Network** **Combat Wireless Network** **Network**

**Microwave Network**

**Fixed**
**Communications**
**System** **Optical Communications Network**


The MND is creating a Defense Integrated Data Center to consolidate

all computing centers that are dispersed and operated by each Service and

at various levels of echelons to ensure the stable utilization of defense

information system in any situation.


**6. Virtualization**

Technology of logically consolidating or
partitioning physically different
systems, such as hardware and
software, for the efficient utilization of
data resources.

**7. All-IP Integrated Network**

A network Internet protocol (IP) based
network with a structure that
incorporates the various different
networks. In an All-IP network, existing
networks such as landline phone
network, international mobile
communication network and wireless
network are integrated into one single IP
based network which is based on the
internet telephone service in which all
voice, data and other multimedia
materials are processed through a
packet.

**8. Internet Protocol**

International standard data
communications protocol, a globally
used standard for Internet use.


-----

The Defense Integrated Data Center, which is expected to be operational

by 2014, will provide tailored services by applying new information

technologies such as virtualization and, services with enhanced stability

through the strengthening of survivability of data resources at peace and

wartime and information protection capabilities. In addition,

high-performance / low-electricity-consumption servers will be installed

to maximize energy efficiency, and low-carbon green IT[9] will be applied

to energy systems in areas such as electricity and heat management.

Recognizing the importance of a wireless communications-based

infrastructure best suited for the network-centric operational environment,

the MND is developing an operational system for stably securing and

systematically managing military exclusive frequencies. In this regard, it

is actively participating in the World Radiocommunication Conference
(WRC)[10] to respond to the international community’s frequency distri
bution policy and to reinforce mutual coordination.

**| Reinforcing the Interoperability of Defense Information Systems |**

Interoperability refers to the capability to smoothly share information in

accordance with horizontal and vertical relationships among information

systems scattered across the military. Interoperability is what allows

information gathered from low-altitude detection radar and UAVs to be

processed through the battlefield command system and then distributed

to guided missiles and combat aircraft.

The MND possesses the Defense Information Technical Standard
(DITA),[11] which is a mandatory standard that is required to ensure

interoperability. DITA is a standard that is mainly applied to communi
cations method, data structure, common software functions, and code

encryption and decryption, and when establishing a defense information

system on products that only comply with this standard may be procured

or developed.

Because most weapon systems now carry information and communi
cations capabilities and are connected to a network, a need to conduct

increased professional technical support and a stricter test evaluation

regarding interoperability has risen. The Joint Interoperability Technology

Center (JITC), which was established in 2006, is faithfully carrying out

this mission.


**9. Green IT**

A way of utilizing information not only in
a sustainable manner but going a step
further to use it to preserve the
environment.

**10. World Radiocommunication**
**Conference [(]WRC[)]**

WRC is a subsidiary organization of the
International Telecommunication Union
(ITU), which is held every 4 to 5 years to
deliberate and decide on international
wavelength policies. The Conference
distributes the wavelength resources
globally, and enacts and revises the
Radio Regulations

**11. Defense Information Technical**
**standard [(]DITA[)]**

An information technology standard that
is used to support the development of
Defense Weapons System and Force
Support System and also secure
compatibility and interoperability
between the two systems.


-----

The JITC developed and distributed standardized software for battlefield

command system terminals in 2011, thereby creating the foundation in

which all the forces can consistently share information. In addition, it

conducted interoperability test assessments for the Cheongung surface-to
air guided missile system in 2012 to accurately verify whether the system

can conduct joint operations in real combat situations.

**3. Strengthening the Capability to Respond to Cyber**
**Threats**

**| Establishing a Proactive Cyber Warfare Response System |**

Cyber threats are on the rise as seen through the distributed denial of

service (DDoS) attack on 7 July 2009, the Stuxnet attack[12] in 2010, and

the hacking of Nonghyup (NH Bank) electronic network and personal

information leak in 2011. Such incidents show that cyber threats go

beyond cyberspace and pose a clear threat to the society and nation.

As a result, the MND recognizes cyberspace as an area analogous to

territory, territorial waters, and airspace that the nation must protect, and is

pursuing the revision of relevant rules and regulations, and the

establishment of systems and doctrines to be able to carry out cyber

warfare at the national level.

In 2010, the MND established the Cyber Command and re-defined the

information protection missions of agencies within the military as well as

creating and operating a military cyber warfare response center for all

forces. Computer Emergency Response Teams (CERT)[13] have been

established in all units above corps level to monitor the defense

information system 24 hours a day and to enable prompt responses.

In addition, the MND Information Protection Team was expanded and

reorganized as the Cyber Defense Policy Team in 2012 to actively respond

to increasing cyber threats and reinforce policy functions for cyber

warfare.

Also, the MND is making efforts to stably secure cyber expert personnel

by setting up cyber defense departments in civilian universities and

recruiting service members with specialty in information portection in

coordination with the Ministry of Knowledge and Economy.


Guided Missile System Cheongung

**12. Stuxnet Attack**

A type of attack which is conducted
against a closed network system such
as nuclear power plant, steel mills, and
power grid to shut down its operation by
infecting the network with malignant
codes.

**13. Computer Emergency Response**
**Team [(]CERT[)]**

An organization, equipped with
integrated control system for
information security, that prevents or
promptly responds to computer or
network based attacks.

Cyber Defense Department education


-----

**| Enhancing the Information Protection System and Acquiring**

**Cyber Response Technologies | The MND is reinforcing its**

information protection system to secure the execution of peacetime and

wartime operations from various cyber threats such as hacking and

computer viruses. In this regard, information protection systems

including consolidated security-monitoring systems and anti-virus

immunization systems have been installed across the military to provide

layered security for data resources such as the network, personal

computers and systems.

In addition, with hacking skills continuing to advance, the DDoS

Response System was expanded in major information systems in 2010,

and in 2012, control systems were established in major servers and

networks to prepare for to DDoS attacks and insider security threats.

Additionally, with the effectuation of the ‘Personal Data Protection Act’ in

September 2011, a personal information leakage diagnosis system and a

personal information code encryption system were introduced to reinforce

personal information protection.

Furthermore, in 2011, the MND designated relevant research institutes

as specializing in information protection technological support and is

utilizing them to strengthen the various technological support functions by

developing cyber response technologies tailored to national defense, and

establishing plans to protect the new technologies adopted by the military.

**| Domestic and International Cooperation for a Timely Response to**

**Cyber Threats | In order to promptly respond to cyber threats, the**

MND maintains a civilian-government-military coordination system and

hosts the annual Defense Information Protection Seminar to share

knowledge in cyber attacks and defense expertise.

International cooperation and exchange of information are becoming

increasingly important to respond to transnational cyber threats. The MND

concluded the ‘Memorandum of Understanding on Information Assurance

and Computer Network Defense’ with the U.S. Department of Defense in

April 2009, to enhance cooperation between the ROK and the U.S. in

responding against cyber threats and by adopting the ‘Terms of Reference

of the ROK-U.S. Information Assurance Working Group,’ which facilitates

the goal of enhanced information sharing in the realm of information


-----

Assurance and Computer Network Defense, has been taking part in the

ROK-U.S. Information Assurance Working Group Meeting since 2010.

The MND also participates in the International Cyber Defense

Workshop hosted by the U.S. Department of Defense twice a year since

2009, to exchange information on cyber warfare and cooperate on

information protection technologies.

Cooperating with allies and friendly nations to respond to globally

surging cyber threats is crucial. In this regard, the MND will continue to

identify and develop areas of cooperation such as personnel exchange and

technology sharing with allies and partner nations.


-----

|1|2|
|---|---|
|4|3|
|||


-----

##### Chapter 7
**Building a Combat**
**Mission Focused**
**Advanced Military**

Section 1 Reinforcing Mental Strength Education for
Service Members and Patriotism Promoting
Activities for Citizens
Section 2  Improving the Education System to
Cultivate Competent Cadres
Section 3  Realistic Training and Education to Build a
Combat-Oriented Military
Section 4  Developing the Operations and
Management System of the Defense
Workforce


178

182

188

200


**1  Army commando regiment carrying out river**
infiltration exercise
**2  Marine Corps Baekryeongdo (island) defense**
exercise
**3  Maritime maneuver exercise near Dokdo**
(island)

**4  ROK-U.S. combined exercise with fully armed**
wartime munitions (Practice Generation)


-----

**Reinforcing Mental Strength**
**Education for Service Members**
**and Patriotism Promoting**
**Activities for Citizens**

Mental Strength education is a key imperative that needs to be strengthened in order to build an elite military capable of defeating the enemy. The
ROK military is continuously strengthening its education program to nurture
a deep sense of patriotism and a clear perspective on security among the
service members and to cultivate a military spirit of decisive victory.
Moreover, in order to enhance the effects of education, the ROK military is
developing and providing various contents that the service members are
familiar with, and providing support for various activities such as security
site visits and hands-on military camp experiences that will promote patriotism for the younger generation.

**1. Establishing a steadfast perspective on security and en-**
**hancing a willingness to fight**

After North Korea’s attack against the ROK Ship Cheonan and the

shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island), a pressing requirement has emerged to

strengthen mental strength education in order to inculcate a clear

awareness of the true nature of North Korea and to ‘build a combat
oriented military that is never hesitant to engage in battle.’ Accordingly, the

ROK military is exerting its utmost efforts to establish a steadfast

perspective of the security situation and the enemy, and to enhance a

willingness to fight.

Mental strength education for new recruits is concentrated in the first

three weeks of basic training to help them transform into military soldiers

as early as possible. In particular, the entire basic training period is utilized

for mental strength education in order to cultivate a true military mind-set


**Section**
# 1


-----

and fighting spirit.

For the education at the unit level, rather than carrying out theory-based

education in classrooms, more on-site education activities such as visits to

battle sites are being conducted. Also, education provided by retired

comrades based on their combat experience as well as reciting of combat

awareness mottos are frequently taking place. In addition, lectures by

North Korean defectors and war veterans are carried out on a regular

basis.

Meanwhile, education for instructors at educational institutions and

basic training centers as well as workshops for troop information and

education (TI&E) officers from all Services and ROTC instructors are

carried out in a substantive manner for developing expertise.

**2. Strengthening the Education to Establish National Identity**

The MND is strengthening its education program to establish a national

identity so that the service members can gain a better understanding of the

contributions and dedications made by the generations before them in

building the proud ROK of today, and attain a proper view of the ROK’s

modern history. This education program also aims to inspire the service

members to be proud of being an ROK citizen.

Also, efforts to instill a proper awareness of history are being exerted by

carrying out education with modern history included in the curriculum for

professional development training and refresher training courses and by

producing and distributing educational videos on history. Accordingly, by

publishing and distributing various reference booklets such as ‘View of

_ROK Modern History through Statistical Indices,’ the educational effect is_

being significantly increased.

In addition, education to clearly elucidate the true nature of those regime

threatening factions that do not recognize the legitimacy of the ROK and

blindly espouse the North Korean regime is also being carried out.


Education for TI&E Officers of All
Services (War Memorial, September
2011)

Service Member Morale Education
Reference Booklets


-----

**3. Improving the Service Member Morale Education Sup-**
**port System**

The MND is continuing to develop a weekly mental strength education

system, contents, and education techniques in order to yield better

performance results from the education.

The weekly education session was restored to Wednesdays as of 1

September 2011. Previously, the Army carried out its weekly morale

education sessions on Mondays and the Navy and Air Force on

Wednesdays. However, setting the time and date of weekly morale

education sessions to take place on Wednesday mornings has not only

produced good morale education results but also contributed to creating a

sense of unity among the Services.

The Korea Defense Daily’s ‘Basic TI&E’ education material, which is the

main teaching material for weekly morale education, is published in

conjunction with the ‘TI&E Class’ broadcasted on the Korea Forces

Network (KFN) in order to enhance the understanding of educational

contents.

Also, the MND is making morale education sessions interesting for

service members by actively utilizing professional lecturers in KFN

programs such as the ‘TI&E Class’ and ‘Prominent Lecturer’s Special

Lecture.’ In particular, diverse contents are being developed and used such

as the ‘Prominent Lecturer’s Special Lecture on the Road’ and ‘Golden Bell

Challenge’ to accommodate the tastes of the “video generation.”

Meanwhile, teaching materials are now being prepared using

storytelling methods and advertising techniques considering the viewpoint

of the young generation, which are receiving great responses from the

service members.

In June and November 2011, the ‘Discussion Forum on the

Development of Morale Education in Educational Institutions’ and the

‘Discussion Forum on Morale Education Innovation’ were held respec
tively, where experts from various fields had in-depth and productive

discussions on ways to develop mental strength education.


Discussion Forum on Innovating Morale
Education (War Memorial, November
2011)


-----

**4. Supporting Activities of Experiencing Patriotism**

At a point in time when the Korean War caused by North Korea’s

invasion of South Korea is being forgotten and North Korea’s provocation

against the ROK abides, inculcating the teenagers with a spirit of

patriotism has become a top priority task.

Therefore, in order to establish an all-out security posture where the

people become one, the ROK military is actively supporting hands-on

activities for the youth through patriotism experiencing education, security

site visits, and hands-on military life experience activities.

In March 2011, a memorandum of understanding (MOU) was signed

with the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology and the Korean

Federation of Teachers’ Associations, which led to the opening of many

military unit facilities. In particular, improvements have been made to the

support systems by receiving requests for hands-on security experience

activities through the internet websites of the MND and each Service.

As a result, the number of people participating in the patriotism

education program, security site visits, and hands-on military camp

experience activities increased significantly compared to the numbers

prior to 2010, and it is evaluated that these efforts and results contributed

to increasing the security awareness of the younger generation.[1]

In 2012, active cooperation with the relevant government offices is

being pursued along with efforts to develop relationships among military

units in each echelon, local governments, and education support agencies

in order to further attain positive results.

Meanwhile, in order to instill a sense of pride and identity of being an

ROK citizen into multi-cultural families and North Korean defectors, a

variety of efforts are being put forth such as providing support for learning

activities.


College students observing a moment of
silence in commemoration of the late 46
sailors of the ROK Ship Cheonan (Navy
2[nd] Fleet, May 2012)

**1. Survey on teenager security**
**awareness**

According to a survey on 1,000
teenagers, conducted by Research and
Research and sponsored by the Ministry
of Public Administration and Security,
the number of teenagers who received
security education in 2011 increased by
35 percent from 2010, and 73 percent
of those who received security
education replied that “hands-on
military unit security experiences were
very helpful.” (June 2011)


-----

**Improving the Education**
**System to Cultivate**
**Competent Cadres**

In order to cultivate competent cadres, improvements have been made to
the school curriculum, teaching methods, and development and refresher
course education system. Also, the education system is being improved and
further developed through the establishment of the Joint Forces Military
University (JFMU) and the implementation of integrated education for first
year cadets of the Army, Navy, and Air Force academies.

**1. Improvements to the Curriculum and Teaching Method**

**| Resetting school education objectives |  In order to enable cadres**

to execute combat missions immediately after completing school

education, the required capabilities for each position of service that need

to be covered through development and refresher training have been

clearly defined in a detailed manner.

The education objectives for development training have been set on

cultivating students to become cadres with basic combat skills, combat

command capabilities, and training and education instruction capabilities

required of junior cadres. For refresher training, the education objectives

have been set on cultivating the capability to perform one’s duties,

understanding the basic principles of combat, and training students to

become tactical commanders and staff members that possess the capability

to apply what they have learned in real battle. By setting these objectives,

it is now possible to cultivate competent cadres that possess a combat
oriented mind-set and combat skills.


**Section**
# 2


-----

**| Curriculum based on core combat skills | Considering the limited**

time for school education, improvements have been made so that

education on core combat skills required for combat mission execution is

the focus of school education out of the many other subjects. For this

initiative, the MND boldly reduced the number of courses that it controls

from twenty-two to two courses (TI&E and military security). In other

words, only those subjects required for combat mission execution will be

taught at schools while subjects for peacetime mission execution

unrelated to combat mission execution have been transferred to unit

education. Also, subjects that are inappropriate to be taught in schools

have been removed from the MND controlled subject list. Additionally,

the curriculum has been improved to an integrated curriculum focused

on tactics by minimizing the number of education subjects for each

course and the number of required tasks for each subject.

**| Improvements in teaching methods | By improving the teaching**

method from a lecture centered education led by the instructor to a

‘learning & teaching’ education led by students, students will be able to

develop training instruction capabilities through mutual mission

exchanges with each other. Also, the ROK military is now moving away

from the standardized training range and is carrying out actual

combat-like training where tactical measures are taken in diverse

situations in random terrain. Additionally, teaching methods have been

improved in the direction of carrying out tactical situation-oriented

discussions focused on practice and application rather than theory.

**2. Improvements in the Development and Refresher Train-**
**ing System**

**| Implementation of the overall evaluation system for officer and**

**non-commissioned officer candidates | The overall evaluation**

system for officer and non-commissioned officer (NCO) candidates,

applied to all officer and NCO candidates in candidate training courses in

each Service, is a system to commission only those who pass certain

qualification criteria during overall evaluations prior to being commis

overall evaluation system for officer and
non-commissioned officer (NCO)
candidates (Squad Combat)


-----

sioned.

Evaluation is focused on essential combat skills, combat command

ability, and training and education instruction capability that can be

utilized on the battlefield, and the evaluation criteria have been selected to

incorporate the characteristics of each Service. In addition, in order to

increase the expertise and transparency of evaluations, an expert

evaluation group has been formed and is operating.

The results of a trial run in 2011 of this system showed that the basic

combat skills and training and education instruction capability of all cadre

candidates increased dramatically. Accordingly, the overall evaluation

system for officers and non-commissioned candidates is being

implemented in full scale as of March 2012. This system is expected to

contribute immensely in cultivating competent junior cadres who make up

the foundation of a combat-oriented military.

**| Utilization of instructors in charge of tactics | The system of**

instructors in charge of tactics is a system where instructors in charge

who have expertise in military tactics and have outstanding character
istics and talents as a military personnel wholeheartedly pass down their

tactical knowhow in an apprenticeship-like manner. Instructors in charge

of tactics are responsible for teaching tactics but utilize a teaching

method where they only teach the basic combat principle and focus more

on stimulating discussions by presenting a realistic combat situation

based on war history which allows students to fully comprehend the

tactical concepts that they learned.

The system of instructors in charge of tactics is being implemented at

the Army College and in advanced officer courses at nine military branch

schools since 2012 after trial operations in 2011, and is expected to

contribute significantly to inculcating competent cadres with the tactical

knowledge and character required of a high-ranking officer.

**| Strengthening of NCO Training and Education | With regard to the**

ROK military NCO education, in the past, there were limitations in

training NCOs to become proficient with combat skills in a systematic

manner due to the short education period compared to that of advanced

foreign militaries.


Lecture by an instructor in charge of
tactics


-----

As such, the NCO education system has been improved so that NCOs

can better understand and become proficient with small unit tactics in a

systematic manner by extending the Army NCO education period from 30

weeks to 37 weeks.

The NCO development training course was extended from 10 weeks to

12 weeks to enable NCO candidates to fully attain individual and squad

combat skills, and the NCO basic course was extended from 15 weeks to

20 weeks to enable NCOs to fully attain individual and squad combat

skills and build instruction capabilities for training and education. Also, by

receiving collective training and education at the deployed unit, which was

extended from one week to three weeks, NCOs are able to adapt to their

unit at an early stage and become mission capable as soon as they are

deployed to the field. The Army NCO education period improvement

status is shown in Chart 7-1.

**Chart 7-1. Army NCO education period improvement status**

**Army basic** **NCO Academy** **NCO Academy**

**On-the-job training**

**Past** **training camp** **development training** **basic course**

**(1 week)**

**(5 weeks)** **course [(]10 weeks[)]** **(15 weeks)**

**Army basic** **NCO Academy development** **On-the-job training** **NCO Academy**

**Improved** **training camp** **training course [(]12 weeks,** **(3 weeks, extended** **basic course [(]20 weeks,**

**(5 weeks)** **extended 2 weeks[)]** **2 weeks[)]** **extended 5 weeks[)]**


**3. Improvements in the Education System to Strengthen**
**Jointness**

**| Establishment of the Joint Forces Military University | The Joint**

Forces Military University (JFMU), which is in charge of refresher

course education for field grade officers, was established on 1 December

2011 to cultivate a large number of joint experts in the perspective of

strengthening jointness by integrating the Army, Navy and Air Force

Colleges.

Expected results with the establishment of the JFMU are as follows.

First, professional education on jointness can be carried out effectively and


JFMU Activation Ceremony (1 December
2011)


-----

the cultivation of joint expert personnel can be expanded. As such, the

number of students has been increased from 700 to 2,000 a year, and the

joint education period of the joint basic course for major level officers has

been extended from 8 weeks to 15 weeks. Second, with the role of

developing joint concepts and doctrines transferred to the JFMU from the

ROK JCS, a joint combat development system synchronized with research

and education has now been established. Third, an optimal education

system for ensuring jointness has been created by appointing Army, Navy,

and Air Force personnel to key positions, including the president of JFMU

based on a rotational basis and composing a joint staff and instructors with

personnel from each Service in a balanced manner. Fourth, a collateral

effect of enhancing the efficiency of national defense management was

attained as the organization became streamlined with the merger and

abolition of similar functions.

In the future, the JFMU will become a premier military educational

institution that strengthens the jointness of ROK military and spearheads

innovation in joint education.

**Chart 7-2. Joint Forces Military University Organizational Chart**

**JFMU**


**Joint**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||

**Education**
**Department**


**Joint Combat**
**Development**
**Department**


**Defense**
**Language**
**Institute**


**Army**
**College**


**Navy**
**College**


**Air Force**
**College**


**| Integrated education for first year cadets of the Army, Navy, and**

**Air Force academies | As of April 2012, integrated education is being**

carried out for first year cadets of the Army, Navy, and Air Force

academies. Considering the total number of the first year cadets in each

Service academy, cadets are mixed into three groups, and each group

receives integrated education from the Army, Navy, and Air Force

academies in rotation.

The two semester education cycle was divided into four cycles. During

the first cycle, cadets receive education on their respective Services from

their Academy, and during the remaining three cycles, they receive eight


Integrated education for first year
cadets of each Service academies


-----

weeks of integrated education at each Service Academy. Integrated

education at each Service Academy will be more than just goodwill

exchanges among the Academies and is expected to contribute in

strengthening the foundation for jointness and sharing the unique culture

of each Academy.


-----

**Realistic Training and**
**Education to Build a Combat-**
**Oriented Military**

The objective of national defense training and education is to ‘build a
combat-oriented military that can fight and win against the enemy.’ In order
to build a combat-oriented military, the ROK military is strengthening the
recruit training and education system to be able to immediately generate
combat power. Also, at the field units, unit training focused on tactical training is being strengthened by carrying out training such as realistic force-onforce training employing the Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement System
(MILES), which clearly determines the winner and the loser.

**1. Cultivating Strong Warriors Capable of Immediately**
**Generating Combat Power**

**| Strengthening the Recruit Training and Education System | The**

Army division’s basic training period has been extended from five weeks

to eight weeks starting from 2011 in order to train strong warriors that

are capable of immediately generating combat power at their respective

field units after completing basic camp. Additionally, the Army’s recruit

training and education system has been improved by raising the

standards for qualifying in key subjects.

The strengthened recruit education program consists of five weeks of

basic education and three weeks of intensive education. Acquiring basic

physical strength and combat skills required for combat is the focus of the

basic education. The intensive education portion additionally aims to have

recruits gain the tenacious physical strength required for combat

sustainment and key combat skills.

According to an evaluation on the results of the strengthened recruit

training and education system,[1] the level of combat mission proficiency of


**Section**
# 3


**1. Evaluation results on the**
**strengthened recruit training and**
**education system**

According to the results of a survey
conducted against the field unit cadres
on the mission execution satisfaction
level of new service members coming
out of basic training, 44 percent of the
respondents replied positively while 16
percent negatively, which shows that
overall satisfaction level increased due
to the strengthened recruit training and
education system. Also, the survey
showed that the evaluation points for
combat power of key subjects rose by
18 percent. (2011 ‘Evaluation of the
Result on Strengthening Recruit
Education’ by KIDA).


-----

recruits and the recruits’ combat power level on the key subjects increased

remarkably. Additionally, it is evaluated that the new system assisted the

recruits in adapting to military life at an early stage.

**| Implementation of Combat Ability Certification Program | The**

ROK military has been implementing a combat ability certification

program since 2011. The combat ability certification program is

classified into a certification program carried out by educational

establishments and a certification program carried out by field units.

Combat ability certification programs by educational establishments

cover nine areas, essential for combat mission execution, including

guerrilla training, mines, explosions, lifesaving, and martial arts. By

awarding certifications to cadres who meet the required standards, the

ROK military has institutionalized the method in enhancing the expertise

and duty execution capabilities of the service members.

The combat ability certification program by field units consists of the

‘junior grade cadre certification program’ for junior grade cadres and the

‘superior warrior selection system’ for all service members. Key courses

related to combat missions and duty execution are evaluated through the

junior grade cadre certification program and certifications are awarded to

those who pass the program. The superior warrior selection system awards

certifications to service members through evaluations on marksmanship,

physical capacity, morale strength, and combat skills.

**2. Unit Training Focused on Tactical Training**

**| Unit Activities Cultivating a Fearless Mentality | All unit activities**

of field units, which are focused on cultivating a fearless mentality, are

centered on enhancing the combat power of service members through

various competitions and tournaments.

Small-unit tactical competitions and gunnery competitions enable

service members to learn and enhance with zest the key skills required to

execute combat missions. Individuals and units with outstanding

performance records are given commendations and incentives for

motivation purposes.


Mock cavalry battles provide the
opportunity to physically and morally
absorb the fundamentals of combat.


-----

In addition to these competitions, military operational specialty (MOS)

training, physical training, and combat skill enhancement results are

achieved in a natural manner through physical capacity tournaments, the

best-of-best tournaments,[2] and sports tournaments. Furthermore, hand-to
hand combat inside trenches and mock cavalry battles provide opportu
nities for service members to physically and morally absorb the

fundamentals of combat.

**| Realistic ‘Win or Lose’ Unit Training | The Army has achieved many**

good results by utilizing the platoon-level Multiple Integrated Laser

Engagement System (MILES). Tactical training activities using MILES

equipment greatly contribute to achieving realistic training objectives

because MILES clearly determines the winner and the loser. Training

effects will be further enhanced once the MILES equipment for company

level units is introduced.

**3. Establishing an Environment to Fully Concentrate on**
**Military Training and Education**

**| Resolutely Eliminating Administrative Elements | In order to carry**

out training and education that lead to good results, unnecessary

administrative duties were resolutely reduced and an environment was

established to fully concentrate on military training and education.

By reducing the administrative duties of units smaller than battalion
level units by 50 percent and reducing the number of unnecessary

inspections, audits, and unit visits, field units are now able to concentrate

on enhancing their combat power through training and education.

**| Securing Realistic Training Ranges | Currently, the ROK military**

is lacking in realistic training ranges that are scientific and conform with

the future operation environment. Also, the fact that small training ranges

are scattered throughout the ROK in an unorganized manner is not only

having a negative impact on efficiency but also is becoming the source

of increasing civil appeals by residents living in rapidly urbanizing towns

near training ranges.


**2. Best-of-Best Tournament**

This tournament is carried out by field
units to select the best service member
in the MOS fields, physical capacity, and
combat skills. For example, combat
skills are enhanced by selecting the best
service member at 5km run, push-ups,
and driving.

Realistic combat-like force on force
platoon training exercise using MILES
equipment


-----

In order to improve and resolve these problems, the Ministry of National

Defense (MND) has prepared and is implementing a plan to secure

realistic training ranges. In connection with the plan to consolidate and

realign units, training ranges in the frontline areas are planned to be

consolidated according to the axis in which the sites are located and the

training ranges in the rear areas will be integrated according to adminis
trative areas. By 2030, the MND is planning to build scientific training

ranges that are integrated by area for corps-level units, division-level units,

and different functions. Additionally, the MND will acquire compre
hensive training ranges at locations where units larger than battalion-level

units are stationed. Through these initiatives, it will be possible to

guarantee realistic military training and education, increase the efficiency

in utilizing national land, and contribute to improving the people’s living

environment.

**4. Exercises and Training Simulating Actual Combat**

The ROK military is pushing forward with realistic exercises[3] and

training[4] in order to generate its maximum combat power during contin
gencies. In particular, the ROK military is bolstering ROK-U.S. combined

exercises and training led by the ROK in preparation of wartime OPCON

transition.

**| Combined/Joint Exercise and Training |**

The Ulchi Freedom Guardian (UFG) Exercise is an ROK-U.S. theater
level Command Post Exercise (CPX) carried out annually in the second

half of the year and consists of the government and the military. The

government portion of the exercise commenced as a standalone exercise

after the Blue House Raid attempt on 21 January 1968 and was later

integrated with the military portion of the exercise after North Korea’s Axe

Murder Incident on 18 August 1976 in order to establish an all-out

national defense posture. The military exercise portion commenced in

1954 under the name ‘Focus Lens’ led by the Commander of the United

Nations Command (UNC). The name was changed to Ulchi Focus Lens
(UFL) Exercise in 1976 when it was integrated with the government


**3. Exercise**

Training carried out between higher- and
lower-echelon units or by a single unit to
train commanders and their staff to
become proficient in crisis management
or execution of wartime operational
plans by simulating actual combat
environment.

**4. Training**

This is an organizational proficiency
process to enable individuals and units
to master the technical knowledge and
actions required to effectively execute
their assigned missions.

-  Combined training: training carried out
by the militaries of two or more nations
to execute a single mission through
mutual cooperation for the
achievement of their joint objectives.

-  Joint training: training carried out
under the command and control of a
single commander or through mutual
coordination in order to execute
integrated military activities of two or
more Services from the Army, Navy
and Air Force.


-----

exercise.

The exercise name was changed to UFG in 2008 and focused on

carrying out combined exercises to train and become proficient with a new

combined defense system in preparation for wartime OPCON transition.

However, with the attack against the ROK Ship Cheonan in 2010, the

focus of UFG has been changed to prepare against North Korea’s existing

threats under the current combined defense system. Starting from 2013, a

combined exercise to prepare for the new combined defense system will

resume.

Government agencies above city, county and district levels along with

businesses designated for mobilization participate in the government

exercise, and army units above corps-level units, naval units above fleet

command units, air force units above wing-level units, Marine Corps HQs

and Northwest Islands Defense Command, USFK, and U.S. augmentation

units during wartime participate in the military exercise.

_The Key Resolve/Foal Eagle (KR/FE) Exercise is an annual ROK-U.S._

theater-level CPX[5] and FTX carried out during the first half of the year. In

the beginning, the RSOI and Foal Eagle exercises were carried out

separately. However, the two exercises were integrated in 2002 in order to

enhance the efficiency of the exercises. Staring from 2008, the exercise

name was changed to the current KR/FE exercise in preparation for

wartime OPCON transition and is being carried out with the focus on

becoming proficient with operation execution procedures by reviewing

and inspecting the current combined defense system. In particular, with the

attack against the ROK Ship Cheonan and the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo
(island) in 2010, realistic exercises are being carried out by simulating the

current North Korean threat and diverse crisis situations that could

potentially occur in the future.

On the ROK side, army units above corps-level units, naval units above

fleet command units, air force units above wing-level units, and the

Marine Corps HQs and Northwest Islands Defense Command participate

in the Key Resolve exercise. On the U.S. side, the Combined Forces

Command, USFK, units under Pacific Command, Strategic Command,

Transportation Command, and the wartime augmentation forces

participate.


2011 UFG Exercise

**5. Command Post Exercise [(]CPX[)]**

Mission execution exercise for
commanders and staff members at each
echelon where service members train
and become proficient with command
post displacement and operations,
commander and staff activity
procedures, and the application of
operation plans and SOPs under diverse
situations while maintaining
communications.

**FTX Field Training Exercise**

**RSOI Reception, Staging, Onward**
Movement, Integration


-----

The Foal Eagle exercise is a field maneuver training to enhance the

capability of ROK-U.S. combined and joint operations, combined special

operations and rear area defense operations. This exercise started in 1961

as the first irregular warfare training carried out independently by the

ROK. In 1970, rear area operations were included and in 1975, the name

of the exercise was changed to the current Foal Eagle exercise and was

expanded to include ROK-U.S. combined irregular warfare training. From

1982, it was expanded to a two-way training between special operation

units and rear area units applying the concept of regular warfare. Starting

from 2002 it was integrated with the RSOI exercise, after which it was

integrated again with the KR exercise in 2008 to strengthen combined and

joint maneuver training.

**| Joint Exercise and Training |**

The Taegeuk Exercise is a theater-level CPX carried out annually under

the lead of the ROK JCS to enhance the ROK military’s peacetime and

wartime operation capabilities and to identify emerging requirements for

joint forces and unit structures. Upon taking over the peacetime OPCON

in 1994, the ROK JCS commenced this CPX in 1995 to establish an

independent operation execution capability. By expanding the partici
pation to operations commands under the ROK JCS in 1999, this exercise

has developed into realistic theater-level joint CPX led by the ROK JCS.

The name ‘Taegeuk Exercise’ has been used since 2004, and starting

from 2005, this exercise is being carried out in a realistic combat-like

manner using a theater-level joint operation simulation model (Taegeuk

JOS model) developed by the ROK JCS. The focus of the exercise from

2008 to 2011 has been on establishing an operation execution system and

developing the required capabilities to prepare for wartime OPCON

transition. Since 2011, the exercise focus has been on becoming proficient

with and refining operational command procedures in preparation for the

higher command structure reform.

The Hoguk Exercise is an annual theater and operations command level

maneuver training to enhance the operation execution capabilities of large

units led by the ROK JCS. In 1988, the Army’s Sangmu Training, the

Navy’s Tonghae Exercise, and the Air Force’s Pilseung Training, which


**JOS Joint Operation Simulation**

Joint amphibious training during the
2011 Hoguk Exercise


-----

were carried out independently by each Service, were integrated and

expanded into one unified exercise. By replacing the Team Spirit Exercise

in 1996, the Hoguk Exercise was changed to also include army corps-level

real troop maneuver training. Considering the changes in the operational

environment, training conditions, and unit structure, this exercise was

upgraded to a theater-level large unit maneuver exercise by integrating the

corps level maneuver training and the corps operations plan execution

training in 2008. In addition, through the Hoguk Exercise, the ROK

military is heightening its joint operation execution capability by

enhancing the effects of synchronization, unity, and interoperability.

With heightened military tension caused by the attack against the ROK

Ship Cheonan and the artillery firing at Yeonpyeongdo (island) in 2010,

the Hoguk Exercise corps level maneuver training that was carried out in

the Yeoju and Icheon area was adjusted in 2011 to a mechanized infantry

division force-on-force training in the Yeoju area and a corps level

operations plan execution training in their respective areas of responsi
bility in consideration of maximizing the realistic combat-like training

results, reducing force gaps in operation plan areas, and preparing for

existing threats.

The Hwarang Exercise is a comprehensive rear area exercise led by the

integrated defense headquarters in which all national defense elements

including civilian, government, military, and police elements participate.

This exercise, which has been expanded to all Services, was originally

carried out as a comprehensive metropolitan area counter-infiltration

exercise controlled by the Third ROK Army from 1977 to 1981. The focus

of the Hwarang Exercise is for the rear area units to become proficient

with peace and wartime operations plan execution procedures; establish an

integrated civilian, government, military, police defense posture; and

increase the security awareness of the local residents.

**| Exercises carried out by each Service | The Army is strengthening**

its realistic unit training focused on combat missions unique to each

echelon in order to build a combat-oriented military.

Combined arms training is focused on organizing the combat elements

for each specialty and function and mutually reinforcing their vulnera

A mechanized infantry division’s river
crossing operation during the 2011
_Hoguk Exercise_


-----

bilities in order to maximize the integrated combat capabilities of

regiment-level units.

The Army’s ROK-U.S. combined exercises are focused on biological,

chemical and radiological operations, counter-fire operations, air assault

operations, and anti-terrorism operations. In particular, by establishing a

consultative body between the Army and the Eight U.S. Army, ROK-U.S.

combined exercises are being expanded to diverse areas including

small-unit combined training, air ground joint training, and technology
driven combat training.

Also, the Army is utilizing technology-driven combat training, the Battle

Command Training Program (BCTP), and simulator-based training

programs to train service members in an actual combat-like setting and

have them experience the aspects of real combat.

The KCTC training program is a force on force training program that

utilizes superior opposing forces and advanced technology such as MILES

equipment, data communication, and satellites, and is carried out in an

environment that virtually simulates real battlefield. Currently, battalion
level training is possible. However, the KCTC will be expanded to a

brigade-level facility and mechanized unit training will also be carried out.

A KCTC training conceptual diagram Chart 7-3 is as follows:

**Chart 7-3. KCTC training conceptual diagram**

GPS satellite


ROK-U.S. combined technology-driven
combat training

**KCTC Korea Combat Training Center**


Recording vehicle

Camcorder

Camcorder

Chemically Indirect
Indirect fire contaminated area fire

Recording vehicle

Supply

Training unit Opposing

Evacuation Mine field forces

Optical cable

Relay tower EXCON


Supply


-----

**BCTP Battle Command Training Program**

**6. Changjo 21 Model**

Battle command training model for
corps and standing divisions

**7. Jeontu 21 Model**

Battle command training model for
regiments and battalions

**8. Hwarang 21 Model**

Battle command training model for
homeland reserve divisions

Maritime interdiction training


The BCTP is a training program to develop the battle command

capabilities of commanders and staff members utilizing computer

simulations. Applying the ‘Changjo 21 Model,’[6] the ‘Jeontu 21 Model,’[7]

and the ‘Hwarang 21 Model’[8] which were indigenously developed starting

from 1999, service members are becoming proficient with tactical

planning procedures and integrated combat power operation capabilities of

corps to battalion echelons in situations similar to actual battle. In

particular, for corps and division exercises, professional control officers

and opposing force teams operate and the battle command group

supervises the after-action review. In the future, improvements will be

made to carry out an even more realistic and substantive training by

linking the computer simulation-based training with actual maneuver

units.

Simulation equipment training, which is a virtual battlefield

environment training for firing, operating, gunnery and other training

purposes, is carried out at educational establishments during development

training. In the future, individual training and training for various

battlefield functions will be improved by establishing simulation training

centers at corps and division units.

The Navy is strengthening actual combat-like maritime exercises that

befit the battlefield environment of the waters in the East, West and

Southern Seas.

Combined arms and joint exercises are carried out as component

training and maritime training where joint forces, including, ground,

naval, and air forces, participate to generate integrated combat power.

Component exercises are fundamentally carried out according to the

characteristics of various combat environment such as anti-surface,

anti-submarine, anti-air, amphibious, mine, and submarine operations.

Maritime exercises include maneuver training where fleet and surface

battle groups and battle squadrons participate and specialized training such

as Northwest Islands defense training, NLL local provocation joint

response training, and maritime interdiction training. In these exercises

and training, multidimensional capabilities such as the state-of-the-art

surface combatants, submarines, amphibious ships, Coast Guard vessels,

maritime patrol aircraft, and maritime operation helicopters participate.


-----

Combined exercises are classified into ROK-U.S. combined exercises

and multilateral combined exercises for enhancing humanitarian support

and military cooperation. The ROK and U.S. militaries are carrying out a

variety of combined exercises including maritime anti-special warfare unit

training, anti-submarine marine surveillance training, anti-submarine

operations training, amphibious operations training, mine operations

training, special warfare operations training, and submarine operations

training. Cobra Gold exercise, Western Pacific Mine Counter Measure

Exercise (WPMCMEX), and the Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC) exercise

are multilateral combined exercises in which the ROK military participate.

Meanwhile, the ROK military is carrying out search and rescue exercises
(SAREX) with neighboring countries such as Japan, China, and Russia.

Cruise training for naval academy midshipmen is carried out for 90 to

120 days. The Navy divides the world into four area-based navigation

routes and one navigation route is taken for the cruise training every year.

In 2011, a total of ten nations in the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean

Sea area were included and in 2012, ten Pacific area nations were included

in the cruise training. Through the cruise training, various objectives are

pursued such as developing the midshipmen’s duty execution capabilities

and a global mindset; thus, enhancing the national status, and

strengthening military cooperation with the nations visited by the

midshipmen.

The Air Force is strengthening realistic combat-like training activities

centered on combat missions in order to maintain the best all-directional

readiness posture that is required to immediately respond to any situation

and threat. Major training activities include defensive counter-air training,

offensive counter-air training, air interdiction training, and close air

support training.

Defensive counter-air training is focused on interdicting enemy

infiltration forces that are attempting to intrude the ROK air space, and

available air defense assets are simultaneously operated during this

training in order to detect, identify, intercept, and destroy virtual enemy

aircraft as far away as possible.

Offensive counter-air training focuses on operating air power in enemy

territory in an offensive manner in order to attain air superiority. The


ROK-U.S. combined anti-submarine
training

ROK-Japan search-and-rescue training


-----

operational effect is enhanced during this training by jointly operating

deep strike assets such as ground-to-ground missiles and special warfare

units.

Air interdiction training focuses on disrupting, delaying, or destroying

enemy support forces that have been reinforced to the frontline area and

are posing a threat against friendly ground and naval forces. Air

interdiction operations can neutralize enemy forces or delay their

operational tempo by limiting the reinforcement, resupply, or maneuvering

of the enemy’s deep area forces.

Close air support training focuses on directly supporting ground and

naval forces and includes attack training using night vision goggles
(NVG), live bombing training, and live fire of precision guided weapons.

In particular, the Max Thunder exercise, a large scale combined

exercise, is staged to enhance ROK-U.S. combined operation execution

capabilities and for realistic combat-like training purposes. The Air Force

also participates in the Red Flag exercise which is a multilateral combined

tactical exercise. In addition, aerial refueling training is carried out by the

Air Force to acquire multi-mission and long-range overseas force

projection capabilities.

Other training activities carried out by the Air Force include counter-fire

operations training to neutralize enemy’s long-range artilleries and

maritime infiltration interception training in preparation against maritime

infiltrations by enemy special warfare units.

Furthermore, technology-driven training activities are held simulta
neously utilizing simulators, GPS-Air Combat Maneuvering Instrumen
tation (GPS-ACMI) equipment, and the Electronic Warfare Training

System (EWTS) due to the limitations in initiating actual maneuver

training.

The Marine Corps, as a multipurpose rapid response force, is

strengthening its realistic combat-like training and education in order to

acquire operation execution capabilities that enable the completion of the

mission in any situation during contingencies.

Major exercises and training include amphibious training, ROK-U.S.

combined training, joint training, and overseas combined training.

Amphibious training is conducted to deploy amphibious forces to the


F-15Ks performing aerial refueling
training

**GPS-ACMI** GPS-Air Combat Maneuvering
Instrumentation

**EWTS Electronic Warfare Training**
System

The ROK Ship Dokdo and amphibious
armored vehicles during amphibious
training


-----

enemy coast onboard landing vessels, landing craft, and aircraft via sea.

This training is mainly focused on developing division level amphibious

operation capabilities. Combined training for combined arms, combined

logistics and engineering exercises, and combined tactical air control

exercises are carried out to enhance ROK-U.S. Marine Corps combined

operations capabilities.

The Marine Corps participates in joint exercises such as the ROK

JCS-led Hoguk Exercise, coastal infiltration readiness exercise, and

Northwest Islands reinforcement and defense exercises, and in overseas

combined exercises such as Cobra Gold and the RIMPAC exercises.

Also, in order to review the procedures for command and staff activities

and elevate the operation plan execution capabilities, the Marine Corps is

staging battle command training employing its own war game model
(Cheonjabong model). It also holds surprise landing, airborne, mountain
eering, special reconnaissance, and extreme wintertime cold and snow

training to be able to complete missions for each echelon, and is

developing realistic combat capabilities by participating in the Army’s

battalion-level technology-driven combat training.

The Northwest Islands Defense Command (NWIDC), established on 15

June 2011, is carrying out a multitude of exercises and training such as

command and control and island defense exercises for any type of enemy

provocation in order to strengthen the readiness posture against North

Korea’s surprise occupation of the Northwest Islands and firing

provocations.


-----

**Developing the Operations**
**and Management System of**
**the Defense Workforce**

The MND is pursuing a personnel policy that will allow the military to efficiently recruit and operate outstanding personnel who will lead the future
battlefield. First, job stability was increased by maintaining an appropriate
personnel structure centered on cadres, and a foundation for utilizing expertise was established. Also, the MND has established and is implementing a
personnel management system that greatly values military expertise in order
to select outstanding talents and use them in the right place. Through these
efforts, the MND plans to cultivate elite personnel resources that will lead
the digital battlefield in the era of cutting-edge information technology and
digitization.

**1. Recruiting and managing the defense workforce**

The MND is developing the military workforce structure from an

enlisted-centered force into a cadre-centered force that possess various

expertise in order to reorganize the military structure into a technology
intensive structure. Also, the MND is continuously developing a policy on

defense workforce management by significantly improving the workforce

recruiting system with the introduction of the system to reappoint

reservists as active service members, and by increasing the level of female

personnel authorizations.

**| Designing an optimum personnel structure | In order to increase**

job security for officers and NCOs and to utilize the expertise of these

cadres, the personnel structure is being designed in the direction of

maintaining the service period for each rank at a reasonable level and


**Section**
# 4


-----

guaranteeing a reasonable promotion rate.

Up to now, there were difficulties in cultivating and utilizing the

expertise of personnel because the military personnel structure was an

inefficient ‘large quantity recruiting – short-term utilization – large

quantity efflux’ structure where the percentage of lower ranking cadres
(NCOs, second and first lieutenants) was too large, and military cadres

were discharged after three to four years of short-term service. Although

implementing a ‘small quantity recruiting – long-term utilization’ structure

as a means to resolving this issue would be advantageous in cultivating

and utilizing the expertise of the personnel, this structure could increase

the personnel management cost caused by an increase in high-ranking

personnel. Therefore, the MND plans to improve the personnel structure

of military cadres in the direction of guaranteeing a reasonable promotion

rate for each rank so that job security is reinforced and expertise of the

cadres can be utilized. To realize this, the percentage of company-grade

officers will gradually be reduced while the percentage of field-grade

officer will be increased for officers, and the percentage of staff sergeants

will gradually be reduced while sergeant first class and master sergeants

will be increased for NCOs. This will heighten the professionalism of

personnel at each rank and increase the efficiency of personnel utilization.

**| Improving the recruitment system for elite personnel | In order**

to recruit elite military cadres, it is crucial to manage various recruit and

cultivation processes in a reasonable manner, and to establish a tailored

personnel recruitment system. Accordingly, the MND is planning to

make various improvements to the recruitment system such as adjusting

the number of candidates for each course, increasing the number of

female personnel, and introducing a tailored recruitment system.

First, although there are a variety of officer candidate courses currently

in operation such as the military academies and ROTC programs, the cost

for each program and course varies as well as the quality of the officers

produced by each program and course. Considering these characteristics,

the number of candidates for each course will be adjusted to a reasonable

level in the future.

Second, the MND is cultivating female defense personnel through the

introduction of the female ROTC program. By selecting some of the


-----

female officers through the ROTC program, a foundation to recruit elite

female defense personnel has been created. After selecting around 60

female ROTC candidates in September 2010 and initiating trial runs, it

was assessed that elite female defense personnel can be recruited through

this program and thus the program was expanded to 260 candidates in

2011.

Third, the ROK military is recruiting personnel in a tailored manner

from military related departments at civilian universities that were

established through university-military agreements to meet the defense

requirements. From 2004 to 2011, military studies departments opened in

11 universities, and by 2015, this number is expected to increase to 14.

Additionally, the number of junior colleges that have non-commissioned

officer studies departments, which was 43 in 2011, is expected to reach 58

by 2015. Future university-military agreements in the works are shown in

Chart 7-4.

**Chart 7-4. Future university-military agreements in the works**

|Classification|2011|2015|
|---|---|---|
|Officer (Military Studies Department)|11 universities (420 students)|14 universities (520 students)|
|NCO (NCO Studies Department)|43 colleges (4,485 students)|58 colleges (5,200 students)|



Officers and NCOs graduating from military studies and NCO studies

departments are assessed to be superior in terms of grades during the

education period and in terms of field mission execution capabilities

compared to officers and NCOs from regular departments. Based on these

results, the MND is planning to further develop these university-military

agreement initiatives in the future. Additionally, in order to eliminate the

difficulties in recruiting combat branch NCOs and to cultivate NCOs who

possess both physical and morale strength, the ROK military is pursuing

to establish an ‘Army combat NCO department.’

Fourth, university students who are in the age range to carry out military

service are showing preference towards military service as an enlisted

rather than as an officer. It is assessed that university students are showing

this tendency because the mandatory service period for enlisted service

members has been reduced as seen in Chart 7-5 and due to the uncertainty


-----

of one being selected as an officer.

**Chart 7-5. Adjustments to the Army mandatory service period over the years**


**month**

40

35

30

25

20

15


**Enlisted** **ROTC** **OCS**

**36**

**28**

**21**


1963 1968 1981 1984 1993 2003 2010


Considering these tendencies, the MND has been implementing a

‘reserve officer candidate’ program since 2010. Through this program, a

portion of those who will be selected as candidates for ROTC and OCS

programs and cadets of the Korea Army Academy are chosen in advance

as prepared officer candidates who then go through a prescribed process to

be selected as officer candidates and cadets. For example, in the past, all

OCS candidates were chosen among university graduates and soon-to
graduate university students but now, out of the entire number of officers

that will be commissioned, 30−70 percent are chosen among university

students who are selected as reserve officer candidates. In accordance with

the assessment that the reserve officer candidate program is conducive to

acquiring elite personnel, the MND is planning to increase the percentage

of those who are selected as reserve officer candidates.

Additionally, an incentive is given to those who apply for ROTC and

OCS programs since 2011 as a means to recruit elite short-term service

officers. Furthermore, with fairness and objectivity firmly in place in the

cadre selection method, the MND has developed and is utilizing a ‘junior

cadre selection tool’ that comprehensively evaluates not only the moral

capacity such as intellect, duty compatibility, and situational judgment

capability but also the character, disposition and caliber of the applicants.


-----

**| Reappointment of Peacetime Reservists to Active Service | The**

MND will implement a program to reappoint reservists who possess

military capabilities and expertise to active service starting from June

2013 in order to proactively cope with the difficulties incurred by

changes to the personnel recruiting environment and to recruit elite

personnel in an efficient manner. This program will be by far the most

innovative policy of the personnel recruiting policies that have been

pursued up to date.

By reappointing reservists to active service, the MND is expecting to

achieve the following objectives: 1) guarantee the stable management of

personnel by supplementing in a flexible manner elite personnel who will

serve a mid-term period considering the increase in the percentage of

personnel serving a mid-term due to improvements in the military

personnel structure; 2) manage the organization in a smooth manner by

supplementing vacancies caused by, for example, an increase in paternity

leaves; and 3) recruit reserve officers and NCOs who possess outstanding

capabilities and military expertise required for positions that demand a

high-level of proficiency such as military negotiations, overseas

intelligence gathering, overseas deployment, and expert skills in a flexible

manner, and utilize these personnel with the right capabilities at the right

position.

Reserve officers with the rank of first lieutenant and above and NCOs

with the rank of sergeant first class and above who have been discharged

for three years or less and do not have any reasons for disqualification are

eligible to apply for this program. The appointment age limit stipulated in

Article 15 of the Military Personnel Act does not apply to these personnel

and there are no limitations for reappointment as long as they have not

exceeded their respective rank and age limit. The MND plans to first

determine the personnel requirements for each branch and rank and then

select elite personnel through a screening process after posting a selection

announcement. In principle, reappointed service members will serve for a

short-term of two to three years. However, opportunities to serve a longer

term with promotion opportunities will be given to elite service members

who have been reappointed.

The MND plans to utilize this program so that it contributes to the

establishment of a combat oriented military by not only minimizing the


-----

expected trials and errors during the beginning process of the program by

eliminating in advance the anticipated problems and conflicting elements

and by refining the related laws and regulations; but also recruiting elite

personnel who possess various expertise and utilizing these personnel at

the right positions.

With the activation of the reservists active service reappointment

program, it will be possible to recruit elite personnel in a flexible manner,

allowing the utilization of personnel who still possess the experience and

military expertise from their active service years at the right position

without additional training. Also, the MND expects to counter vacancies

caused by leaves of absence by supplementing elite personnel serving

mid-terms in a stable manner and to guarantee conditions for smooth

personnel management.

**| Efficient Personnel Management | Personnel management in the**

military needs to be carried out in a sustained manner based on a fixed

number of personnel per Service and per rank. Through such personnel

management, the military can meet the organizational requirements for

mission execution and recruit the required personnel in a stable manner.

As the retirement age for each rank moved up according to the

amendments made to the Military Personnel Act in 1989 and 1993, the

number of service members in some ranks exceeded the fixed number for

that rank due to the decrease in service members being discharged from

the military. However, the personnel management system is being

normalized by implementing an age-based and service period-based

retirement program simultaneously and controlling the number of

promotions per rank at an appropriate level. This effort is expected to be

completed by 2015, and the MND is planning to continue its efforts in

managing its personnel system in a stable manner.

In order to alleviate the problems caused by personnel serving at a

certain rank for too long due to the retirement age being extended, the

MND adjusted the minimum service period required for promotions for

each rank to an appropriate length. In particular, the long service period
(eight years) of captains was a source of low morale and an element that

limited full performance while the short service period (four years) of

colonels limited the opportunity for colonels to utilize their expertise in the


-----

fields of policy and planning. In order to improve this situation and to

manage personnel in an efficient manner, the minimum service period as a

captain was reduced to seven years and the minimum service period as a

colonel was extended to five years. Changes to the minimum service

period for each ranks are shown in Chart 7-6.

**Chart 7-6. Changes to the minimum service period for each rank**

|Classification|2nd and 1st Lieutenant|Captain|Major|Lieutenant Colonel|Colonel|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Before 2010|3 years|8 years|6 years|5 years|4 years|
|After 2011|3 years|7 years|6 years|5 years|5 years|



In addition, the Defense-Manpower Analysis Programming Plan &

Support (D-MAPPS) system was developed and is being utilized for

personnel management outlook, personnel structure analysis, and

requirement assessment for recruiting personnel in order to manage

personnel in an efficient and stable manner. This system is being further

developed so that it can be applied for personnel management of all

classes including officers, NCOs, enlisted members, and military civilians,

and for personnel management of each specialized branch and specialty.

**| Increase in Female Personnel and Improvements in Service**

**Conditions | The MND is gradually increasing the number of female**

personnel and is developing diverse gender defense policies to support

such increase. As of September 2012, there are a total of 12,807 female

defense personnel[1] of which 7,955 are female military service members,

373 female public officials, and 4,479 female military civilians. The

detailed female defense personnel status is shown in Chart 7-7 and Chart

7-8.


**1. Female Defense Personnel**

All female public officials working at the
MND and all female military service
members and female military civilians
working for each Service

|Chart 7-7.|Female military service member status|Col3|Col4|Col5|Unit: persons|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total|Officers||||NCOs||||
||Total|Army|Navy|Air Force|Total|Army|Navy|Air Force|
|7,955|3,664|2,768|408|488|4,291|2,763|695|833|


-----

**Chart 7-8. Female public official and military civilian status**


|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Unit: persons|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total|Female Public Officials||||Female Military Civilians||||
||Total|Grade 4−5|Grade 6−7|Grade 8 and lower|Total|Grade 3−5|Grade 6−7|Grade 8 and lower|
|4,852|373|70|210|93|4,479|187|1,390|2,902|


According to the National Defense Reform Act, the number of female

military service members are to be steadily increased through 2020.

However, considering the social personnel environment[2] and the expected

changes to the future military structure, the MND is planning to achieve

its goal of increasing the number of female military service members[3] to

its desired level by 2017. The female military service member increase

plan is shown in Chart 7-9.

**Chart 7-9. The female military service member increase plan**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Unit: persons|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Classification|Total|Army|Navy|Air Force|
|2012|8,346|5,792|1,221|1,333|
|2015|10,121|6,970|1,607|1,544|
|2020|12,165|8,495|1,875|1,795|



Female military service members are carrying out duties in a variety of

areas as commanders and staff members at various echelons and as fighter

pilots, PKM captains, and troops deployed overseas. Also, like male

service members, females now have the opportunity to dedicate

themselves to national security by serving as reservists if they desire after

active service in accordance with the amendments made to the Military

Personnel Act and the Military Service Act.

The MND is pursuing diverse policies in synch with the government’s

gender policies in order to guarantee service conditions that allow all

female defense personnel to be the best that they can be in various fields.

First, in order to spread an awareness of gender equality and contribute

to a gender equality culture taking root in the military, the MND is

carrying out gender recognition improvement education[4] to field unit

service members, cadres at each rank, and military civilians and public

officials. In addition, better education results are being attained by


**2. Social Personnel Environment**

The need to recruit more female military
service members is gradually increasing
due to the decrease in manpower
resources caused by low birthrate

**3. Goal of Increasing the Number of**
**Female Military Service Members**

Increase the number of female officers
to 7% of the fixed number of officers,
and female NCOs to 5% of the fixed
number of NCOs.

**4. Gender recognition improvement**
**education**

Education to improve the capability to
recognize the impact of sex and gender
on the lives of males and females


-----

applying a variety of educational techniques and developing and utilizing

diverse subjects.

Second, systems and policies that are gender biased or unreasonable are

being identified and rectified and a counseling system for addressing

female grievances is being operated at each echelon. Female grievance

counselors[5] counsel and resolve grievances of female personnel in the unit

and support junior cadres in the process of adjusting to the unit.

Third, as the number of female military service members continues to

increase, the MND is creating a service environment where female

personnel are able to balance their duties at work and at home. In order to

contribute to increasing the birthrate and strengthening maternity

protection, maternity leave of absence for service members who are

raising children under eight years old as well as maternity leave for

spouses were expanded. Also, by improving various systems such as

introducing an infertility leave of absence and building more child-care

facilities, the MND is contributing to the efforts of guaranteeing

conditions for childbirth and child-care.

Fourth, the MND is strengthening the effectiveness of its gender impact

assessment system by carrying out a gender impact assessment

evaluation[6] in order to contribute to the realization of gender equality

during the process of establishing major MND policies. It is also pursuing

the establishment of an assessment system to have the results of the

evaluation reflected in the related polices. In addition, in connection with

this system, the MND is also expanding the budget for gender recognition

that rectifies gender discriminative elements by analyzing in advance how

the budget impacts males and females.

Fifth, the MND is planning to fix the percentage of female committee

members appointed to the MND government committee in order to

expand the level of participation of females in policy decision processes.

In addition, public relations activities to highlight the organizational

leadership, sense of responsibility, and professionalism of female service

members are being carried out towards various companies including large

enterprises in order to support the employment of retiring female service

members, and a mutual cooperation system between the military and

companies is being established.


**5. Female Grievance Counselors**

A total of 646 counselors (female
military service members and female
military civilians) are working in units
above brigade and division level units

Female military service members in
action

**6. Gender Impact Assessment**
**Evaluation**

Program to help realize gender equality
by assessing the impacts government
policies will have on gender equality.
Through this program, it will be possible
to reduce social incidental expenses
caused by unintended gender
discrimination in advance.


-----

**2. Establishing a Personnel Management System Centered**
**on Military Expertise**

The MND has established a personnel management system centered on

military expertise in order to select and utilize elite personnel who can

lead the effort in building a combat oriented military.

Accordingly, the personnel management system is being improved in

the direction of promoting and managing personnel focused on ability and

military expertise while moving away from the existing traditional

practice of considering balance and distribution as the main criteria for

promotions according to type of commission, year of commission, and

year of promotion.

**| Officers | With the goal of cultivating elite personnel who possess**

the capability and military expertise required to lead the battlefield of the

future, the MND considers the selection and promotion of personnel

based on capabilities while excluding past considerations focused on

type of commission, year of commission, and year of promotion,

establishing a duty assignment management system to strengthen

jointness and the infrastructure, and improving the rating system for

identifying elite military experts.

First, a consensus that ‘even if you are close to your age or rank limit,

you will be promoted or selected if you are an elite personnel’ has been

established through a capability-based promotion system that does not

consider the source of commission, year of commission, and year of

promotion. Also, by selecting elite military experts in a respective field

and assigning these experts to areas that require expertise such as military

diplomacy and negotiations, and information technology, the utilization of

officers has been improved.

Second, the duty assignment management system has been improved in

order to strengthen jointness and the infrastructure. First, jointness and

cooperation have been strengthened by enhancing the understanding of

and cooperation with other Services and branches through duty

assignment exchange programs between Services and branches. Status of

duty assignment exchanges between branches is shown in Chart 7-10.


-----

**Chart 7-10. Status of duty assignment exchanges between branches**

|Classification|Content|
|---|---|
|Total|42 branches and 518 positions (55 colonels, 99 lieutenant colonels, 171 majors, 104 captains, 89 1st and 2nd lieutenants)|
|Army|17 branches and 201 positions (14 colonels, 20 lieutenant colonels, 98 majors, 67 captains, 2 1st and 2nd lieutenants)|
|Navy|9 branches and 145 positions (25 captains, 28 commanders, 40 lieutenant commanders, 15 lieutenants, 37 Lieutenant junior grades and ensigns)|
|Air Force|11 branches and 158 positions (16 colonels, 46 lieutenant colonels, 26 majors, 21 captains, 49 1st and 2nd lieutenants)|
|Marine Corps|5 branches and 14 positions (5 lieutenant colonels, 7 majors, 1 captain, 1 1st and 2nd lieutenant)|



By extending the duty period of combat regiment commanders [captains

and group commanders (air force colonel level commanders)] and

selecting and assigning elite personnel to units in contact areas, conditions

to establish a combat readiness posture under the responsibility of the

commander have been guaranteed. In addition, by introducing the duty

assignment eligibility review system for key policy office positions, the

best personnel for mission execution for the relevant position are selected

and assigned.

Third, in order to improve the rating system for identifying elite military

experts, a category-based evaluation standard for each position at each

rank has been established. The rating system for all Services has been

changed to relative ratings and electronic ratings in order to enhance the

assessment function and the fairness of ratings, and standards and methods

for evaluating key capabilities in a three-dimensional manner have been

established.

In addition, the rating pattern and rating category have been improved

so that it is possible to identify the specific military expertise, particularly

those abilities unique to the personnel being rated. By strengthening

regular rating verifications and including the rating verification results into

the rater’s personnel management record, the raters are inspired to carry

out their rating duties with a heightened sense of duty and responsibility.

In the future, personnel selected for open ratings will be gradually

expanded in order to increase transparency of ratings, and ratings will be

further utilized as performance appraisal data to identify elite personnel

and to assist in the development of individuals.


-----

**| Non-commissioned Officers | The MND is redefining the role of**

NCOs to be consistent with a combat oriented military, and is planning

to implement a variety of policies that will create a culture where NCOs

assigned to combat positions are respected and given priority treatment.

First, the roles and responsibilities of NCOs, which have been focused

on unit management and administrative support, have been redefined so

that NCOs are at the core of generating combat power. Up to now, the

roles of NCOs were to uphold and continue to develop the traditions of

their respective units, assist the unit commander in carrying out his or her

duties, and carry out unit management activities as unit management

experts. However, with the roles of NCOs redefined as combat leaders and

functional area experts, a foundation for the cultivation of a combat

oriented military culture has been established.

Second, a personnel recruiting system centered on combat branches
(specialties) has been established. In order to recruit talented personnel

with superior combat power, the percentage of NCOs recruited from a

pool of enlisted service members is gradually increasing while the

percentage of NCOs recruited straight from the civilian sector is being

lowered. Also, the hometown area service system which allows NCOs to

serve in units located in their hometown area (limited to frontline area

only) is being expanded in order to improve the rate of NCOs being

assigned to frontline area units. In addition, the MND is planning to

acquire tailored personnel by gradually increasing the number of

academy-military agreement universities and personnel, and has improved

the related systems so that paid volunteer service members (special NCOs)

can serve for mid to long-term periods.

Third, the promotion and long-term service selection system has been

refined so that NCOs assigned to combat positions are given priority

treatment. The distribution of marks for each standard evaluation elements

has been adjusted so that NCOs who possess superior combat skills and

capabilities are selected during promotion and long-term service

selections, and that NCOs who are assigned at combat positions for a long

period receive higher evaluations. In addition, improvements to the

long-term service system are being made by increasing the percentage of

personnel selected for long-term service and expanding the opportunity for

NCOs to apply for long-term service.


NCOs in action


-----

Fourth, an honorary promotion system has been introduced in the

second half of 2011 in order to heighten the self-esteem and increase the

morale of NCOs. Accordingly, it is now possible for master sergeants, who

are retiring after more than 20 years of faithful service with outstanding

performance records, to be promoted to sergeant majors on the day of their

discharge.

**| Military Civilians | The MND is strengthening the employment**

system for recruiting elite military civilians, and is revising the related

laws and ordinances and systems in order to maximize the efficiency in

managing the military civilian organization.

First, in order to hire competent military civilians, the MND has

strengthened the assessment functions of the employment exam since

2011. In addition to this effort, the objectivity and transparency of this

exam has been reinforced by forming a personnel pool consisting of

university professors and specialists in specific areas to write and validate

questions and answers.

Second, the military civilian occupational groups and series, which were

excessively subdivided compared to public officials, have been integrated

through merger and abolition[7] as of 1 January 2012 in line with the

changing military environment and efforts to reform the military structure.

In particular, by integrating the functional series that carried out similar

duties as regular government services into the general series, a system has

been established where duty efficiency and professionalism can be

maximized.

Third, up to now, the efficiency in duty performance has declined

because it was not possible to supplement the loss of personnel due to

military civilians, who have less than one year left until they reach their

retirement age, going on training courses during their transitional leave. In

order to eliminate the problem of long-term vacant positions from

occurring, the MND is planning to revise the Military Civilian Personnel

Act to establish a legal basis to be able to supplement vacancies caused by

military civilians going on training courses during their transitional leave.

Fourth, currently, it is only possible to appoint contracted military

civilians to positions where expert knowledge is required which makes it

impossible to appoint contracted military civilians to vacant positions


Military civilians in action

**7. Integration through merger and**
**abolition of the occupational group**
**and series system**

23 occupational groups, 79
occupational series 11 occupational
groups, 56 occupational series

-  Occupational group: set of people
doing same kind of work

-  Occupational series: set of several
positions characterized by similar
types of work but different in terms of
skill level and responsibilities


-----

created by military civilians going on paternity and maternity leaves. As

such, the MND is planning to amend the Military Civilian Personnel Act

to increase the efficiency in managing personnel by appointing contracted

military civilians, who are employed for a specific time frame, to positions

that demand flexible appointments.

Fifth, the MND is pursuing a revision of the Enforcement Ordinance of

the Military Civilian Personnel Act with the purpose of abolishing Grade

Ten of the functional military civilian class and expanding the possible

long-service promotion of military civilians to Grade Six from the current

Grade of Seven in line with the improvement trend of the personnel

management system for public officials. Through this initiative, significant

improvements are expected to be made in enhancing the morale and

welfare of military civilians and vitalizing the duty atmosphere.

Sixth, as a means to realizing an impartial society, the MND signed the

‘Agreement to Expand the Employment of Disabled Persons’ with the

Korea Employment Agency for the Disabled, and gave shape to its

‘Military Civilian Employment Plan’ by expanding the areas of

employment for the disabled.

**3. Education of Professional Defense Personnel**

The MND is continuously educating its professional defense personnel

to actively prepare for changes to the defense environment in the future

while efficiently recruiting personnel required by the military in a

mid-to-long term perspective.

**| Cutting-edge Studies and Advanced Military Areas | In order to**

cultivate personnel required for developing and operating future weapon

systems, annually the MND is providing educational opportunities for

around 300 cadres who are mainly science and engineering majors in the

fields of high tech science and technology at universities at home and

abroad. Also, around 400 military cadres are sent overseas every year to

receive education and training at foreign military educational institutes

with the goal of training regional experts such as military attaches,

strengthening military cooperation through personnel exchanges with


Signing of the ‘Agreement to Expand the
Employment of Disabled Persons’ (MND,
July 2011)


-----

foreign militaries, and learning advanced military doctrines and skills to

enhance the global capacity of military cadres. Military personnel are

sent to over 30 countries including the U.S., Japan, and Germany to

receive foreign military education, and education opportunities will be

diversified to newly cooperating areas such as the Middle East, South

America, and Africa.

**| Foreign Student Education and Language Areas | In accordance**

with the overseas military education exchange policy, the ROK military

invites foreign officers and cadets to study at ROK military educational

institutes. Since the foreign student education program commenced in

1970, a total of 610 personnel from 35 nations received education in

ROK educational institutes, and in 2012, a total of 67 personnel from 20

nations are studying at the Army, Navy, and Air Force Colleges, military

academies of each Service, and in the National Defense University

security course. Recently, due to the increased status of the ROK

military, requests by foreign militaries to have their personnel study in

the ROK have increased, and the number of nations and personnel

coming to the ROK to study is gradually increasing as the military

diplomacy channels get more and more diversified.

Meanwhile, in order to flexibly respond to the language education

requirements that are becoming more diversified and internationalized and

to systematically cultivate personnel in the perspective of national defense,

the MND established the Defense Language Institute under the Joint

Forces Military University on 1 December 2012 which integrated all

language courses of each Service. With the establishment of the Defense

Language Institute, English and second foreign language education for

officers and NCOs of each Service, interpreting officer education, and

Korean language education for foreign military students will all be

provided at the Defense Language Institute.

**| Defense Management Area | In order to instill a defense**

management thought process through advanced management technique

education, training opportunities are being provided at companies for

officers (majors and lieutenant colonels) and through ‘chief security

executive courses’ for general and flag officers and senior public


-----

officials.

‘Training at companies’ commenced in 2011 with 20 major level officers

being selected to receive training at six local companies including

Samsung Electronics. Officers who participate in the ‘training at

companies’ learn through experience the various know-how and

management techniques of civilian companies by working in eight fields

of management such as human resources, business management,

marketing, supply network management, and energy. After this training,

they deduce the lessons and cases that can be applied to the military and

disseminate what they learned to the military personnel through presen
tations and reports. In 2012, the number of selectees increased to 30 and

these officers were sent to nine companies considering the positive results

achieved in the previous year such as the visible enhancement in the

management thought process for each area.

The ‘chief security executive course’ is being provided at the College of

Business Administration at Seoul National University. This is an education

course tailored to national defense management and security where a mix

of students including 25 general and flag officers and senior public

officials and 25 civilian executive officers attend. The 12 week course in

2011 from September to December focused on lectures and lessons that

can be readily applied to defense areas such as the most recent business

administration and economic theories after the global financial crisis,

changes to the management environment and survival strategies for

companies, and organizational culture focused on communication. Starting

from 2012, the course has been expanded to 16 weeks.


-----

|1 2|Col2|
|---|---|
|2||
|||


1

2


-----

##### Chapter 8
**Enhancing the Efficiency**
**of National Defense**
**Management**


218

227

231

235

245


Section 1  Enhancing the Efficiency of National
Defense Budget Management
Section 2  Enhancing Fairness and Transparency of
Weapons System Acquisition
Section 3  Optimizing Defense Resources through
the Use of Private Sectors
Section 4  Enhancing the Efficiency of National
Defense Resource Management
Section 5  Developing the Defense Economy in
Support of the National Economy


**1  Seoul International Aerospace and Defense**
Exhibition 2012 (ADEX 2012)

**2  Republic of Korea Air Force (ROKAF) Black**
Eagles executing an aerobatic maneuver
during the Royal International Air Tattoo in
July 2012.


-----

**Enhancing the Efficiency of**
**National Defense Budget**
**Management**

The Ministry of National Defense (MND) is putting forward substantial
efforts to secure an appropriate amount of budget for national defense and
to efficiently manage the budget in order to respond to various security
threats and execute national defense reforms in a stable manner. Moreover,
the MND is striving to increase management efficiency in all aspects of
national defense in order to optimize the limited defense budget.

**1. Securing an Appropriate Amount of Defense Budget**

**| Changes in Defense Budget Allocation | The percentage of the**

defense budget via-à-vis the ROK Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and

the entire ROK government budget has changed with the security and

financial environment. The overall trend in defense budget allocation is

shown in Chart 8-1.

**Chart 8-1. Overall Trend of Defense Budget via-à-vis the GDP and Government Budget**

**General Account**

35

30

25

20

15

10


**Section**
# 1


**Ratio to Government Budget** **Ratio to GDP**

**34.7**

**29.4**

**24.2**

**21.4**

**16.3** **15.6** **14.7** **14.8**

**5.7** **4.3**

**3.5** **2.7** **2.3** **2.4** **2.5** **2.5**


1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2012


-----

Until the early 1980s, the defense budget was 5 percent of the GDP and

30 percent of the government budget. This was because a sufficient budget

was allocated for the implementation of various force enhancement plans,

including the Yulgok project,[1] that were initiated during the mid-1970s.

Starting from the late-1980s, however, the defense budget was signifi
cantly reduced due to the increase in investments to growth-inducing

infrastructure, greater demand for social welfare, and the Asian financial

crisis. As of 2012, the defense budget is 2.52 percent of the GDP and 14.8

percent of the government budget.

**| Importance of Securing a Defense Budget Consistent with the**

**Security Conditions | In general, the size of the defense budget is**

determined through a holistic approach that considers military

requirements needed to respond to security threats and the nation’s

financial capacity. For those countries that are directly exposed to

external military threats, such as the ROK, there exist greater military

requirements to properly respond to such security threats.

Compared to many other countries around the world, the size of the

ROK defense budget is relatively small, despite the high level of security

threats. The ratios of defense budget to GDP for major nations involved in

conflict or military confrontation are shown in Chart 8-2.

**Chart 8-2. Ratios of Defense Budget to GDP of Major Nations Involved in Conflict or Military**
**Confrontation as of 2010**

|Israel|Jordan|United States|Lebanon|Georgia|Syria|Pakistan|Russia|Iran|ROK|PRC|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|6.46|5.42|4.77|4.16|4.15|3.94|3.24|2.84|2.56|2.52|1.3|



*[ Source: The Military Balance, 2012 (London, International Institution for Strategic studies)]

Moreover, the level of defense budget per capita is also somewhat

lower. While the average per capita defense budget of the Organization for

Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries is 585 USD,

that of the ROK is only 515 USD, or 88 percent of the OECD average.

**| Expected Utility from Securing an Appropriate Amount of Defense**

**Budget | In order to guarantee the survival and prosperity of the state,**


**1. Yulgok Project**

A military modernization plan
implemented from 1974 to 1992 with
the objective of establishing a selfreliant national defense posture. The
project contributed to force
enhancement through the development
and production of M-16 rifles and K-1
tanks.

**Appendix 2**

See the table on the comparison of
major countries’ defense budgets


-----

firm security posture needs to be maintained by securing an appropriate

amount of defense budget. Any security crisis on the Korean Peninsula,

such as North Korea’s attack on the ROK Ship Cheonan, the shelling of

_Yeonpyeongdo (island), and nuclear tests, can damage the international_

credibility of the ROK and have negative impact on the ROK’s economy.

Therefore, in a state of military confrontation between the South and

North on the Korean Peninsula, maintaining a robust security posture is

imperative for the continued and stable development of the ROK

economy.

Furthermore, the defense budget utilized for a steadfast security posture

also provides positive contributions to the economy by propelling a

virtuous cycle as depicted in Chart 8-3. The establishment of a solid

security posture through the acquisition of an appropriate amount of

defense budget leads to a more stable society and economy and better

national credibility, which in turn leads to the stable growth of national

economy. Likewise, higher rates of economic growth bring about an

increase in revenue and an expansion of the government budget, which in

turn contribute to securing an appropriate amount of defense budget.

**Chart 8-3. A Virtuous Cycle between Security and Economy Created Via Securing an Appro-**
**priate Amount of Defense Budget**


Better National Credibility
Facilitating Economic
Activities and Investment

**Economic Growth**

Increased Revenue


Expansion of
Productive Capacity
and Employment


Steadfast Security
Posture

**an Appropriate**
**Amount of**
**Defense Budget**


Creating Domestic Demand,
Increased Investments in
Defense-related Research and
Development, and
Development of Human
Resources


**Stable Society**


**Expanded**
**Government**

Increased Resource **Budget** Increased Revenue
Allocation for Defense


**Facilitating Production**
**and Advancing**
**Technology**


The defense expenditure required for national security not only supports

the inherent functions of national defense but also contributes to creating

various economic synergies. Personnel expenses, including wages for the

service members and civilian employees in the military, help create


-----

effective demand and facilitate industrial production. Project expenditures

required for the acquisition of weapons systems and logistical materials,

and construction of military facilities and installations flow into various

industrial sectors including manufacturing and construction, leading to

increased production, employment, and growth rates.

Advanced technologies acquired through research and development in

the defense industries are shared with the private sector, leading to

increased private sector productivity, and contributing to the development

of electric, communications, and mechanical engineering industries. Some

notable examples of such effects are captured in Chart 8-4.

**Chart 8-4. Spin-Off Examples of Defense Science and Technology Transfer to the Private**
**Sector per Major Industries**

**Knocking**

**Design of** **Piezoelectric**
**Ammunition** **Sensors on**
**Shock Sensor** **Shock Device**

**Automobile**

**Navigation**

**Satellite** **Satellite** **Software Based on**
**Intelligence**
**Imagery** **Image Map** **Digital Map with**

**Actual Images**

**Spread**

**Next**

**Spectrum and** **Mobile**

**Communications** **Generation FM**

**Synchronization** **Communications**

**Radio**

**Technology**

**Technology for** **Personal**

**Chemical,**

**Radiation** **Designing** **Dosimeters and**

**Biological and**

**Detector** **Radiation** **Radiation**

**Radiological**

**Detector** **Detectors**

**Carbon** **Basic Production**
**Composites for** **Technology for**

**Material** **Heat Pipes**

**Ultra-High-** **Composite**
**Temperature** **Materials**


The military specialty training and education have also been nurturing

technical experts and numerous nationally certified technicians. In the past

five years, a total of 52,943 nationally certified technicians were trained in

the military as industrial engineers and technicians in 120 different fields

including mechanical, chemical, electric, and electronic engineering (data

from the National Defense Statistics Year Book 2006-2010).


-----

**2. Defense Budget and Mid-term Defense Program**

**| Defense Budget 2012 | The defense budget in 2012 totaling**

32.9576 trillion Korean Won (KRW), has shown a five percent increase

from 2011’s budget, and focused on building a combat-oriented military

and enhancing the morale and welfare of service members. The scope

and distribution of the defense budget in fiscal year (FY) 2012 is shown

in Chart 8-5.

**Chart 8-5. Scope and Distribution of Defense Budget in FY 2012 General Account**

**Unit: 100 million KRW**

|Types|Col2|FY 2011|FY 2012|Changes|Changes (%)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total||314,031|329,576|15,545|5.0|
|Force Operating Costs|total|217,096|230,638|13,542|6.2|
||Personnel Management|128,185|134,923|6,738|5.3|
||Operations and Maintenance Costs|88,911|95,715|6,804|7.7|
|Force Improvement Budget||96,935|98,938|2,003|2.1|



The force operating costs,[2] which amounted to a total of 23.0638 trillion

KRW, or 70 percent of the defense budget, showed a 6.2 percent increase

compared to that of 2011 and focused on the implementation of key

defense policies. These policies included building a combat-oriented

military, enhancing the morale and welfare of service members, and

preparing for the transfer of wartime operational control (OPCON).

First, in order to build a combat-oriented military, the requirements to

enhance operation and security facilities in forward areas were reflected in

the budget, and efforts were put forward to improve the execution of

combat mission capabilities by expanding the support of supplying

combat equipment including bullet-proof vests and functional combat

boots. Moreover, efforts were made to improve the existing corps-level

training facilities into combat-oriented comprehensive training facilities in

order to guarantee realistic warfighting training conditions.

Second, the requirements to improve the morale and welfare of service

members were also reflected in the budget. This included the goal to

reform the military medical system which entails improving the sanitary


**Appendix 16**

See the table on the annual defense
budgets

**2. Force Operating Costs**

Previously known as ‘ordinary operating
costs.’ Due to the tendency of the term’s
connotation being perceived as being
expendable costs, it was replaced with
the term ‘force operating costs’ in
January 2011.


-----

conditions of basic training centers and expanding the scope of the service

members eligible for vaccination. Moreover, efforts to modernize military

barracks and quarters will continue to be made. Also, encouragement

incentives for non-commissioned officers (NCOs) serving in combat units

and other incentives were introduced. Various compensations were also

increased for those who are serving in austere environment and

responsible for missions and tasks with high levels of risk and difficulty.

Third, the requirements for the implementation of major policies and

tasks were also reflected in the budget. These include the budget for

constructing a war game center and opposing force (OPFOR) facilities, in

preparation for the transfer of wartime OPCON as well as expanding core

intelligence protection infrastructure in response to various cyber threats.

The forces enhancement budget, which amounted to a total of 9.8938

trillion KRW, showed a 2.1 percent increase compared to that of 2011, and

focused on three major aspects.

First, in preparation against North Korea’s local provocation and long

range artillery threat, improvements in surveillance and detection

capabilities and development of Command, Control, Communications,

Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) systems, which entailed counter
artillery detection radar,[3] next-generation thermal observation device
(TOD), and tactical information communication network (TICN)

programs, were made. Moreover, the requirements to improve precision

strike and air defense capabilities, which include precision guided

munitions (PGMs) for ground target,[4] and mid-range surface-to-air guided

missile programs, were also reflected in the budget.

Second is the improvement of core capabilities, including the combined

command and control (C2) systems, theater operations command

facilities, ground laser target designators (LTDs), Ulsan-class Batch-I/II,[5]

and multi-purpose precision guided cluster bomb units (CBUs), in

preparation for the transition of wartime OPCON. Also reflected in the

budget were the core requirements for the transformation of military

structure in support of the execution of Defense Reform Basic Plan, which

involves the activation of a Ground Operations Command and the

implementation of ground observation post (GOP) advanced technological

security systems project.

Third is the implementation of the high-altitude unmanned aerial


**3. Counter-artillery Detection Radar**
**Project**

Counter-artillery detection radar detects
the location of enemy artillery by
retracing the trajectory of the shells
launched from enemy artillery. The
project entails the acquisition of such
assets in order to strengthen the ground
forces’ counter-fire warfare capabilities

**4. Precision Guided Munitions [(]PGMs[)]**
**Project for Ground Target**

A project that entails the acquisition of
PGMs which can strike targets such as
enemy coastal artilleries, multiple
launch rocket systems (MLRS), and
self-propelled guns (SPGs) in tunnels in
cases of enemy provocation.

**5. Ulsan-class Batch-I/II Project**

A project that entails the acquisition of
next-generation frigates with better
combat capabilities and survivability in
order to replace the antiquated frigates
and corvettes.


-----

vehicles (HUAVs),[6] next generation fighter jets (F-X),[7] _Jangbogo-III_
(Korea Attack Submarine III, or KSS-III),[8] and Gwanggaeto-III (Korean

Destroyer Experimental III, or KDX-III)[9] projects to prepare for various

threats by North Korea and other neighboring countries.

As for the special accounts allocated to the MND, there are those for the

relocation of defense and military facilities, relocation of the United States

Forces in Korea (USFK) bases, and construction of an ‘Innovation City.’

The total amount of MND-allocated special accounts budget amounted to

926.7 billion KRW, and its distributions are shown in Chart 8-6.

**Chart 8-6. Special Accounts Budget, FY 2012**

**Unit: 100 million KRW**

|Types|FY 2011|FY 2012|Changes|Change (%)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Defense and Military Facilities Relocation|8,226|5,317|-2,909|-35.4|
|USFK Base Relocation|3,869|3,850|-19|-0.5|
|Innovation City Construction|757|100|-657|-86.8|
|Total|12,852|9,267|-3,585|-27.9|



The special account for the relocation of defense and military facilities

was introduced for the relocation of the relevant facilities located in urban

centers to suburbs, and for the purchase of private lands used by the

military. In 2012, a total of 531.7 billion KRW was allocated for this

purpose, in support of the planning of relocation of the First Logistics

Support Command and the relocation of the off-base ammunitions storage

site for Gwangju Airbase. The special account for the relocation of USFK

bases amounted to 385 billion KRW in support of the USFK base

relocation to Pyeongteak. The special account for the construction of an

‘Innovation City’ was introduced in accordance with the Public Agency

Relocation Plan (enacted on 24 June 2005), which entails the budget for

the relocation of the National Defense University (NDU). In particular, the

budget for 2012 for this purpose amounted to 10 billion KRW, as the

Ministry of Strategy and Finance (MOSF) finalized the total budget

requirements for the relocation of the NDU on 7 December 2011.

**| Mid-term Defense Program 2013-2017 | The Mid-term Defense**

Program 2013-2017 has allocated the budgets of this period with the


**6. HUAVs Project**

A project that entails the acquisition of
HUAVs in order to guarantee intelligence
collection capabilities in response to any
changes in the North Korean threats or
future battlefield environment.

**7. F-X Project**

A project that entails the acquisition of
high-performance fighter jets that can
replace antiquated fighters, secure air
superiority, and fulfill the concept of
future battlefield management.

**8. Jangbogo-III Project**

A project that entails the acquisition of
submarines that can help strategically
deter various maritime threats from
North Korea and other neighboring
countries.

**9. Gwanggaeto-III Project**

A project that entails the acquisition of a
modern destroyer, which can perform
composite - i.e. ground, maritime, and
air battle functions.


-----

focus on improving the current force capabilities, acquiring core

capabilities in preparation for wartime OPCON transition, and enhancing

advanced morale and welfare support systems in order to maintain

combat readiness and fulfill the objective of building combat mission
oriented advanced elite military forces.

The budget allocated to the Mid-term Defense Program 2013-2017

amounts to 199.6 trillion KRW, and reflects an average increase of 5.3

percent for force operation, 8.6 percent for force improvement, and 6.4

percent for total defense budgets for the mid-term period. The overall scope

of the Mid-term Defense Program 2013-2017 is shown in Chart 8-7.

**Chart 8-7. Mid-Term Defense Program 2013-2017**

**Unit: trillion KRW and %**

|Types|Col2|2012|Project Years|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|Total|
|Defense Budget (Changes) Force Operating Costs (Changes) (Proportions) Force Improvement Budget (Changes) (Proportions)||33.0 (5.0)|35.4 (7.4)|37.5 (5.9)|39.6 (5.6)|42.3 (6.9)|44.9 (6.2)|199.6 (6.4)|
||Force Operating Costs (Changes) (Proportions)|23.1 (6.2) (70.0)|24.4 (5.8) (68.9)|25.7 (5.4) (68.6)|27.0 (5.1) (68.3)|28.4 (5.2) (67.2)|29.9 (5.3) (66.7)|135.5 (5.3) (67.9)|
||Force Improvement Budget (Changes) (Proportions)|9.9 (2.1) (30.0)|11.0 (11.1) (31.1)|11.8 (6.9) (31.4)|12.5 (6.7) (31.7)|13.9 (10.5) (32.8)|15.0 (8.0) (33.3)|64.1 (8.6) (32.1)|



The force operation costs focused on the requirements to maintain the

core capabilities in preparation for the transfer of wartime OPCON,

improve the capabilities of existing forces, and enhance the service

members’ morale and welfare. More specifically, resources were allocated

for the establishment of realistic education and training systems, reform of

the military medical system, improvement of individual uniform and

equipment, and assurance of follow-up logistics support for advanced

capabilities.

As for the force improvement budget, priority was given to the

enhancement of core capabilities, including surveillance and detection, C2

and communications, and precision strike systems, in preparation for the

transition of wartime OPCON. Moreover, resources were focused on

reinforcing those capabilities required to respond to existing North Korean


-----

threats, such as their long-range artillery (LRA) or missile threats, and to

various potential future threats. Furthermore, allocating resources for the

key requirements regarding the transformation of military structure created

a favorable environment for the implementation of the Defense Reform

Basic Plan. Also, sufficient resources were also allocated to defense
related research and development in order to facilitate the capacity for the

independent development of weapons systems.

**3. Execution of Defense Budget and Enhanced Perfor-**
**mance Management**

In order to minimize the budget from being carried over to the next

fiscal year and facilitate the efficient execution of the defense budget, the

MND has been strengthening its spot inspection activities and conducting

regular inspections on budget executions.

Moreover, in order to establish a low-cost, high-efficiency, and

advanced defense management system, and to guarantee priority

investment of resources in the areas with the most need, the MND has

been implementing the Defense Management Efficiency Plan. The current

execution status of the plan is revisited on a regular basis through the

Defense Management Efficiency Inspection Committee Meetings chaired

by the Vice Minister of National Defense, and each Service has also been

executing their service-specific inspection plans. These efforts to enhance

the efficiency of defense management and the resultant savings in

resources and manpower are being translated into priority investments in

more urgent and necessary areas, such as the enhancement of service

members’ morale and welfare as well as any contingent forces

enhancement plans.


-----

**Enhancing Fairness and**
**Transparency of Weapons**
**System Acquisition**

The MND is striving to build up its military strength in a stable and efficient
manner under the constraints of limited available resources. In order to do
so, the MND has been strengthening force requirement reviews to ensure
objective validity and credibility of the long-term force enhancement projects that require a large-scale budget commitment. Moreover, the MND has
established new organizations and made improvements to existing institutions in order to enhance fairness and transparency of force improvement
programs.

**1. Enhancing the Requirement Reviews on Force Enhance-**
**ment Programs**

Considering the limited available resources for national defense, the

MND has been enhancing the requirement reviews of force enhancement

programs in order to ensure objective validity and credibility of force

requirements such as additional weapons systems. To this end, the MND

has established the Force Requirements Review Committee, which

consists of civilian, government, and military members, chaired by the

Vice Minister of National Defense, in order to conduct systematic and

objective reviews on the validity of the new force requirements raised by

the military. The composition of the committee is shown in Chart 8-8.


**Section**
# 2


-----

**Chart 8-8. Composition of Force Requirement Review Committee**

|Type|Col2|Col3|Details|
|---|---|---|---|
|Civilian|Private (5)||Military Strategy Experts, Defense Industry, Industrial Engineers, and Economists|
||Think Tanks(5)|Economics|Researchers from Korea Development Institute and Korea Institute for Industrial Economics and Trade|
|||Defense|Vice Presidents of Korea Institute for Defense Analyses (KIDA), Agency for Defense Development, and Defense Agency for Technology and Quality|
|Government|Ministries (3)||Relevant Chiefs and Directors from the Ministry of Strategy and Finance, Ministry of Education and Science Technology, and Ministry of Knowledge Economy|
|Military|MND, Defense Acquisition Program Administration (DAPA), and Military (7)||Chief of MND Office of Military Force and Resources Management, Vice Commissioner of DAPA, Chief Director for Strategic Plans and Policy (J5), and Vice Chiefs of Service|
|Total|||20|



The detailed procedure of force requirements review is as follows. First,

the MND identifies the review candidate programs from the newly

determined force requirement programs, which require more than 100

billion KRW or are expected to have significant economic spillover

effects. Then, the Force Requirements Analysis Group of the Korea

Institute for Defense Analyses (KIDA), which supports the Force

Requirements Review Committee, conducts basic analysis of alternatives
(AOAs) for selected candidate programs. The committee then reviews the

results of such analysis. Finally, appropriate follow-up actions, such as

reflecting the outcome of the reviews in the Defense Mid-term Program,

are taken.

The objective of enhancing the requirement reviews on the force

enhancement programs is to build up the military strength in a stable and

effective manner by ensuring objective validity and credibility of force

enhancement programs, which require substantial long-term budgeting.

Such force requirement reviews provides strong motivation for supporting

a reasonable and highly relevant Defense Mid-term Program, and for

helping military force requirement planning tasks to be developed in a

more systematic manner.


-----

**2. Ensuring Fairness and Transparency of Forces Enhance-**
**ment Programs**

Three large-scale foreign acquisition projects, namely the next

generation fighter jets (F-X), large attack helicopters, and maritime

operational helicopters projects, and several major research and

development projects, including the capabilities improvement of K1A1

tanks, production of FA-50 fighter jets, construction of Jangbogo-II and

-III submarines, were carried out in 2012. In order to execute such projects

in a fair and transparent manner, relevant organizations have been newly

established and institutions improved.

First, a whole-of-government working-level committee, composed of

relevant representatives from ten key administrative organizations, was

established in March 2012 in order to facilitate seamless coordination

among the relevant government bodies. Through this committee,

negotiation strategies regarding the next generation fighter jets (F-X) are

being reviewed at the governmental level, and courses of action regarding

trade-offs among governmental bodies and industrial cooperation

including the use of relevant core technologies are being established.

Second, the Task Force on Large-scale Air Capabilities Acquisition,

composed of military and civilian experts, was established in January

2012, and has been conducting objective reviews and inspections of

negotiation strategies and evaluation criteria regarding large-scale foreign

acquisition projects.

Third, evaluation groups for each Service were established in March

2012 in support of the testing and evaluation of the next generation fighter

jets (F-X), large attack helicopters, and maritime operational helicopters

projects. Each Service evaluation group is responsible for missions such as

testing and feasibility evaluation of relevant weapons systems and

providing technical negotiations support.

Fourth, the Guideline on the Evaluation and Negotiation of Research

and Development Proposals was substantially revised in April 2012, in

order to enhance fairness and transparency of evaluation of proposals on

domestic research and development projects. The main revisions include

changes in the list of items for evaluation, standardization of weight

proportions, institutionalization of field visits and proposal hearings, and


-----

expanding the scope of disclosure of evaluation results.

Fifth, efforts are being made to prevent unfair competitive activities

when making bids for contracts. If unfair competitive activities are

committed, the actor is required to provide an explanation. When such

explanation is not sufficient, sanction measures, such as imposing

disadvantages during the evaluation for selecting the model or registering

the bidder as an unscrupulous vendor and limiting the opportunity to bid

for other contracts, are being reviewed from various angles.

Sixth, emphasis is being placed on communicating with the public when

implementing force enhancement programs. Such communications

include providing open access to information on force enhancement

programs on the web and holding regular press briefings. Through these

efforts, the views and ideas of relevant experts and the public are being

reviewed and incorporated.

The various efforts and measures outlined above will not only enhance

fairness and transparency of forces enhancement programs but also signif
icantly contribute to the ultimate goal of promoting national interest.


-----

**Optimizing Defense**
**Resources through the Use**
**of Private Sectors**

In order to increase the efficiency of defense management, the MND has
been utilizing private sector resources for combat service support including
installation maintenance and management, supply, maintenance, and transportation. Moreover, diverse efforts are being made to optimize the limited
defense resources by introducing performance-based management techniques such as the military executive agency system and the Lean Six
Sigma, and by replacing military equipment with superior commercial goods.

**1. Increasing the Use of Private Sector Resources in Com-**
**bat Service Support**

Combat service support is an area in which the use of substitute private

sector resources can easily lead to enhanced management efficiency. The

ROK military has used various types of private sector resources, including

capital, manpower, and facilities, for combat service support.

In particular, modernizing military accommodations including barracks

and housing has been completed in an early manner through the use of

private resources; the level of medical service in military hospitals has

been improved by hiring civilian doctors and specialists; and the

proportion of civilian professors hired at the military academies of each

Service has been increasing in a gradual manner.

Additionally, the MND is continually looking for projects in the fields

of supply, maintenance, and welfare, in which the use of private resources

are feasible. For instance, starting from 2012, laundry and repair services

for supply units are being outsourced to civilian companies, and the

civilian vehicle leasing service was introduced in order to curtail the


**Section**
# 3


-----

number of vehicles owned by the military. In the future, a civilian-military

cooperative maintenance service project for Army and Air Force aircraft,

and a project utilizing civilian distribution networks for military

convenience stores will be pursued.

**2. Introduction of Performance-based Management Tech-**
**niques**

The MND has been improving its management efficiency by

introducing performance-based management techniques such as the

‘military executive agency system’ and the ‘Lean Six Sigma.’[1]

‘The military executive agencies’ aims to facilitate performance-based

management by allowing organizational, personnel, and financial

autonomy to the heads of organizations, and making those heads directly

responsible for the organization’s performance.

With regard to this system, the Act on the Designation and Management

of Military Executive Agency was enacted in 2008. Following the

enactment of this law, combat service support units such as publishing,

medical, supply, and maintenance units, were designated as military

executive agencies in order to promote efficient defense management.

A total of five agencies were first designated as military executive

agencies in 2009, and as of 2012, a total of 14 units and organizations

have been designated and are operating as military executive agencies.

After the designation of military executive agencies, assessments

showed that the customer satisfaction rate increased and management

efficiency improved due to the provision of customer-centered services

and the application of a systematic performance-management system. The

MND expects to transform its military units and agencies into

performance-based organizations by continuously expanding the military

executive agency system to all combat service support units.

The MND is also striving to achieve higher management efficiency by

introducing the Lean Six Sigma, which is an advanced management

technique proven to be successful in the commercial sector, into the

military. In 2011, a total of 56 tasks were successfully completed in the

areas of supply and maintenance of each of the Services with the


**1. Lean Six Sigma**

Advanced civilian management
technique that aims to achieve a leaner
business process by making the
necessary adjustments to business
processes, and to minimize the defect
rate of products and business results.
(Six sigma level: an advanced
management technique meaning three
to four defects out of one million cases.)

Lean Six Sigma Presentation of
Accomplishments (January 2012)


-----

assistance of external expert consulting agencies, which resulted in

reducing approximately 74 billion KRW. Moreover, an institutional basis

to continue pursuing such projects was established by enacting the

Directive on the Defense Management Innovation based on Lean Six

Sigma. By building on the successful execution of Lean Six Sigma

projects in 2011, additional efforts, such as creating an atmosphere in

which commanding officers of various units can manage their units with

innovative mindsets, were put forward in order to help management

innovation become an integral part of organizational culture. In 2012, the

application of Lean Six Sigma was expanded to tasks not only in logistics,

but also in all other areas of national defense including operations,

personnel, and training and education.

In order to ensure that post management review is conducted on those

tasks that have already been completed, and that projects pursued in 2012

are efficiently managed, an evaluation system in which retired experts are

utilized is also being operated.

With the assistance from external expert consulting agencies, the MND

plans to expand the Lean Six Sigma initiative to all areas of national

defense by 2013, and to conduct Lean Six Sigma activities on its own

starting from 2014.

**3. Increasing the Use of High Quality Commercial Goods in**
**the Military**

The MND has been increasing its use of high-quality commercial goods

that have been developed using advanced technologies from the civilian

sector. As a part of this effort, the MND has been scrutinizing and deciding

which items on the list of military specifications could potentially be

substituted with commercial goods. Moreover, the possibility of using

commercial goods is first reviewed from the development stage of military

goods. Also, the use of cost-effective and well-built commercial

equipment and goods are first considered prior to the acquisition of new

military goods.

In order to continually increase the use of commercial goods, the MND

has designated the Defense Agency for Technology and Quality (DTaQ) as


-----

the expert support agency for the systematic review of military specifi
cations. Moreover, in order to coordinate and control the military specifi
cations-related tasks of various military specifications management

agencies of each Service and the Defense Acquisition Program Adminis
tration (DAPA) in a comprehensive manner at the MND level, the Defense

Specifications Review Committee was established with the Vice Minister

of National Defense as the Chairman. This Committee, which is

responsible for reviewing and adjusting military specifications, strives to

actively introduce commercial goods into the military by relaxing and

eliminating certain specifications by applying the commercial Korean

Industrial Standards (KS)etc. The concept diagram depicting the

introduction of commercial goods is shown in Chart 8-9.

**Chart 8-9. Concept Diagram of Introduction of Commercial Goods**

**Maintain**
**Operational**
**Capability, Quality,**
**and Durability**

**Develop**
**Commercial Goods**
**and Technology**

**Promote**
**Competition among**
**Firms**

**Identify Substitutable**
**Military Goods /**
**Substitute with**
**Commercial Goods**


**Economic Effects**
**(Reduced Costs for**
**Defense Budget[)]**

In 2011, 1,243 out of the total 8,798 items in the military specifications

list were substituted with commercial goods resulting in the annual cost

savings of defense budget of more than 100.3 billion KRW.


-----

**Enhancing the Efficiency of**
**National Defense Resource**
**Management**

The MND is working hard to improve the efficiency of national defense
resource management in order to respond to the changes in the future environment under the constraints of limited resources. As such, the MND is
establishing an advanced consolidated military logistics system and developing a supply and transportation support system. Furthermore, the MND is
establishing a consolidated maintenance support system utilizing private
sector resources in order to ensure efficient management of combat equipment and improve the rate of operation. Moreover, efforts to centralize the
military installation-related tasks and organizations of the respective
Services into the Defense Installations Agency (DIA), and relocate and integrate military installations scattered throughout the country are being put
forward.

**1. Advanced Integrated Military Logistics System**

The MND is exerting its efforts to establish a highly efficient integrated

military logistics system to respond to the changes in the future

environment including reductions in budget and a decrease in the number

of eligible conscripts. The integrated military logistics system is

established by integrating the supply support systems of the respective

Services around the integrated logistic centers in each area. Establishing a

one-stop support system[1] by consolidating the scattered supply,

maintenance, and transportation facilities into a integrated logistics center

is also planned. In order to minimize the size of the integrated logistics

center, it will be maintained as a facility for essential military requirements

during peacetime, while maximizing the use of national and civilian


**Section**
# 4


**1. One-Stop Support System**

A customer-centered support system
that batch-processes related support
tasks from a single location.


-----

logistics facilities during wartime. The center will be equipped with

modernized and standardized facilities and equipment, and the

establishment of additional systems, such as the integrated logistics

information system and the automated field management system is being

planned. Chart 8-10 depicts the overall concept of the establishment of the

integrated logistics center.

The MND plan to establish a speed-based logistics system which can

rapidly provide munitions needed on the field based on regional integrated

logistics centers.

**Chart 8-10. Concept of Establishment of Integrated Logistics Center**

**Integrated Logistics Center**

Supply Integrated Logistics

Supply

Maintenance Transportation

Army

Navy Air Force

Integrated Logistics
Information System

Automated Logistics
Field Management
System

Depot
Management
System

Modernization Standardization Information Technology


Through these efforts, installation requirements, assets in stock, and

manpower requirements are expected to be reduced. The MND is planning

to implement a integrated logistics center pilot project to devise an optimal

course of action, and expand its applications in the future.

**2. Developing Supply and Transportation Support System**

**| Supply | The MND has developed and supplied high-quality, multi-**

functional uniforms and equipment in order to enhance the mobility,

convenience, and survivability of service members. As a part of such

effort, the ‘Project on Next Generation Defense Textile Development’ is


-----

being executed in coordination with the Ministry of Knowledge

Economy, and efforts to improve quality are being made by establishing

a comprehensive development plan for uniforms and equipment.

The new combat uniform was developed to provide greater mobility and

convenience for service members by applying ergonomic design, to better

fit the physique of service members by adjusting the measurement system,

and to significantly enhance the effects of camouflage. The functional

winter garment reflects cutting-edge civilian clothing technology, and has

improved waterproof, sweat elimination, and heat preserving functions.

The functional combat boots reflect an advanced shoe-manufacturing

technology in order to maximize combat support and individual comfort.

The boots have enhanced waterproof and sweat elimination functions

through their use of high-quality leather and other materials. Moreover, by

applying various civilian technologies, the boots are lighter and allow for

greater mobility and convenience, which in turn resulted in greater

satisfaction of service members.

Individual equipment is being developed with the goal of ensuring

enhanced individual combat execution capabilities and survivability by

improving their functions, weight, and bulletproof capabilities. The new

individual tent has a single-body, dome-like structure that has its main

body and floor connected and has improved waterproof and camouflage

functions. The new combat backpacks have, in addition to the main

backpack, attack and supplemental backpacks that can be attached and/or

detached depending on the types of operations and missions conducted.

Other individual equipment currently under development include

bulletproof uniforms, combat vests, combat glasses, and bulletproof

helmets.

As seen from the examples above, the efforts to improve the quality of

uniforms and equipment have increased the combat execution capabilities

and satisfaction of the service members. Moreover, issues that arose

during the process of quality improvements and procurements are being

closely analyzed in order to make the necessary improvements on the

research and development, procurement, and supply system.

In the future, the ROK military will continue to research and develop as

well as expand the supply of uniforms and equipment tailored to the battle

environment, and plans to collect service members’ opinions on those


New Combat Uniform

Functional Combat Boots

New Individual Tent

New Combat Backpack


-----

uniforms and equipment that have already been improved in order to make

any additional improvements on them as necessary.

**| Transportation | The MND has been developing a defense transpor-**

tation support system in order to effectively support combined and joint

operations. This entails developing a transportation support system that

can support the entire military by integrating the means of transportation

support carried out by each Service, ensuring an appropriate level of

transportation assets even during peacetime, and enhancing a tight

civilian, government, and military transportation coordination system.

For the development of a consolidated military transportation command

system, the MND is planning to increase the utilization of the Defense

Transportation Information System (DTIS). By using the DTIS, more

efficient and rapid transportation support will be possible as it allows for

integrated command and control over transportation assets of the Army,

Navy, and Air Force, as well as real-time tracking of military personnel

and cargo locations.

Moreover, efforts will be exerted to ensure that an appropriate level of

transportation assets is available for integrated military transportation

support even during peacetime, by first identifying those transportation

resources out of the integrated military transportation support list that

cannot be, or are limited in being, replaced in a timely manner with

civilian transportation resources.

To this end, a National Defense Transportation Association (NDTA)[2]

will be formed to establish a close civilian, government, and military

coordination system even during peacetime, and ensure the timely use of

civilian transportation capabilities during emergency situations.

Meanwhile, the ROK military has introduced a commercial vehicle

lease system, which leases commercial vehicles rather than purchasing

and maintaining commercial vehicles. The lease system was first

introduced by the MND Service Support Group in 2012, and is planned to

be expanded, pending the performance assessment, to other support units

that deal with administration, education and training. It is expected that

this system will not only reduce vehicle-related costs, but also signifi
cantly improve user satisfaction.


**2. National Defense Transportation**
**Association [(]NDTA[)]**

Composed of experts from the
government, military, and industry.
Performs the role of efficiently linking
the transportation related civilian,
government, military, and academic
basis in order to ensure the timely use
of civilian transportation capabilities
during wartime, peacetime, or
contingency.


-----

**3. Establishing Integrated Civilian, Government, and Mili-**
**tary Maintenance Support System**

Due to the advancements in defense science and technology, military

weapons systems are becoming more cutting-edge, sophisticated, and

complex. Maintaining both the conventional equipment and new cutting
edge advanced equipment with the limited maintenance assets of the

military is a challenging task. As such, for those weapons systems that

have constraints in terms of establishing a maintenance support system, an

integrated civilian, government, and military maintenance support systems

capitalizing on private sector resources and government institutions are

being developed. Moreover, in order to facilitate efficient combat

equipment maintenance and a heightened rate of equipment operation,

various efforts are being exerted to utilize private sector resources, such as

the expansion of performance-based logistics (PBL[3]), establishment of a

field maintenance support center, introduction of a spare parts prime

vendor support system, operation of spare parts requirement analysis

teams, and outsourcing of military maintenance depot.

PBL is a system designed to maintain an efficient rate of equipment

operation by having private firms, such as manufacturing companies, take

responsibility for maintaining and supplying advanced equipment, and

rewarding these firms based on their performance. An analysis on the PBL

pilot program for the KT/A-1 aircraft proved that the PBL system reduces

the procurement lead-time, increases the equipment operation rate, and

lowers the inventory management costs. As such, the PBL system is being

expanded to a variety of weapons systems including unmanned aerial

vehicles (UAVs) and fighter jets.

The plan to establish field maintenance support centers aims to attract

commercial maintenance firms scattered around the country into

designated areas within the field armies, thereby integrating these firms

into field maintenance support centers. These centers will be constructed

based on the cooperation among civilian, government, and military.

Considerable improvements in field maintenance capabilities are expected

from establishing maintenance centers out in the field which will allow for

rapid maintenance. Chart 8-11 depicts the general concept of the plan.


**3. Performance-based Logistics [(]PBL[)]**

A system in which the Service that
operates the equipment recommends
the performance criteria such as target
rate of operation; specialized companies
perform maintenance and supply on
those equipment; and the military funds
the companies based on their
performance.


-----

**Chart 8-11. Management of Field Maintenance Support Center**

**Current** **After Field Maintenance Support Plan Execution**

Support Centers **Western**

Scattered Field Maintenance
Support Centers

**Eastern**

**Western**

Consolidated Field
Maintenance
Centers by Areas


**Depot Maintenance** **Depot Maintenance**
**(Civilian+Military+Foreign)** **(Civilian+Military+Foreign)**

**Depot Maintenance**
**(Civilian+Military+Foreign)**

**Depot Maintenance**
**(Civilian+Military+Foreign)**


**4. Prime Vendor Support System for** The prime vendor support system for spare parts[4] is a type of contract
**Spare Parts**

that is designed to increase the rate of equipment operation by selecting a

A system in which a unit price contract
is signed with a prime vendor who has prime vendor who has established a logistics network that ensures the
established a logistics system. The
supplier then provides supplies using supply of spare parts in a stable and economic manner. A legal foundation
this logistics system as requested by the has been established through legislative initiatives for this system, and the
users. The amount of payment is
dependant on the reduction of system is expected to perform a major role in ensuring stable acquisition
procurement lead-time and rate of of maintenance parts for key weapons systems in the future. Moreover,
timely delivery.

spare parts requirement analysis teams are established and operated in

order to improve the accuracy of spare parts requirement estimates,

optimize the inventory level, and determine the appropriate level of budget

**5. Depot Maintenance** in consideration of rates of equipment operation, by forecasting spare parts

Conducting disassembly, inspection, requirements, and developing inventory management and calculation
repair, regeneration, remodeling, or
production using special maintenance models.
facilities, equipment, and tools when Moreover, the military is increasing the efficiency of depot
such tasks surpass the capabilities of
field maintenance. maintenance[5] across the Services by establishing a remote maintenance


-----

support system[6] using high-speed information communication networks,

hiring retired military maintenance depot personnel as temporary workers,

and benchmarking competent civilian technology and management

innovations to advance maintenance technology.

**4. Establishment of Total Life Cycle System Management**
**(TLCSM)**

The MND has established a total life cycle system management
(TLCSM) that efficiently and economically manages the total life cycle of

military supplies through the earlier development, acquisition, operation

and to disposal stages. In May 2011, the Comprehensive Action Plan on

Total Life Cycle Management was established for policy development and

institutionalization.

First, organizational and legal foundations for TLCSM have been

established. Through organizational restructuring, total life cycle

management organizations were newly established under the office of the

assistant chief of staff for logistics and in logistics commands of each

Service. Moreover, the Force and Resources Management Steering

Committee chaired by the Deputy Minister for Military Force and

Resources Management was newly established as a consultative body to

facilitate communication and to coordinate and control any conflicts or

disagreements in opinions among the relevant organizations. Also, by

revising the Act on the Management of Military Supplies and the Directive

on National Defense Force Development Task, the legal basis for total life

cycle management was established.

Second, the standardized task execution system was re-established to

integrate the types of military supplies with similar functions. Through this

initiative, the types of military batteries were simplified from 43 to 22

types and the types of military generators from 52 to 13 types, and these

simplified types have been designated as priority application items. In the

future, the interoperability and compatibility of military supplies will be

further enhanced by establishing and executing standardized execution

plans from the early stages of acquisition.

Third, depot maintenance and performance improvements that go


**6. Remote Maintenance Support**

Providing maintenance support or direct
maintenance activities by establishing a
video, voice, or text-based connection
between operating and maintenance
units via information communication
systems such as satellite
communications or by directly
accessing certain remote systems.


-----

through similar working processes such as disassembly and assembly are

being integrated. In 2011, approximately 12.3 billion KRW was saved by

integrating depot maintenance and performance upgrades for tracked

vehicles such as tanks and armored vehicles. In addition, approximately

360.6 billion KRW is expected to be saved by 2026. By revising the

Directive on National Defense Force Development Task and the

Regulations on the Management of Defense Acquisition Program, the

MND has institutionalized the integration of product improvement

planning and depot maintenance cycle earlier than expected, and is

reviewing the feasibility of expanding such integration initiatives beyond

the Army equipment to include the Navy and Air Force equipment.

Fourth, the Mid- to Long-term Comprehensive Development Plan on

the National Defense Force Support System was established and

task-execution-procedures were re-established by devising detailed annual

project plans. In 2012, a force support system[7] research and development

budget of five billion KRW was reflected in the budget for the first time,

and provided the basis for the development and distribution of essential

military supplies necessary for enhancing the combat strength of battalions

and below.

Moreover, a Life Cycle Sustainment Plan (LCSP) is being developed in

order to replace the Integrated Logistics Support Plan,[8] previously

established during the full scale development stage, to the total life cycle

starting from the early stages of research and development. These efforts

are expected to reduce the costs incurred during the total life cycle of key

equipment and materials including weapons systems.

**5. Establishing Efficient Military Installations Construction**
**System**

**| Consolidating Defense Installations-related Organizations | As of**

1 December 2011, the MND has consolidated the installations-related

organizations of the Army, Navy, and Air Force into the Defense Instal
lations Agency (DIA) directly under the MND, in order to centralize the

military installations-related tasks. The size of the organization was also

expanded from the previous two offices and ten branches, to one


**7. Force Support System**

A term that incorporates various
elements other than weapons systems,
such as equipment, parts, general
facilities, resource management, and
software infrastructure, that supports
the continued maintenance of combat
strength of service members and
weapons systems which are the subject
of combat execution. Previously called
non-weapons system, the term was
renamed as force support system on 1
January 2012.

**8. Integrated Logistics Support Plan**
**(ILS-P)**

A comprehensive plan to guarantee
integrated logistics support mission
execution and systematic management.
Included in the plan are integrated
logistics support factors, missions to be
accomplished for each acquisition
stage, missions for the office of primary
responsibility and the relevant offices,
detailed plan and budget for mission
accomplishment, test and evaluation,
and logistics support analysis plan.


-----

directorate, two offices, and seven branches, thereby enhancing the

organizational capacity in order to execute all installations-related tasks

of the military, and also perform research and development of military
specific construction capabilities including the construction of chemical,

biological, and radioactive-resistant facilities.

Moreover, in accordance with the concept of localized support, the

country was divided into six regions, and accordingly, six regional instal
lation groups were established under the DIA. Each regional installation

groups manage the installation projects of the local army, navy, and air

force units and support the management of national assets. The role of

each Service was adjusted so that they only submit requirement requests

for ongoing installation projects.

The consolidation of defense installation organizations will contribute to

the building of a combat-oriented military by reducing the administrative

burden of each of the Services and field units. Furthermore, the defense

installation related budget is also expected to be executed in a more

efficient manner due to the reorganization of the DIA into a more efficient

and specialized organization.

**| Establishment of the Defense Installation Integration Information**

**System | The MND has established and is operating the Defense**

Installation Integration Information System in order to efficiently

execute defense installation related tasks. The Defense Installation

Integration Information System aims to manage the defense installation

assets during their installation life cycle[9] in an integrated manner.

This system focused on the management of military real estate until

2009, but following a military-wide installations status investigation in

2010, it was expanded to incorporate the management of defense instal
lation assets including buildings and other structures. As of late 2011, the

information system is being used to manage installation assets, which

amount to approximately 50 percent (76 trillion KRW) of the defense

assets.

Moreover, in order to increase efficiency, the MND plans to standardize

military construction project management and introduce systematic and

pragmatic management mechanisms, by adding the military construction

management functions in the Defense Installations Information System in


**9. Installation Life Cycle**

Requirement Request Design
Construction Maintenance and
Management


-----

2012 for a more efficient management of military installation construction.

**6. Efficient Execution of Military Installation Relocation**
**Projects**

The MND is consolidating and relocating military installations scattered

around the country with the year 2030 set as the target year for completion

in conjunction with the military structure reorganization plan of the

Defense Reform Basic Plan.

The relocation plans are established in consideration of various environ
mental factors. First, the number of service members and units are

expected to be reduced as a result of reorganization of military structures,

which aims to transform the previously conventional military structure

into an information and technology-intensive military structure.

Second, the dispersed military installations are being considered as a

hindrance to urban development with cities nearby continuing to expand.

As such, when establishing relocation plans, the MND gives priority for

the units in urban areas to be relocated to the suburbs if possible, and tries

to minimize the requirements for purchasing new land by maximizing the

use of military land. Moreover, efforts are exerted to forecast and manage

any conflicts by considering the city planning of local governments.

Third, while previous military installations were dispersed in small sizes

to ensure adaptability and survivability of strong points, the development

of early warning systems and unmanned security systems now allows for

the consolidation of military installations.

Relocation of military installations requires substantial resources. In

order to minimize public burden, the MND plans to utilize the resources

gained from selling its land that is no longer needed due to the relocation

plans to purchase land and build installations.

Increased efficiency in unit management and operations is expected

from relocation of military installations. Moreover, by resolving civil

appeals and conducting relocation in consideration with local development

needs, more amiable relations with local governments, population, and

military can be expected.


-----

**Developing the Defense**
**Economy in Support of the**
**National Economy**

The ROK government has continuously been promoting defense industries
with the goal of strengthening self-reliant national defense capabilities. The
defense industry has been a solid foundation in building a combat missionoriented advanced military. Moreover, the development of the defense
industry is making substantial contributions not only to the advancement of
science and technology, but also to the growth of the national economy in
the form of technology transfer and creating jobs.

**1. Contributing to the National Economy Through In-**
**creased Export of Defense Industry**

The defense industry adds to the national economy by creating

employment and export, and provides important means of national

security by supplying defense products to the military. Moreover, the

advanced core technologies developed to fulfill the high functional

requirements of the military has transferred to other technological areas

through technological integration. This in turn supports the development

of industries and the national economy. As such, the MND has been

putting forward its efforts to promote the defense industries in order to not

only acquire advanced capabilities, but also to facilitate the development

of industries and the national economy.


**Section**
# 5


-----

**| Defense Industry Exports | The total defense industry exports in**

2011 amounted to 2.38 billion USD based on the approved export. Such

outcome is twice that of 2010 which was 1.188 billion USD, and ten

times that of 2006. Chart 8-12 shows the overall trend in export growth

after 2005.

**Chart 8-12. Defense Export, 2005-2011**

**Unit: 100 million USD**

30

25 **23.82**

20

15

**11.66** **11.88**
**10.31**

10 **8.45**

5 **2.62** **2.53**

0

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

The number of target export countries grew from 42 in 2005 to 84 in

2011, and the range of export items also changed from parts for

ammunitions and maneuver, and aircraft equipment to fully manufactured

items such as submarines and trainer aircraft. Chart 8-13 shows the list of

export items and partner countries.

**Chart 8-13. Export Items and Partner Countries, 2005-2011**

|Year|Items|Country|
|---|---|---|
|2005|Aircraft parts, basic trainer aircraft, and ammunitions|US, Indonesia, and 40 other countries|
|2006|Aircraft parts, K-9 artillery parts, and ammunitions|US, Turkey, and 45 other countries|
|2007|KT-1 trainer aircraft and A-10 main wing production|Turkey, the Philippines, and 44 other countries|
|2008|Next generation tank production technology, 155mm ammunitions parts, and K-9 artillery parts|US, Turkey, and 57 other countries|
|2009|Commutations equipment, submarine depot maintenance, and submarine combat system|US, Iraq, and 72 other countries|
|2010|Trainer ship, fighter jet engine, armored vehicle, and ammunitions|US, Malaysia, and 62 other counties|
|2011|Submarine, T-50 trainer aircraft, fighter jet depot maintenance, armored vehicle parts, and ammunitions|US, Indonesia, and 82 other countries|


-----

The increase in defense industry exports is also a result of active

marketing efforts. In the October 2011 Seoul Aerospace and Defense

Exhibition (ADEX), a total of 313 companies from 31 countries, and 105

key individuals from 52 countries participated. The efforts for overseas

market development were also enhanced. In 2011, the ROK held a joint

defense industry and logistics committee meeting with ten countries, and

participated in twelve international exhibitions and conferences, including

the United Arab Emirates (UAE) International Defense Exhibition and

Conference (IDEX 2011).

**| Defense Industry Support Policies | Between 2000 and 2007, the**

global defense expenditures increased by approximately 50 percent, as

the demand for smart weapons based on cutting-edge technologies, such

as unmanned robots and aircraft, increased. However, with the 2008

global financial crisis, the defense budgets of developed countries were

radically reduced. The national defense budget was reduced as spending

increased to stimulate the economy, and as a result, the flow of resources

into the defense industry also began to diminish. As the defense industry

environment changed as outlined above, the competition among defense

industry firms to increase their overseas market share has become even

fiercer. Considering such circumstances, the ROK government has

devised various policies and developed strategies to provide systematic

support to the defense industry.

First, the ROK government is working hard to boost the competitiveness

of defense industry products and companies. For example, the government

is guaranteeing the quality of products by awarding the Defense Quality
(DQ) Certification Mark[1] for high-quality defense industry export

products. Also, it is supporting the education and training of experts in the

defense industry and facilitating meetings with chief executive officers
(CEOs) in order to enhance the companies’ export capacity. In addition, the

government is expanding financial support to small and medium-sized

businesses for defense industry exports.

Second, the government is developing defense industry export markets

and promoting marketing activities. The ROK government has established

a tailored export strategy, optimized to the demands of customer countries

by region, and has been conducting market development activities in


**1. Defense Quality [(]DQ[)] Certification**
**Mark**

Introduced in January 2012, the DQ
Certification Mark aims to offer support
for small and medium-sized businesses,
which have high quality products but
lack marketing capacities, by providing
government-level quality assurances.


-----

future effective markets in Africa, the Middle East, and Latin America.

Moreover, it has been facilitating high-level military exchanges and

cooperation, such as the meetings with the foreign military attachés, and

enhancing the foundations for a defense industry export market by

promoting the Seoul ADEX as a world-class defense industry exhibition.

Chart 8-14 shows the defense industry export strategies and partners by

region.

**Chart 8-14. Defense Industry Export Strategies and Targets by Region.**

**Western Europe** **Eastern Europe** **Asia**
Offset Trade, Joint Research Joint Production and Local Production, **North America**
and Development, Financial Support, Technology Transfer, Offset Trade, Joint Research
Maintenance Service, and Training Equipment, Ships, Armored Vehicles, and Development,
Advanced Trainer Aircraft and Parts and Trainer Aircraft Maintenance Service, and

Advanced Trainer Aircraft

**Africa** **Middle East** **Central and South**
Compensation Trade, Local Industrial Cooperation, **America**
Production, Military Vehicles, Technology Transfer, Aircraft, Governmental Sales and
and Combat Equipment Tanks, and Self-propelled Financial Support, Patrol

Guns Ships, and Military Vehicles


Third, the government is strengthening the industrial basis that supports

the defense industry export. The development of national defense science

and technology is a prerequisite for the competitiveness and systematic

development of the defense industry. As such, the MND has been exerting

efforts to increase the defense research and development capabilities and

establish the foundations for future acquisition by expanding the level of

investment in research and development from 6.6 percent of the defense

budget in 2011 to 7.1 percent in 2012. Moreover, when partner countries

request additional assurances for the stable implementation of the contract,

the ROK government is operating the government-to-government (G2G)[2]

sales support system in which the government mediates or supervises the

export sales.

Furthermore, in order to ensure the sustainability of weapons system


**2. Government to Government [(]G2G[)]**
**Sales Support System**

A system in which the DAPA or Korea
Trade-Investment Promotion Agency
(KOTRA) provides, mediates, or proctors
the defense industry export
transactions between domestic firm and
the government of the partner country.


-----

management, the government is putting forward efforts to institutionalize

early on the Defense Exports Follow-up Logistics Support System,[3] which

entails providing logistical support elements, such as materials, facilities,

and personnel, to partner countries. Also, other efforts to enhance the

industrial foundations in support of defense exports, including the

development of Defense Export-Import Support Information System[4] in

order to provide real-time defense industry trends and marketing

information and facilitate information exchange among relevant offices,

are being put forward.

**2. Green Growth and Energy Conservation**

**| Green Growth in National Defense | Facing global environmental**

changes, including global warming and an energy crisis, the MND is

pursuing a policy for Green Growth.[5] For the Green Growth in national

defense, the MND established the Comprehensive National Defense

Green Growth Implementation Plan in 2009 and actively pursued the

development of green defense technology, reduction of greenhouse

gases, and greener military barracks.

First, the development of green defense technology is focused on 14

technologies in three areas, including the use of eco-friendly green energy

technology in national defense,[6] weapons systems based on low-carbon

future energy,[7] and military management and development based on

modeling and simulation.[8] So far, a total of four technologies including the

conversion of energy material from antiquated munitions, and military

green bio composite material technology have been developed.

Additionally 10 more, including submarine fuel batteries, and a

high-maneuver hybrid propellant system for special mission vehicles, are

under development.

Second, in order to reduce greenhouse gas emission, efforts to establish

and utilize a carbon management information system for military units,[9]

replace light bulbs with LED lights, install and expand the distribution of

low-carbon vehicles are taking place. In 2012, a carbon management

information system for military units will be introduced to the entire

military, and 30 percent of incandescent and fluorescent lights were


**3. Defense Exports Follow-up**
**Logistics Support System**

A system that provides logistical
materials, facilities, and personnel to
customer countries at the government
level for the maintenance and
management of defense products
exported by defense industry firms.

**4. Defense Export-Import Support**
**Information System [(]D4B[)]**

An information system built with the aim
of providing support to defense industry
exports. One of the Business
Competitiveness Support Systems
selected as an electronic government
support project of the Ministry of Public
Administration and Security and
developed jointly by three agencies:
namely, the Ministry of Knowledge
Economy, DAPA, and Small and Medium
Business Administration.

**5. Green Growth**

A harmonious growth of economy and
environment through the reduction of
greenhouse gases and environmental
pollution and creation of new growth
source and employment using green
technology and clean energy.

**6. Eco-friendly Green Energy**
**Technology in National Defense**

Producing and storing eco-friendly
energy such as solar energy and
exploiting such energy in national
defense.

**7. Weapons Systems Based on**
**Low-carbon Future Energy**

Transitioning from previous weapons
systems that rely on fossil fuel to
systems that minimize carbon emission
and environmental pollution.

**8. Military Management and**
**Development Based on Modeling and**
**Simulation**

Simulated training system, which
minimizes energy consumption while
simulating the same effect as a real
military training.
*[ Modeling and Simulation: Simulating ]
and modeling real natural events using
computers.


-----

**9. Carbon Management Information**
**System for Military Units**

A system that aims to reduce
greenhouse gas emission by analyzing
the level of emission and setting
reduction goals per unit.

**10. New and Renewable Energy**

Energy that converts the existing fossil
fuels for use or utilizes renewable
energy such as solar, water, and
geothermal energy.

Jeju Civilian-Military Complex Port


replaced with LED lights. Moreover, by 2013, a total of 129 new and

renewable energy[10] production facilities related to solar street-lights,

solar-heated water, and geothermal heating and cooling will be installed,

and 50 percent of office vehicles will be replaced with low-carbon

vehicles such as electric or compact cars.

Third, pursuing greener barracks means encouraging greener lifestyles

of service members in the barracks. This involves emphasizing green

growth education and training, natural environment protection, waste

minimization, resource recycling, and increased use of bicycles.

The use of fossil fuels in the military could lead to problems such as

resource depletion, environmental pollution, and increased costs. In order

to resolve these problems, the MND will continue to pursue green defense

growth. Through such efforts, the MND plans to develop an advanced

national development management system in which resources are

recycled, the environment is protected, and national defense is

strengthened.

**| Eco-friendly Military Installations | When relocating to or building**

new military installations, the MND is applying the concept of

eco-friendly Green Growth to the equipment, facilities, and surrounding

environment, from the planning stage to the final construction stage. In

particular, this concept will be actively pursued during the construction

of a civilian-military complex port. For the Jeju Civilian-Military

Complex Port, solar and tidal electric generation will be used for energy

sources, and waste water and material recycling construction techniques

that use natural cyclical resources will be applied.

**| Energy Conservation | The MND has been practicing energy**

conservation by setting conservation goals per unit. For fuel

consumption in particular, the goal is set to conserve 5 to 14 percent of

the allocated fuel in consideration of the changes in fuel prices.

Moreover, the MND has also been identifying and publicizing ideas that

can help preserve energy during everyday tasks while guaranteeing the

essential requirements for the sustainment of combat strength. Also,

fuel-efficient education and training as well as video teleconference,

including the integration of similar exercises and training, utilizing


-----

simulation and scientific training equipment, and conducting cyber
education, are actively being employed to conserve fuel.

Energy conservation in national defense is being implemented in consid
eration of government policies and the requirements of the military. The

MND is monitoring the recommended indoor temperature and partici
pating in the ‘one day of the week no vehicle’ initiative. Moreover, the

MND is encouraging the conservation of water and electricity, efficient

operation of equipment, and eco-friendly and economic driving.


-----

**1  Military Housing constructed in August 2011, Pocheon,**
Gyeonggi Province
**2   Service members enjoying recreational activities in**
their barracks after work hours
**3  Service members reading during their leisure time for**
self-development
**4  A utility helicopter equipped with emergency medical**
kits for prompt evacuation of military patients
**5** _The Spring Concert by the Armed Forces Symphony_
Orchestra (MND, February 2012)

|1|2|
|---|---|
|4|3|
||5|


-----

##### Chapter 9
**Improving Working**
**Conditions for Service**
**Members**

Section 1  Improvements in Welfare
Section 2  Modernization of Military Housing
Section 3  Innovation in the Medical System
Section 4  Advancement of Military Culture
Section 5  Ensuring a Productive Working
Environment


254
270
274
280
285


-----

**Improvements in Welfare**

Military personnel welfare is a crucial factor in determining the quality of life
and morale of service members and maintaining intangible combat power.
The MND has established and is systematically implementing a comprehensive plan to improve the welfare of service members, and is strengthening
various support measures for cadres who are retiring from the military and
starting a new career. In addition, the MND provides military pension
programs that reflect the unique characteristics of service members so that
retired cadres are able to sustain a stable life after their service to the military.

**1. Improving Welfare of Service Members**

Based on the ‘Basic Act for Military Personnel Welfare,’ the MND

confirmed the ‘Basic Plan for Military Personnel Welfare’[1] with a

Presidential approval in April 2009 and presented a future vision for

military welfare. Based on this plan, the MND has established a compre
hensive welfare policy and is systematically implementing this policy.

**Key Contents of the ‘Basic Plan for Military Personnel Welfare’: [(]4 Major Welfare Areas[)]**

-  Basic welfare: ensuring basic living conditions for service members so that they can
concentrate on their military duties
-  Improvement in the salary and pension systems

-  Family welfare: alleviating the difficulties of military family members
-  Ensuring academic support for children of military personnel, providing age-appropriate
welfare services

-  Advanced cultural welfare: realizing an enriched cultural life that matches social development.
-  Providing support for self-development and ensuring physical training conditions in all
weather.

-  Welfare infrastructure: establishing an efficient welfare support system that meets the needs
of service members.
-  Improved management of welfare facilities and welfare funds


**Section**
# 1


**1. ‘ Basic Plan for Military Personnel**
**Welfare’**

According to Article 6 of ‘the Basic Act
for Military Personnel Welfare’ (effective
as of March 1, 2008), the Minister of
National Defense sets up a ‘Basic Plan
for Military Personnel Welfare’ every five
years and carries out consultations with
the heads of central government
ministries and agencies and receives
final approval from the President.


-----

**| Ensuring Basic Welfare | Military service members have unique**

characteristics that are distinct from the regular workforce in society.

First, service members are assigned with tasks to defend the nation and

protect the lives and properties of the people during crisis, which

requires them to risk their lives. Second, service members often confront

difficulties in maintaining a stable family life because of requirements to

maintain a seamless readiness posture, work in remote areas, and

frequently relocate their houses. Third, most service members retire early

when their living expenditure is at the highest level (i.e., ages 45-56).[2]

Fourth, they are given limited job opportunities after retirement due to

the limitations in utilizing the skills they attained through military service

in society.

The MND is currently engaged in close consultations with the relevant

government ministries and the National Assembly to address such issues

and reflect the unique characteristics of the service members in devising a

military welfare policy. The following are the main topics being pursued.

The MND is refining the military salary system so that the unique

characteristics of military service, such as their ranks, duties and working

environment are reflected in the salary system. In particular, the MND is

exerting its efforts to raise the salary of career service members

tantamount to that of conglomerates, and to expand various allowances to

heighten the morale and passion of those service members who are serving

under difficult conditions.

In 2012, the MND newly introduced an additional incentive for NCOs

serving in company-level or below combat units, and increased the air

service allowances for cargo aircraft pilots. In addition, the MND

increased the incentive pay for veterinary officers from 70,000 KRW to

150,000 KRW, which is the same amount that regular government

employees receive. Lieutenant colonel level personnel serving in

commanding officer positions or department heads have been receiving

specific duty pay since 2009. However, the range of lieutenant colonels

receiving this pay has been expanded to those serving in staff positions

starting in 2012. Also, duty officers who are assigned to battalion level or

below units are being paid service allowances since 2012.

In addition, the MND plans to create new benefits, such as service

member allowances, separated family allowances, and family college


**2. Highest Level Expenditure Period**

The period in which the household
expenditure increases to the highest
level due to child support and other
living expenses associated with this
period in life.


-----

tuition allowances, and offer frontline area allowances, sea duty pay

allowances, air crew allowances and hazardous duty allowances in consid
eration of the risk of duty and stationed areas.

The MND has improved the pay system for enlisted service members to

meet the necessary expenses for their daily activities on and off post. To

this end, the monthly salary for enlisted members has been increased to

97,500 KRW (corporal-level salary in 2012), and regular leave allowances

have been increased by 20% as well. Also, the MND has increased

hazardous-duty allowances and sea duty pay allowances to improve

welfare conditions for those enlisted members who are under special

circumstances as well as newly created vessel mobilization allowances.

Aside from the efforts to make monthly salaries and allowances for

enlisted members more realistic, the MND has been providing accident

insurance service for service members during leaves and off post visits

through the Nara-sarang card service[3] since March 2010, and the amount

of insurance that can be received has been extended in July 2011 as well.

In addition, through consultation with the Ministry of Education, Science

and Technology, measures have been taken so that enlisted members who

have to pay interests on student loans can defer these payments until

completion of their military service. Especially, starting from 2012, for

those enlisted members who received loans that can be redeemed after

employment, the government is providing support to assist these service

members in paying off the interest payments on this loan during their

military service.

**| Improve Family Welfare | Family welfare is an essential element for**

the service members to maintain morale and devote themselves to their

duties. Family welfare has been included and consistently developed as

one of the four welfare areas in the first ‘Basic Plan for Military

Personnel Welfare,’ which was established in 2009.

Improving the housing conditions is an important element in military

family welfare. Accordingly, the MND is strengthening its efforts to

improve housing conditions for the officers and NCOs. Above all, the

MND has been continuously improving the deteriorated housing facilities,

and expanded its lease payment aid for officers and NCOs who are not yet

able to move into the military housing. Since 2012, the MND has


**3. Accident Insurance Service**

An insurance service that provides up to
60 million KRW to active-duty personnel
or switchover service members
(conscripted police, combat police,
conscripted fire fighters, prison guards
working for the Ministry of Justice) in the
event of injury or death while they are
off post (for example, on leave or
overnight passes). This insurance
automatically becomes effective when
they register the Nara-sarang card as
the account into which their wages are
paid.


-----

increased its lease payment aid from 40-100 million KRW to 50-140

million KRW per household depending on the region.

Moreover, considering that only around 30% of career service members

are home-owners, the MND has been consistently improving its support

plan to help career service members purchase their own homes. With the

revision of ‘the Special Act Related to the Bogeumjari Housing Construction’

and its enforcement ordinance on 17 August 2010, service members who

received special Bogeumjari housing benefits were partially exempted

from being subjected to the compulsory move-in and mandatory residency

policy. In addition, the ‘Rule of Housing Supply’ was revised on 25 August

2011 to enable service members, who have served in the military for more

than 10 years, to submit housing applications for houses in all parts of the

country including the capital area regardless of where they currently live.[4]

Furthermore, the MND is making efforts to provide well-established

family welfare support which will help service members maintain a

harmonious balance between their workplace and home, and between

work and leisure activities. In October 2008, the MND signed the

‘Agreement for Providing Professional Family Support Service to Service

Members’ Families’ with the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Family

Affairs and based on this agreement, is providing the Happiness Support

Service for Service Members’ Families,[5] which links the local family

support centers with the relevant local units nationwide, in order to

support various cultural and educational programs and provide counseling

services for military families. After conducting pilot projects of this

service in 34 units from 2008 to 2009, this service has been expanded and

is currently being provided to all units since 2010.

On the other hand, to promote the birth rate of the military family

members, the MND introduced the customized welfare system[6] in 2011 to

provide approximately 1.5 million KRW as a cash award to the families

that give birth to their third child or more. The MND is pursuing to expand

the benefit to 3 million KRW starting in 2013.

Additionally, in order to improve child care conditions, the MND has

been annually acquiring child care facilities in conjunction with the

military housing construction plan. At the same time, the MND is striving

to transition military child care facilities, which are currently operated

mainly by the private sector, into public facilities to provide a higher


**4. Abolition of the Current Address**
**Regulation for Submitting Housing**
**Applications**

‘The Rule of Housing Supply’ set by the
Ministry of Homeland and Maritime
Affairs, which stipulates that one must
reside in the same area as the housing
construction in order to submit housing
applications, was amended to allow
military personnel to submit
applications for houses in any area,
regardless of their current address
(August 25, 2011). This amendment was
made in consideration of the unique
characteristics of military service, which
requires relocation every 1 or 2 years.

**5. The Happiness Support Service for**
**Service Members’ Families**

A service that helps to prevent family
conflicts by offering counseling services
and educational and cultural programs.
It also provides customized emergency
services, such as babysitting and
day-care services, for double-income
families.

**6. Customized Welfare System**

A system that helps public officials
choose the appropriate welfare benefits
according to their preferences and
needs within the given budget.


-----

quality child care service. The annual plan for acquiring child care

facilities is shown in Chart 9-1.


**Chart 9-1. Annual Plan for Acquiring Child Care Facilities**


**Unit: No. of facilities**

|Type|Total|Current|Planned|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|
|Total|9 9|19|31|17|8|23|1|


In addition, a total of 12 dormitories in 10 cities have been provided for

approximately 2,200 military children attending schools in different

regions, while separated from their parents. The MND also has a plan to

construct new dormitories that can accommodate 600 students in Wirye

New Town.

Career service members have long faced the challenge of providing

quality education for their children as they frequently relocate and often

work in small and remote areas. In consideration of such disadvantages in

receiving education, approximately 450 military family children a year are

allowed to take advantage of the Special Admissions Program for entering

college. In 2010, the MND expanded the Special Admissions Program for

military family children to include middle and high school admissions,

and it has also offered college admission workshop tours and college

entrance consulting services to ensure that more children from military

families enjoy this benefit. In addition, in order to establish a stable

educational environment for the military family children who frequently

relocate due to the uniqueness of military service, the MND is providing

support to military families by allowing their children to enter or transfer

to elementary, middle, and high schools regardless of the student quota (up

to 2%-5%).

Since 1993, the Defense Scholarship (Hoguk Scholarship) has been

offered to children of military personnel who are enrolled in colleges. It

was revised and improved in 2010, and is now given to enrolled students

based on their academic performance. Aside from this, the Armed Forces

Welfare Agency awards congratulatory cash prizes to military children

when they get accepted into college.


-----

**| Advanced Cultural and Welfare Support | Physical and mental**

strengths are essential elements for men and women in uniform to

successfully carry out their duties and missions. The MND has actively

provided support to meet the sporting and cultural needs of the service

members as well as recreation and leisure activities through which they

can recover from the fatigue caused by their working environment such

as repetitive training, working in remote areas, and maintaining a

readiness posture.

Currently, military bases are short on standard sporting facilities and

physical fitness equipment. Therefore, the MND plans to build indoor

gymnasiums in every regiment-level unit as well as battalion-level

sporting facilities in which sporting activities such as weight training,

basketball, volleyball and other popular sports can be played.

In addition, in order to help service members rejuvenate while they are

on leave, the MND is pursuing a memorandum of understanding (MOU)

with private enterprises to grant military service members free admission

to amusement parks as well as tickets to soccer and basketball games, and

provide them with membership benefits to use private condominiums. The

MND plans to gradually extend the complementary use of private welfare

facilities and the enterprises to which membership benefits can be applied.

**| Establishing an Efficient Welfare Infrastructure | In 2010, the**

MND established the Armed Forces Welfare Group, integrating each

welfare agency of the Army, Air Force, and the Navy, and re-established

the management system of welfare facilities to provide additional

welfare benefits to the service members by improving the management

and environment of each type of facility. It has continued to improve the

environment of the military post-exchanges (PX) and renovated the old

condominiums in Hwajinpo and Daecheon as well as the Seogwipo hotel

to improve leisure conditions for service members. In addition, military

PXs have been established in remote areas so that service members and

their families are no longer left out in enjoying these welfare benefits,

and new construction and repair works on the unit’s welfare facilities are

ongoing as well. In the future, the MND plans to enhance the welfare

infrastructure for service members by improving military PX facilities

and effectively executing welfare funds.


MND-Everland Agreement on Free
Admission for Service Members


-----

**2. Improving the Support for Retiring Service Members**
**Starting a New Career**

**| New Career Support Policy Direction | To active service members**

serving today, retired service members represent their future image.

Providing national support for retiring service members to settle into the

social workforce has a significant impact on the morale of active-duty

service members, as well as strengthening the national defense

capabilities. Accordingly, the MND and each military Service are

making efforts to establish and implement a new career support policy

that is systematic and effective.

The new career support policy is being implemented in consideration of

the number of years an applicant has served in the military. For service

members who have served for more than 10 years, the MND has created

job positions within the military as well as the public and private sectors to

allow smooth job transition, while providing job transition support

programs that are tailored to the applicants in order for the applicants to be

competitive in the job market. For the short and mid-term service

members, who served their mandatory service for less than 10 years, the

MND offers basic employment education courses and front area education

courses, and provides recruitment information.

**| New career support education system | The MND is exerting its**

efforts to provide new career support education in a systematic manner.

It is strengthening the basic education courses for retiring service

members and providing personalized education to enhance competi
tiveness in the job market. In addition, the MND is reviewing an option

to introduce the career counseling system for cadres to allow them to

plan ahead for their careers.

Strengthening new career basic courses The MND is reinforcing the

new career basic courses to help retiring cadres relieve their anxieties

towards the future. The MND is providing education programs for

short-term cadres who are awaiting discharge from the military after

serving in remote front-line areas. For the mid-term service members, a

one week education program is provided at the MND Employment

Support Center, and for those who cannot participate in this program,


-----

three-day education courses are offered at the local employment centers

under the Ministry of Employment and Labor (MOEL). For the long-term

service members, a two week education program is provided at the Korea

Education and Research Institute for Patriots & Veterans. Currently, new

career support education is mostly outsourced to the civilian sector.

However, the MND plans to directly provide integrated education

programs once the MND New Career Education and Research Institute
(MNCERI, provisional name) is established in 2014.

Currently, new career support education is mainly provided during

specific education periods. When the construction of the MNCERI is

completed, the MND will review the option of expanding the scope of the

new career support education program by making the education courses

such as life planning and self-development courses available even during

military service. The current draft plan for the new career education

system is shown in Chart 9-2, and its implementation will be confirmed

once the verification process is completed.

**Chart 9-2. New Career Support Education for Long-Term Service Members [(]Draft[)]**

|Classifi- cation|During Military Service|Col3|Col4|Col5|New Career Support Education Period|Col7|After Retirement|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Time Period|While in Service||2 years before retirement|18 months before retirement|1 year before retirement|1 year before retirement - retirement|After retirement|
|Lead Agency|MND|MND, MOEL|MND|MND|MND|MND|Ministry of Patriots & Veterans Affairs (MPVA)|
|Course Name|Self development education|Life planning|Career consulting|New Career Basic Education|Consulting / Management|Individual capacity building|Consulting + professional education|
|Main Contents|Decided by each unit|1-2 days|1 day (6 times)|5 days|1 year|1 week - 32 weeks|1 week - 32 weeks|
||Online Support|Concerned Unit (Division level)|MNCERI|MNCERI|MNCERI|MNCERI|Korea Education and Research Institute for Patri- ots & Veterans|



User-centric New Career Education The MND is providing various

programs in order to enhance the competitiveness of retiring cadres. In

particular, the MND has developed and applied tailored new career

educational programs in coordination with other government agencies


Basic Employment Courses for Mid-term
Service Members (Mock Interviews at
MND Employment Support Center)


-----

such as the Ministry of Patriots and Veteran Affairs and Ministry of

Employment and Labor.

For such programs, the MND created 28 courses in 2011 including

security guard instructor, legal administrator, personality education

instructor, and psychological therapists. In 2012, the programs were

expanded to 41 courses including security guard team leader, career

consultant, job manager and FTA instructor. In the future, the MND will

add and adjust the professional education courses by examining the

employment trends of the enterprises and the job demands.

Career Counseling System Two Years Prior to Retirement The MND

plans to implement a phased career counseling program that will be

provided for retiring cadres by private institutions two years prior to

retirement to allow them to plan ahead for job transition. The career

counseling services will be provided on trial for a select number of

long-term service members who are not eligible for receiving pension, and

it will be gradually expanded based on the results of the trial. The ongoing

phased career counseling program is shown in Chart 9-3.

**Chart 9-3. Three-phase Career Counseling Program**

|Classification|Col2|Contents|
|---|---|---|
|Phase 1|Aptitude Comprehension|Understanding oneself by taking various diagnoses on one’s tendency, vocational interests and motivations|
|Phase 2|Career Development|Focusing on career options and end-states based on one’s aptitude and career.|
|Phase 3|Life Planning|Preparing for various domains of life to enhance the quality of life and plan for the second life with pride.|



**| Expansion and Creation of Job Positions | The MND has**

endeavored to create job positions in which retiring service members can

employ their military specialties and experiences. However, the reality is

that there are not enough job positions to meet the total demand. In 2011,

14,046 jobs were secured for long-term service members who have

served over 10 years, but this is only 62% of the total 22,800 job

positions that are in demand.[7] The status of the secured job positions is

shown in Chart 9-4.


**7. Calculating the demand of job**
**positions [(]22,800[)]**

This estimate considers the number of
retiring service members who desire to
be reemployed and the average years of
reemployment. It was calculated by
multiplying ‘the number of retiring
service members by rank’ with ‘the
number of rotation years’ and ‘the
employment rate.’


-----

**Chart 9-4. Status of Secured Job Positions for Long-term [(]over 10 Years[)] Service Members in 2011**

**Total Demand**
**Shortage of job positions** **22,800 (100%)** **Secured job positions**
**8,754 (38%)** **14,046 (62%)**


These job positions are created for discharged service members with an

abundance of military expertise and experience and they include contracted

military civilian positions, full-time faculty positions in military educational

institutions, and faculty positions at the security and military science

departments in civilian colleges. For those who are highly experienced in

military training, the MND has secured positions such as supervisors and

control instructors at the Korea Combat Training Center; reservist ROTC

instructors; and teaching positions at specialized high schools. Job positions

outside of the military such as specialized security-related positions, in

which a former service member’s military expertise can be utilized, are

included. In the future, the MND will make government-wide efforts to

continue expanding job opportunities to veterans in the public and private

sectors in close cooperation with the relevant government ministries and

organizations. The employment status of discharged long-term service

members (as of 2011) is shown in Chart 9-5.

**Chart 9-5. Employment Status of Long-term [(]over 10 Years[)] Service members [(]jobs offering**
**four major insurances[)]**

**Unit: Number of employed**

4,000

3,000

1,500

1,000

0

Retired service members Re-employed service members

**4,230** **4,235**

**3,611** **3,684**

**3,411**

**2,465**

**2,323**

**2,118** **2,147**

**1,651**

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

*[ Retired service members: discharged within the year     ]*[ Re-employed service members: employed as of 2011]


-----

**| New Career Support System | The MND has been developing a**

new career support system for retiring officers and NCOs in collabo
ration with the Ministry of Employment and Labor and the Ministry of

Patriots and Veterans Affairs.

In January 2011, the MND revised the ‘Military Personnel Management

Act Enforcement Ordinance’ to establish a legal basis for military officers

who served for longer than the compulsory service period to be able to

receive new career support. In February 2011, it revised the ‘MND

Directive for Military Job Transfer Support’ to allow the 3-month overseas

training program to be extended to the period of job transfer support

education and enabled service members who are not able to complete their

new career support education to use days off and after duty hours for

additional education.

In addition, the MND revised the ‘Act for Retiring Service Members

Support’ in coordination with the Ministry of Patriots and Veterans Affairs,

which is the lead agency on this matter. With this, the MND plans to

provide a new career support funds to service members serving a

mid-term, and support counseling and education regarding employment

and entrepreneurship for the discharged short-term service members.

**| Other Employment Support Services | The MND, through the**

MND Employment Support Center, has provided retiring service

members with opportunities for employment and starting a business

through employment counseling and tours of leading enterprises. For

this, the MND has held an annual job fair in April for retiring service

members, and an employment and recruiting event every month. In

addition, through the online employment information system, it provides

useful real-time services such as online counseling services as well as

various types of information on job opportunities, new business start-ups

and enterprises. The employment support procedure of the center is

shown in Chart 9-6.

In addition, the MND is also engaged in various advertizing activities

through mass media such as inviting human resources (HR) managers at

different companies to provide policy briefings and roundtable

discussions; holding ROK Forces TV policy discussions; sending e-mails

to the top executives of enterprises; airing and printing radio and


Job Fair for Retiring Officers (Seoul Trade
Exhibition and Convention)


-----

newspaper ads to advertise the marketability of the retired service

members.

**Chart 9-6. Employment Support Procedures by MND Employment Support Center**



Registration


Information -  Information Provisions

**Recruiting Companies**

- Job Information

- Company Profile
provision

**MND Employment Support Center**
**(Employment Information System)**
**www.mndjob.or.kr**

- Consulting Service / Recommendations

- Network Management

- Information Provisions

**Job Seekers**

- Registration by Job
Seekers

- Filling Out Resume
Information


**| Reintroduction of the Military Service Additional Point System |**

The MND has reintroduced the Military Service Additional Point System

to instill pride into the heart of retired service members who have

faithfully served their duties and to compensate the loss of opportunities

due to mandatory military service. The nation is obligated to provide

appropriate compensation for the people who have faithfully served their

duties and find ways to support them. The Military Service Additional

Point System is a core system that compensates for the contributions

made during military service and assists service members to adapt to

society after being discharged.

The previous system provided an extra five percent to the retired service

members who served for more than two years when they took the

employment tests. It was initially introduced in 1961 and abolished in

accordance with the Decision on Unconstitutionality by the Constitutional

Court in December 1999. Since then, negative results including the sense

of victimization regarding the military service has become prevalent and

the willingness to serve duties has decreased.

At the 18[th] National Assembly, the Assembly members recognized such

problems and proposed a legislation for the Additional Point System for

Military Service, but it was not adopted. The contents, reflecting the

purpose of the Decision on Unconstitutionality in 1999, included

providing additional points within 2.5% of the individual score, limiting

the ratio of points receiving individuals being accepted to amount to 20%

of the total accepted, and restricting the period or number of times for

receiving additional point benefits. The MND will prepare a reasonable


-----

measure and closely consult with the concerned ministries, and endeavor

to reintroduce the Additional Point System for Military Service by

sufficiently gathering public opinion and forming a consensus among the

public.

**3. Military Pension System Reflecting the Uniqueness of**
**Military Service**

The military pension system has been introduced to contribute to a

stable living condition and enhanced welfare of the career service

members by compensating them or their families if career service

members retire after their faithful service period; retire or die due to

physical or mental problems; or receive medical treatment due to diseases

or injuries received while on duty.

During the early stage of introduction, the military pension system was

operated as a part of the Government Employees Pension System.[8]

However, since 1963, it has been independently operated and separated

from the Government Employees Pension System to enhance the military’s

morale and welfare, and reflect the uniqueness of military service.

**| Characteristics of the military pension system | Service members**

work under harsh conditions while having to risk their lives, and they

retire early due to the short age limit, usually between 45-56 when

expenditure is at an all-time high. The military pension reflecting such

distinct characteristics of military service is intended to provide social

insurance and livelihood security as well as compensation for their

national services.

The military pension plays a crucial role in encouraging service

members to focus on their duties without having to worry about their lives

after retirement while enduring the harsh work conditions. In particular,

the military pension can also be seen as a national security expense that is

necessary to secure a capable workforce in the military.

Considering such characteristics, the developed countries have also

operated military pension systems separately from their government

employee pensions. They also provide more preferential benefits to the


**8. Operated as part of the Government**
**Employee Pension Act**

The Government Employee Pension Act
regulates the overall contents regarding
the government employee pension,
while independently distinguishing the
chapter on military personnel as
Chapter 4 and regulating calculations of
the contribution payment and the period
of service differently from general
government officials (enacted in January
1960)


-----

military pension in terms of starting age, contribution ratio and payment

level compared to other public pension programs. The comparison of

military pension systems by country is shown in Chart 9-7.

**Chart 9-7. Comparison of Military and Public Pension Systems in Major Countries**

|Classification|Col2|UK|Germany|U.S.|Australia|Italy|France|ROK|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Military Personnel|Retirement Age|55|53−61|40−60|55|40−60|45−58|45−56|
||Age for Initial Pension Payment|55|Retirement Age Reached|Upon Being Discharged|55|60|Upon Being Discharged|Upon Being Discharged|
||Individual / Governmental Contribution Ratio(%)|0/Entire Amount|0/Entire Amount|0/Entire Amount|0/Entire Amount|8.8/24.2|7.85/ Shortage of Pension N/A|8.5/8.5|
||Maximum Payment Rate(%)9|5710|72|100|80|90|80|76*|
|Government Employees|Retirement Age|65|60−65|x|x|60−65|65−70|60|
||Age for Initial Pension Payment|60|Retirement Age Reached|60|55|60|60|60−65|
||Individual / Governmental Contribution Ratio(%)|3.5/ Shortage of Pension N/A|0/Entire Amount|0.8/0.8|2−10/ Shortage of Pension N/A|8.8/24.2|7.85/ Shortage of Pension N/A|7.0/7.0|
||Maximum Payment Rate(%)|75|72|80|70|80|80|62.7*|



*[ In the ROK, the military pension is based on monthly salary and the government employee pension is based on ]

standard monthly payment (1.5 times of the monthly salary).

**| Efforts to Stabilize the Financial Status | The first military pension**

recipients appeared in 1961, during the early stage of introduction, and

since the military pension program was not able to secure enough

funding, most of the pension payments have been supplemented by the

national budget. There was not enough funding because of the contri
bution payment exemption made twice during the service year prior to

1959 when the pension system was nonexistent[11] and going through the

Korean and Vietnam Wars. Military pension recipients and payments by

year are shown in Chart 9-8.


**9. Maximum Payment Rate**

A maximum payment rate sets the limit
on the maximum amount of pension to
be paid and it is calculated with the
maximum service period that can be
accredited for the pension. The total
amount of pension is calculated by
multiplying ‘base pay’ by ‘payment rate.’

**10. Maximum Payment Rate of the**
**United Kingdom [(]UK[)]**

In case of the UK, the standard pay of
military personnel accredited for
pension is higher than the government
officials (combat/technique allowances
included). Therefore, the total amount of
pension to be paid is similar to, or even
higher than that of the government
employees.

**11. Addition of Combat Experience**
**Period**

The combat period is calculated as three
times the regular service period, and
contribution payment is exempted for
twice the combat period. (Military
Personnel Pension Act, Article 36,
Clause 3)


-----

**Chart 9-8. Military pension recipients and the payments by year**

|Classification|1963|1973|1980|1990|2000|2010|2011|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|No. of Pension Recipients|354|11,004|24,722|39,900|55,418|75,677|78,103|
|Payment (KRW 100 million)|7|88|682|3,906|10,431|22,068|23,140|
|Government supplement fund (KRW 100 million)|0|3|416|2,715|4,569|10,562|12,266|



In order to stabilize the military pension budget, the MND has consis
tently improved the system in line with the reform direction of other

public pensions such as increased contribution funding, introduction of the

income assessment system, and revision of the pension estimation

standards. The MND is currently revising the Military Service Members

Pension Act to include an increased contribution payment.

In addition, the MND is also making efforts to increase the Military

Pension Fund and generate more revenues. Since 2011, the MND has

entrusted the surplus funds to the Pension and Funds Investment Pool,[12]

which is a professional fund management agency, in a bid to enhance the

professionalism and effectiveness in fund management.

**| Enhancing the Efficiency of the Pension Payment System | The**

MND is making efforts to enhance customer satisfaction and adminis
trative efficiency by making precise payments and connecting the work

process between the MND and administrative agencies.

In the past, service members who served for less than 19 years and 6

months were not eligible for a military pension but a lump sum allowance.

However, since August 2009, with the introduction of the ‘System

Interconnecting the Accumulated Periods among Public Pensions,’ they

have also been able to receive pensions through its integration with the

national pension. The MND has expanded the applicants for integrated

pension by providing guidance on the integrated system to the majority of

short-term discharged service members who are eligible for integrating

public pensions. The MND expects that implementation of the system will

contribute to ensuring the stable aged-life for short-term service members.

The establishment of the MND Financial Management Corps, which


**12. The Pension and Funds Investment**
**Pool**

A system entrusted to the professional
Asset Management Company to be
operated by integrating the surplus
budget of each pension and funds for
effectively operating the pension and
funds (led by the Ministry of Strategy
and Finance)


-----

was established on 1 February 2012, has enabled more professional and

effective work performance as the retirement payment duties, which had

been distributed to the finance corps of each Service, have been integrated

to the MND Financial Management Corps.

In addition, the MND plans to make efforts to enhance the convenience

of pension recipients by enabling various types of certificate issuances as

well as customer services through the online military pension website
(http://www.mps.go.kr) and the window for customer service in the

community center.


-----

**Modernization of Military**
**Housing**

The MND has gradually improved the obsolete and confined housing to
reflect a growing trend of social development as well as enhancement of
living standards and public expectations. Particularly, to create a convenient
living environment for service members, it has designated the modernization
project for barracks, military housing and officers’ quarters as a major task
to be implemented. By doing so, the MND is creating a more attractive and
beneficial image of the military.

**1. Upgrade to Modern Barracks**

The MND is refurbishing the military barracks to ensure a convenient

living environment for the new-generation service members by removing

the gap between the growing environment to which they were previously

accustomed and the military living environment in which they are

currently living.

The project for military barracks modernization is being carried out in

phases based on the Unit Relocation & Integration Plan. During Phase 1
(2003-2009) of the project, the obsolete and confined military barracks in

the front and remote areas constructed prior to 1982 were first improved.

During Phase 2 (2010-2012), the barracks constructed after 1983 were

renovated and expanded.

In detail, the living area per person was expanded from 2.3m[2] to 6.3m[2],

and a platoon-sized, floor-type room is being replaced with a squad-sized,

bed-type room. In addition, convenience facilities such as cyber

knowledge information rooms, fitness centers, and common rooms have

been established and female-only facilities were added as well. The

development progress and changes to military barracks are shown in Chart

9-9.


**Section**
# 2


Barracks at the Navy Education &
Training Command

9[th] Division Medical Detachment


-----

**Chart 9-9. Development Progress and Change of Military Barracks [(]Before and After[)]**

**Before 1960** **1960−1970** **1970−1982** **1983−2003** **After 2004**

Tents/ Type A barracks Integrated Modernized Barracks (Rahmen
quonsets (Block structure, barracks (Rahmen barracks (Rahmen structure, pitched

slate roof) structure, flat structure, pitched roof)

- Platoon-sized roof) roof) - Squad-sized
rooms - 2 squads to 1 - 1 to 2 squads rooms

platoon - Floor-type - Bed-type

- Convenience - Female-only
facilities facilities


Type A Barracks Constructed during 1960-1970 Modern Barracks Constructed After 2004

In 2011, the MND invested 746 billion KRW to improve barracks in 51

Army battalions and 159 barracks in the Navy and the Air Force. In 2009,

it completed the refurbishment of 275 buildings in the General Outpost
(GOP), and sea and river shore areas. Apart from this, it invested 2.1278

trillion KRW to carry out Build-Transfer-Lease (BTL)[1] projects for

constructing Army barracks for 188 battalions as well as 138 Navy and Air

Force barracks.

As such, the MND is carrying out its modernization project for barracks

by employing both government and private finances. From 2003 to 2011,

it invested 6.6382 trillion KRW to improve total of 623 battalions and

1,758 buildings, and in 2012, it invested an additional 637.4 billion KRW

to improve 43 battalions and 85 buildings.

**Chart 9-10. Modernization Project Progress [(]as of December 2011[)]**

**Demand and Completed**


**1. BTL**

A business model by which a private
business builds a facility, transfers the
ownership and leases the facility to the
government upon the completion of its
construction to recover invested capital.

A Barrack Room in 12[th] Division/
Engineering Battalion

Air Force 16[th] Fighter Wing Barrack

|Type|Total Demand|Completed|Col4|Col5|Col6|2012 Plan|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Sum|Funded|BTL|Others|Funded|Others|
|Army Barracks (battalion)|666|623|351|188|84|27|16|
|Navy/Air Force Barracks (building)|886|801|591|138|72|85|-|
|GOP/Sea and River Shore (building)|957|957|957|-|-|-|-|


-----

**Invested**

|Type|Col2|Total Demand|Until 2003|2004−2010|2011−2012|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total||76,491|700|59,941|15,850|
|Army Barracks|Funded|37,228|-|26,412|10,816|
||BTL|17,023|-|17,023|-|
|Navy/Air Force Barracks|Funded|13,432|-|8,398|5,034|
||BTL|4,360|-|4,360|-|
|GOP/Sea and River Shore|Funded|4,448|700|3,748|-|



**2. Modernization of Officer and NCO Housing**


**Unit: KRW 100 million**


To reflect a growing trend of social development as well as

enhancement of living standards and public expectations, the MND has

improved the obsolete and confined housing for officers and NCOs to

meet with the average living standard of the citizens and to instill pride

into the hearts of the officers and NCOs who are playing a leading role in

our military.

**| Military Housing | The MND implemented a plan to improve the**

obsolete and confined military housing to the average living standard by

2012 through expansion of the floor area per household to 80-126 m[2]. In

addition, it is employing both government-funded and private-financed

project models to facilitate the early improvement process. In doing so,

the MND attempts to break away from the previous policy that relied

heavily on construction to secure housing, and flexibly cope with the

variable circumstances such as the military organizational reform by

expanding the purchase of apartments and support for lease funding.

In 2011, it invested 48.4 billion KRW to improve 748 units and thereby

completed improvement works for 71,524 units in total, which amounts to

99% of the total demand. The current status of military residence

improvement is shown in Chart 9-11.

In the future, the MND will continue to put efforts to modernize military

housing as more housing will become obsolete and more officers and

Aerial View Drawing of Yong-in Military
Housing NCOs will be recruited due to the military organizational reform.


-----

**Chart 9-11. Current Status of Military Residence Improvement [(]as of December 2011[)]**

**Demand and Completed**

**Unit: Household**

|Total Demand*|Completed|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Completed (%)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Sub-total|Constructed|Purchased|Leased|BTL||
|71,891|71,524|33,273|11,966|4,504|21,781|99.5%|



*[ Total demand estimated in consideration of the total quota for officers in 2012]

**Invested**

**Unit: KRW 100 million**

|Type|Total Demand|until 2003|2004−2010|2011−2012|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total|57,958|27,847|28,936|1,175|
|Constructed|22,186|20,201|1,275|710|
|Purchased|10,145|6,794|3,351|-|
|Leased|2,328|852|1,011|465|
|BTL|23,299|-|23,299|-|



**| Quarters for Officers and NCOs | The MND plans to secure**

111,446 officers’ quarters by 2012 considering the increased number of

entry-level officers and NCOs based on the military organizational

reform. Along with the new construction of officers and NCO quarters,

the MND also plans to renovate the confined quarters (less than 49.5 m[2]).

Newly constructed quarters will have single bedrooms (23.1m[2]) to allow

officers and NCOs to have adequate personal space.

In 2011, it invested 262.8 billion KRW to secure 5,182 quarters and

thereby completed improvement works for 102,878 quarters, 92.3% of the

total demand. The current status of improvements made to officers’

quarters is shown in Chart 9-12.

**Chart 9-12. Current Status of Officers’ Quarters Improvement [(]as of December 2011[)]**

**Demand and Completed**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Unit: Quarter|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total Demand|Completed||||Completed (%)|
||Sub-total|Constructed|Renovated|BTL||
|111,446|102,878|69,288|12,840|20,750|92.3%|



**Invested**

**Unit: KRW 100 million**


Townhouse-type Officers’ Quarters
(11[th] Brigade)

Apartment-type Officers’ Quarters
(2[nd] Operations Command)

|Type|Total Demand|Until 2003|2004−2010|2011−2012|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total|35,333|12,551|17,086|5,696|
|Constructed|23,504|12,551|6,797|4,156|
|Renovated|3,589|-|2,049|1,540|
|BTL|8,240|-|8,240|-|


-----

**Innovation in the Medical**
**System**

The MND has improved the military medical system in an effort to enhance
the health of service members and improve their combat readiness. In
particular, in the wake of a traumatic death in which a trainee died of meningitis at the Army Training Center in April 2011, it has taken a series of
measures to significantly improve its medical system. As a result, the ‘20122016 Military Medical System Improvement Plan’ was developed by the civilian-military joint committee focusing on reinforcing the prevention system,
improving service members’ accessibility to treatment, expanding medical
capabilities of the division-level or below units and strengthening cooperation with the civilian sector. Through this plan, the MND is making every
effort to realize a military medical system that is easily accessible and reliable for our service members.

**1. Strengthening the Disease Prevention System**

In the past, the military medical system had mainly focused on treatment

rather than prevention, therefore leading to recurrences of infectious

diseases within the military. To avoid such trials and errors, the MND is

implementing the following policies to focus on strengthening the system

for disease prevention.

**| Expanded Vaccination Programs | The previous vaccination**

program covered only seven diseases, including hepatitis A and malaria.

Since 2012, a vaccine for meningitis, which has a high fatality rate, was

newly added to the list, expanding the total coverage to eight diseases. In

addition to the vaccination program for medical and food-handling

personnel, the types of vaccines for all service members were expanded

as well to cover a total of four disease including meningitis, epidemic


**Section**
# 3


-----

parotitis, and influenza, in addition to tetanus, which was already

covered by the previous program.

**| Hygienic Barrack Environment Focused on Prevention | For**

trainees who are especially vulnerable to infectious diseases, personal

hygienic items such as masks and hand sanitizers have been stocked to

meet the demand. Through the expansion of shower facilities and

laundry rooms, the MND is creating a more pleasant and hygienic

environment at the training centers. In addition, the Office of Prevention

Medicine was newly established within the Army Training Center, the

largest training facility in the entire military, to improve the hygienic

environment of the training center and carry out prevention of infectious

diseases.

**| Strengthened Capabilities for Military Medical Researches | To**

date, due to the lack of infrastructure for conducting researches in the

medical field unique to the military such as infectious diseases in the

military and chemical, biological and radiological (CBR) warfare, there

have been shortcomings in developing medical policies suitable for the

military environment. To address this issue, the MND designated the

Armed Forces Medical Research Center, previously under the command

of the Armed Forces Medical Command, as a Military Executive Agency

in January 2012 to promote autonomy and accountability in conducting

medical research. In addition, a civilian expert on infectious diseases was

selected as the head of the research center in an effort to transform the

organization into a more research-oriented medical center.

**2. Accessibility of Treatment for Service Members**

To allow easy access to medical services, the MND has arranged various

programs for service members.

**| Health Counseling for New Recruits | For new recruits, individual**

health counseling with a battalion-level surgeon is now required to

identify any disease at early stages. The counseling service is provided to


Military Medical Research Seminar at
the Armed Forces Medical Research
Center

Individual Health Counseling Service for
New Recruits


-----

new recruits on two occasions; first during the initial group training for

new recruits and second as required or as necessary. After being

counseled by a surgeon, a new recruit is provided with treatment service

as necessary or may request access to higher-level medical institutions

for further treatment.

**| Medical Education Program for Supervisors | It is most important**

to draw the interest of supervisors in order to allow service members to

easily gain access to medical services. To raise the awareness of the

commanders on medical matters, the MND, through the Armed Forces

Medical School, provides medical education programs to officers

enrolled in Command Management Programs at the Army, Navy, Air

Force Colleges to become familiar with proper measures that are

necessary in case of a patient occurrence.

**| Improvements to Education and Training Guidelines for New**

**Recruits | In the past, new recruits showed a tendency of refusing**

treatment in fear of receiving penalty points for not fulfilling the required

training hours, which often led to aggravation of the condition. To

address such issues, the MND has revised the penalty guidelines for new

recruits to create favorable conditions for receiving adequate treatment.

For example, the previous guidelines of the Army stipulated that

non-fulfillment of 40 training hours was subject to a failure in training.

However, the Education and Training Guidelines for New Recruits have

now been revised to flexibly allow a maximum of 80 hours of

non-fulfillment in consideration of average admitted hours for each type

of illness.

**| Remote Treatment Services in Rural and Isolated Areas | Units**

with geographical and environmental disadvantages such as GOPs are

limited in receiving timely medical treatment. To improve such

conditions, the MND is implementing a pilot project for providing

remote treatment service utilizing Internet Protocol Television (IPTV)[1]

technologies. The areas subject to receiving remote treatment are those

with inclement weather conditions such as fogs, heavy snow and rain or

with limited access to medical service. In order for the service members


Remote Treatment Project at 21[st]
Division GOP Battalion (February, 2012)

**1. Internet Protocol Television [(]IPTV[)]**

A multimedia system that allows users
to receive multimedia contents such as
data and video on their TV sets using
the Internet protocol suite (two-way)
over Broadband Integrated Service
Digital Network.


-----

in those areas to receive the same treatment as the professional treatment

service provided at the division-level medical detachments, the MND is

procuring equipment necessary to treat patients in remote areas. In

particular, it is establishing a system in which patient information such as

vital signs, electrocardiogram (ECG), oxygen saturation, electronic

stethoscope data and medical images can be transmitted in real time to

medical specialists at the division-level medical detachments. Currently,

this project is being partially carried out in some units of the Army and

the Air Force, but it will be reviewed in the future whether to further

expand the areas of operation based on the results of the pilot project.

**| Shuttle Bus Service for Treatment | To make personal treatment**

more accessible for the service members, civilian-contracted shuttle

buses run regularly to military hospitals with flexible schedules, allowing

service members to receive medical service whenever they need. Since

November 2011, the shuttle bus service has been provided on a trial basis

between Goyang Army Hospital and the First Corps areas and between

the Hongcheon Army Hospital and the Third Corps areas. It is scheduled

to expand the area of operations to cover six front corps starting in the

second half of 2013.

**| Medical Check-up for Corporals | The medical check-up service for**

Corporals provides medical examinations complying with the standards

of national health insurance to Corporal-level service members who are

in the mid-point of their mandatory service in order to allow them to

maintain their health during the service period and return to the society

after completion of their service. In 2012, the Army implemented this

project on a trial basis for its nine front divisions and ten rear divisions,

and the Navy and the Air Force have done so for their entire forces. With

the revision of the Act on Military Health and Medical Services, the

project is expected to be expanded in full-scale in 2013.


Shuttle Bus Service to Military Hospitals


-----

**3. Expanding Medical Capabilities for Division-level or Below**
**Units**

The MND has discarded the three-step treatment system (battalion
regiment-division), which was previously the most commonly used

process by service members when receiving treatment, and streamlined

the process to be two process (battalion or regiment-division) to allow

more prompt treatment.

Battalion and regiment-level medical offices now focus on

strengthening capabilities for identifying patients and providing first aid.

In order to create an environment in which surgeons can fully concentrate

on treatment, the ‘Directive on Armed Forces Medical Mission’ was issued.

In addition, emergency medical technicians were staffed to facilitate

treatment and evacuation of patients in case of an emergency. Moreover,

essential medical equipment such as stethoscope, oxygen saturation

monitoring devices and automatic cardioverters were newly stocked. The

new recruit training centers and front units such as GOPs, where there is a

high demand for medical support will be reinforced and staffed with more

medical personnel.

As for the division-level medical detachments, more medical personnel

such as internists, orthopedists and dentists have been staffed to expand

the area of treatment to cover from medical examination to rehabilitation.

By 2016, a total of 200 surgeons will be reinforced in stages to complete

the treatment process at the division level. Also, more medical NCOs such

as nurses, dental hygienists, physical therapists and emergency rescue

technicians who are certified in their respective specialties will be

recruited to further strengthen the medical capabilities of division-level

medical detachments.

**4. Strengthening the Network with the Private Sector**

While recognizing the need for cooperation with the civilian entities in

order to advance the military medical system, the MND is carrying out the

following tasks.


-----

**| Strengthened Cooperation with Private Hospitals | The MND is**

pursuing separate approaches in cooperating with private hospitals for

the Armed Forces Capital Hospital and other military hospitals. First, the

Armed Forces Capital Hospital, as the highest-level hospital in the

military, is enhancing its expertise and overall capabilities by

cooperating with top-class university hospitals. To this end, the MND

signed the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Seoul

National University Hospital in April 2012, laying the groundwork for

cooperation on education and exchange of medical personnel. Especially,

with Operation Dawn of Gulf of Aden in 2011 during which Captain

Seok Hae-gyun suffered gun wounds, a need for the military to provide

trauma therapy has been raised. Accordingly, the MND plans to establish

the Armed Forces Major Trauma Center within the Armed Forces Capital

Hospital by 2014 in partnership with a private hospital. Likewise, other

military hospitals have plans to enhance their medical capabilities by

establishing a network for co-treatment with university hospitals in their

respective regions. In addition, all military hospitals have started to

operate treatment cooperation centers since 2012 to ensure prompt

treatment for civilians.

**| Cooperation on Military Emergency Medical System | To**

strengthen capabilities for providing on the scene first aid, the MND is

improving the military emergency medical system in a way that makes

the best use of civilian capabilities. Particularly, it is establishing a

system that utilizes civilian infrastructures such as 119 Emergency

Service to mitigate the problem of delayed dispatch in case of an

emergency taking place during vulnerable hours. To this end, the MND

signed the MOU on Establishment of Emergency Medical System with

National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) in January 2012 in

efforts to strengthen cooperation on information sharing and emergency

evacuation between the regional medical units and 119 Emergency

Service. In addition, with the support of professional agencies such as

119 Emergency Service and the Korean Red Cross, the MND is

expanding its education programs that are tailored to the needs of the

service members and aimed at enhancing their first-aid capabilities.


MOU on Medical Cooperation between
the MND and Seoul National University
Hospital (MND, April 2012)

CPR Training Provided by NEMA (MND,
April 2012)


-----

**Advancement of Military**
**Culture**

In the military, continued tension after work hours, a lack of comforting rest,
and unsatisfactory welfare in addition to on-the-job stress have been the
causes of deteriorating combat power. In response, the MND has set the
goal of ‘establishing combat-oriented military’ that the Korean people trust
and love. It is actively advancing a barrack culture that fosters individual
autonomy, responsibility, and communication. Advancing the barracks
culture refers to actively improving training and education, barracks life, and
the welfare environment in order to generate combat power by promoting a
positive service attitude and barracks life.

**1. Promoting an Advanced Barracks Life**

The MND is fostering a motivating work environment for its service

members and a barrack atmosphere abound with ‘mutual respect and

consideration’ through establishing a barrack culture of individual

autonomy, responsibility, and communication. Based on these, the MND

is actively pursuing to advance the barracks culture to realize the goal of

establishing combat-oriented military.

First, in order to instill pride and unity in carrying out military service

and realize a dynamic barracks life, the MND is enhancing the unit spirit

based on the unit’s history and tradition. In addition, the MND is fostering

a unit culture that is both full of life and high morale by realizing a

barracks life filled with vibrant energy and heightened awareness of

combat missions and by instilling the basic discipline in each service

member.

In order to eliminate abuses and wrongful customs that originated from

incorrect practices, and to embody barracks atmosphere filled with mutual

respect and consideration, the MND instituted and has enforced ‘Barracks


**Section**
# 4


-----

Life Code of Conduct’ since 2011. Moreover, in order to eradicate verbal

abuses and to make use of refined words in daily life, the MND has

developed and is executing the ‘Barracks Language Education Program,’

using media such as visual education materials.

In addition, in order to guarantee sufficient rest for service members, the

MND is devoting efforts to secure an autonomous barrack life by putting

measures in place such as applying improved daily schedules and allowing

service members to share the dorms with their classmates. Furthermore,

by expanding chances for day passes and overnight leaves, the MND is

providing a satisfactory work environment in which service members can

fully devote themselves to training and exercises.

Also, to promote communications among the ranks in the barracks, all

service members including the commander are participating in various

team building events.

**2. Improving the Accident Prevention System**

The MND operates various accident prevention programs in order to

prevent accidents that involve human lives and to lay a solid foundation

for establishing a combat-oriented military by stable force management.

As one of the measures for better identifying service members who need

special care, the MND has executed a ‘new personality test’ in four steps,

which is developed to reflect the ROK Armed Forces’ unique character
istics. The personality test has been used with the newly assigned enlisted

members below staff sergeants since 2009. It was subsequently expanded

to be used at physical exams for conscription and for incoming trainees

since 2010. Since 2011, the MND has added personality tests designed for

officers, NCOs, and trainees.

The MND is producing 600 new suicide-prevention officers at battalion

level to act as ‘suicide prevention guardians.’ In 2012, the MND enhanced

suicide prevention activities by hosting suicide prevention seminars and

drafting comprehensive prevention measures.

The number of barracks-life expert counselors increased from 95 in

2011 to 159 in 2012 to increase counseling opportunities for all service

members. Also, the MND commenced the ‘Armed Forces Life Line’ Armed Forces Life Line


-----

program in December 2011 that has expert counselors on 24-hour standby

and online counseling services.

The ‘Green Camp,’ designed to assist the service members having

trouble transitioning into service, was transformed from a division-level

program to a corps-level one. Through this change, the MND was able to

bolster the program’s efficacy by using civilian counselors.

Furthermore, in order to improve the ability to manage and execute

necessary measures regarding the service members unfit for service, the

MND is operating the ‘Military Service Fitness Evaluation Board.’ The

ROK Army conducted four boards since 2009, the Air Force one board

since April 2010, and the Navy and Marine Corps one board each since

October 2011.

**3. Improving the Individual Rights of Service Members**

In recognition of the progress in individual rights in society, the MND is

also restructuring ordinances and systems and strengthening necessary

educational processes in order to improve the individual rights of service

members. In addition, the MND is distributing individual-rights education

materials made in easy-to-access formats, such as movies and cartoons, to

inspire the sense of individual rights in our service members.

**| Refining the Laws and Regulations Related to Individual Rights |**

In July 2011, the MND instituted the ‘Armed Forces Individual Rights

Operations Directive’ that specified the necessary issues to conduct

individual rights tasks, such as individual rights counseling and current

condition survey, and investigations into individual rights violation

incidents.

As the individual rights education system shifted from being conducted

in schools to unit-level training starting in January 2012, the MND revised

the ‘Armed Forces Individual Rights Operations Directive’ in February

2012. The directive made it mandatory for unit commanders to complete

online individual rights education courses in order to cultivate individual

rights awareness and inform them of systems and knowledge related to

individual rights. On the other hand, in order to protect the individual


The Green Camp (Music Therapy)


-----

rights of the service members imprisoned for discipline, the MND

established the ‘Directive on Admittance into Guardhouses and Treatment

of Detainees’ in February 2011.

**| Improving Education on Individual Rights | The MND is**

strengthening individual rights education given to officers and NCOs so

that service members individual rights can be substantially protected and

secured.

First, in order to enhance individual rights awareness for all cadres, the

MND initiated the individual rights subject as part of the MND online

education center, and it provided individual rights education online to

approximately 9,000 cadres per year, including commanders at different

levels.

Second, the MND is proceeding with customized education fitted to

personnel functions to about 300 members who are involved in individual

rights-related work, including medicine, criminal investigation, law, and

corrections.

Third, the MND conducted a Service-wide individual rights education

tour[1] in order to foster individual rights knowledge and enhance individual

rights awareness of commanders and officers at the 27 corps-level and

above units in each service.

Fourth, the MND conducted a special individual rights education to the

marines in April 2011 in order to eradicate individual rights violations

such as physical abuses and other abusive behaviors that continue to occur

in the Marine Corps.

Fifth, although commanders are conducting individual rights education

within their units, individual rights education at the current state is not

sufficient because of the lack of available individual rights experts and

education materials. To resolve this problem, the MND heightened service

members’ individual rights sensibility by distributing individual rights

education materials in the format of movies and cartoons. This effort

reduced unit commanders’ burden of conducting individual rights

education. Individual rights education movies were distributed to

battalion-level units in all Services as of November 2011. To improve the

ease of access, these movies were posted on the MND Intranet and IPTV.

Furthermore, individual rights education comic books were provided to


**1. Service-wide Individual Rights**
**Education Tour**

Inviting individual rights experts from
inside and outside the military to
provide education and information on
the relationship between command and
individual rights; the roles of
commanders (officers and NCOs) in
ensuring individual rights of service
members; the cases of individual rights
violations; and the relief system.

Service-wide Individual Rights Education
Tour (3[rd] Army HQ, April 2012)

Individual Rights Cartoon (Platoon, AT
_EASE)_


-----

platoon-level units as of February 2012.

**| On-site Instructions for Individual Rights Operations | The MND**

conducted on-site visits to a total of 28 units between October and

December 2011. During these visits, the MND investigated activities

implemented to prevent individual rights violations and provide relief to

victims, management practices in vulnerable facilities, and the current

state of unit-specific individual rights education. Through these efforts,

the MND was able to raise awareness among officers and NCOs

involved in individual rights in each unit and among commanders. It

helped form a consensus on individual rights protection.


-----

**Ensuring a Productive**
**Working Environment**

The MND is ensuring a productive working environment in which service
members can prepare for their future completion of their service, while
committing to their duties. Furthermore, earning credits through distance
learning and providing e-learning contents are just some of the ways that
the MND is ensuring for service members to be able to continue their
education during their service. In addition, the MND is improving the current
system to support service members preparing for various license examinations and ensure that their experience in the military will be formally
accepted in civilian society.

**1. Ensuring Continuity of Learning**

The MND is devoting efforts to make service members’ time in service

both a civic duty for national defense and an opportunity to prepare

themselves for a new life. Those service members who did not graduate

from high school are deeply interested in preparing for college entrance

qualification examinations to improve their education credentials. On the

other hand, service members entering military service while in college are

interested in earning college credits and licenses. Therefore, the MND

supports their efforts in preparing for a stable return to society by

providing service members with a learning environment that allows for

self-development during service.

**| Earning College Credits | The MND is supporting college-student**

service members by providing them with distance learning classes in

Cyber Knowledge Information Rooms upon coordination with the

colleges, so that they may continue their education. Distance learning

classes started with five colleges in 2007 and expanded to include 69


**Section**
# 5


Distance Learning Courses


-----

colleges in 2011 and 84 colleges in 2012. The current goal is to have 120

colleges on board by 2015. Through these distance learning opportu
nities, service members may earn up to three credits per semester, six

credits per year.

**| Supporting College Entrance Qualification Exams | The MND**

provides an educational environment to promote self-development and

raise service morale in service members who have not completed their

high school education; these members reach 10,000 in number per year.

Each unit provides a place for studying, makes use of other service

members who may be able to tutor, and offers learning materials and

e-learning contents. The number of service members qualifying for

college admission increased from 1,605 in 2011 to 3,213 in 2012. The

MND supports, by shaping an environment, in which service members

may continue their studies during service so that military service could

be utilized as a turning point in their lives.

**| Constant Educational Support | The MND is providing educational**

support for service members by allowing service members to learn

various contents such as foreign languages and information technology,

as well as prepare for national license exams, by using Cyber Knowledge

Information Rooms. In 2011, the MND provided approximately 2,300

different contents, which expanded to include 8,275 in 2012.

In addition, to help service members bolster their language abilities, the

MND supports such programs as phone English classes and English

villages. The MND has also coordinated to reduce application fees for

language proficiency tests (TOEIC, TEPS, OPIC, etc.) through coordi
nation with the testing agencies.

**2. Expanding Social Recognition of Military Career**

The MND is promoting policies that will allow military careers to

become an opportunity to develop service members’ capacities and plan

and prepare for their future. The MND is especially keen on establishing a

system that will allow the education and training received while in service


-----

to be recognized in the civilian society.

**| Transferring Military Education and Training to College Credits |**

The MND is implementing a system to have the education and training

courses that service members have completed while in service to be

transferred as college credits after having those courses accredited by the

Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology (MEST). Currently, 87

courses in 22 military branch schools have been accredited, and the

service members who complete these courses receive two to three credits

through the National Continuing Education Promotion Center. In 2012,

182 colleges have revised school regulations to accept credits based on

education and training courses while in the military, and the MND is

coordinating with MEST to add more colleges to the list. Furthermore,

the MND aims to expand the verification process to include additional

courses.

**| Encouraging License Exams Preparation | The MND is**

encouraging service members to prepare for license examinations by

allowing 84 different national license exams to take place within the

Armed Forces twice a year, through coordination with the Human

Resources Development Service of Korea and the Korea Communi
cations Agency. Especially of the 32 courses that have been accredited

for the expertise and fairness attached to the exams, the service members

who have completed Armed Forces training classes are exempt from the

written parts of the exams. Furthermore, after an intensive train-up

provided to applicants, the number of licensee went up from 16,310 in

2011 to 18,000 in 2012.


Service members certified with licenses
during military service


-----

|1|2|
|---|---|
|4|3|
|||


**1  Defense Minister Kim,**
Kwan Jin lending a hand
during restoration activities
at a flood-damaged area
(Woomyeondong, Seoul,
July 2011)


-----

##### Chapter 10
**The Armed Forces**
**Serving the Public**

Section 1 Enhancing the Public’s Rights and Benefits 290

**2  Foot-and-mouth disease quarantine** Section 2  Enhancing Communication with the Public 307
support (Icheon, Gyeonggi Province, January
2011) through Policies Focused on Daily Life

**3  An elderly living alone being rescued after**
being isolated during a heavy snowfall in the
Yeongdong area. (Samcheock, Gangwon
Province, February 2011)

**4  ROK service members working hard in**
support of the people during a flood damage
restoration operation. (Woomyeondong,
Seoul, July 2011)


-----

**Enhancing the Public’s Rights**
**and Benefits**

The ROK military is exerting various efforts to enhance the benefits of the
people and protect the people’s rights and interests while maintaining a firm,
full-spectrum military readiness posture. Such efforts include relaxing the
regulations pertaining to military installation protection zones, operating the
military in an environment-friendly manner, and establishing a readiness
posture for national-level disasters. Through these efforts, the ROK military
is realizing a ‘national defense with the people.’

**1. Relaxing the Regulations Related to Military Installation**
**Protection Zones**

Recently, many ROK citizens have been demanding the relaxation of

regulations on land utilization and the reduction of military installation

protection zones in the perspective of rightfully exercising their property

rights. Accordingly, the MND is continuously reducing the size and

adjusting the boundaries of military installation protection zones to the

extent that military operations are not affected.

**| Reducing and Adjusting Military Installation Protection Zones |**

In September 2008, the MND integrated the ‘Military Facilities

Protection Act,’ the ‘Naval Bases Act’ and the ‘Military Air Bases Act,’

which were applied separately by each Service, into the ‘Protection of

Military Bases and Installations Act.’ In accordance with this Act,

improvements in guaranteeing the property rights of the people and

enabling the people to use their land in an efficient manner have been


**Section**
# 1


-----

made by reducing or adjusting the military installation protection zones

that fall under the following categories.

First, the boundary of controlled protection zones[1] adjacent to the

Military Demarcation Line (MDL) has been reduced from 15km to 10km

as shown in Chart 10-1. Through this adjustment, a total of 241.2 million

m[2] of controlled protection zones have been downgraded to restricted

protection zones.[2]

**Chart 10-1. Adjustment to protection zones north of the civilian control line [(]CCL[)]**

MDL

**Controlled Protection Zone**
**(within 15km)**

25km

Restricted Protection Zone
(within 10km)

**Controlled Protection Zone**
**(within 10km)**

Restricted Protection Zone
(within 15km)


Second, the size of military installation protection zones located more

than 25km south of the MDL have been reduced. In the case of controlled

protection zones, the distance from the military base or installation to the

outer boundary of the military base or installation, which was 500m, has

been reduced to 300m as shown in Chart 10-2. In the case of restricted

protection zones, this distance has been reduced from 1km to 500m.

Through this action, a total of 212.9 million m[2] of land has been removed

from military installation protection zone status.

**Chart 10-2. Adjustment of protection zones located more than 25km south of the MDL**


**1. Controlled Protection Zones**

Protection zones adjacent to the Military
Demarcation Line, in which a high level
of security of military operations is
required, and zones in which the
functions of important military bases
and installations are required to be
preserved.

**2. Restricted Protection Zone**

Protection zones necessary for the
smooth conduct of military operations,
and zones in which the protection of
military bases and installations or the
safety of residents is required.


**300m** **Base/** **500m**

**Installation**

Controlled Protection
Zone

Restricted Protection
Zone


**500m** **Base/** **1km**

**Installation**

Controlled Protection
Zone

Restricted Protection
Zone


-----

By reducing and adjusting military installation protection zones from

September 2008 to 2012, a total of 551.82 million m[2] of land has either

been removed from military installation protection zone status, or the

military installation protection zone status has been relaxed for these

lands. The details of the reduction and adjustment status are shown in

Chart 10-3.

**Chart 10-3. Status of military installation protection zones that have been removed or relaxed**

|(as of 2012)|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Unit: 10km2|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Classification|Total|2008|2009|2010|2011−2012|
|Protection Zone Status Removed|30,206|21,290|1,281|2,522|5,113|
|Protection Zone Status Relaxed|24,976|24,120|19|267|570|
|Total|55,182|45,410|1,300|2,789|5,683|



**| Reasonable Adjustments to Regulations Related to Military Instal-**

**lation Protection Zones | The MND has been improving and adjusting**

the regulations pertaining to protection zones in a reasonable manner by

introducing the ‘Military Installation Protection Zone Management

Directive,’ and the improved contents are as follows.

First, protection zones located more than 25km south of the MDL were

designated as such based on the distance from the ‘outer most fence line’ of

the military base or installation in accordance with the relevant laws and

regulations. However, by adjusting the baseline for determining the outer

boundary of protection zones from the ‘outer most fence line of the base or

installation’ to the ‘key installations’ inside the base or installation, the size

of protection zones has been reduced. This is another step taken by the

MND to relax regulations related to military base and military installation

protection.


-----

**Chart 10-4. Adjustment to the baseline in determining the size of protection zones**


**Base/Installation outer**
**most fence as the baseline**


**Key installations**
**as the baseline**


Base/Installation
outer most fence

**500m**


Regular installations Key installations

**500m**


Second, regarding the height restrictions near military air bases,

improvements have been made so that height restrictions are enforced

based on reasonable and systematic standards by introducing a system to

evaluate the impact height restrictions have on flight safety. Accordingly,

standards and procedures for approving or disapproving the construction

of structures that exceed the height restriction have been established taking

into account the special characteristics of the region and the flight

procedures. These standards and procedures are included in the directive

and are being implemented.

Third, in areas that have little impact on military operations and can be

utilized for the benefit of the locals and the local society, the MND has

entrusted the local governments to handle the administrative process when

approving constructions, which are usually handled by the jurisdictional

military unit. This initiative is another effort put forth by the MND to

continuously simplify the administrative process and increase efficiency

for the benefit of the people. The status of land entrusted to local

governments is shown in Chart 10-5.

**Chart 10-5. Status of land entrusted to local governments**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Unit: 10km2|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Classification|Total|before 2008|2009|2010|2012|
|Area|92,806|49,313|14,963|23,006|5,524|


-----

**2. Environment-friendly Military**

The MND’s environment preservation policy is not only required to

protect the health of the ROK people and enhance the benefits of the

current generation, but is also required for future generations. As such, the

ROK military is pursuing the following policies: Development of the

military’s environment management system; expansion of environment

contamination prevention projects; nature preservation activities;

prevention of noise from military air fields and firing ranges; and

environment management of returned USFK installations. Through these

policies, the MND is exerting its efforts to protect the people’s health from

various accidents caused by environmental contamination and prevent any

inconveniences to the public due to environmental pollution.

**| Development of the Military’s Environment Management System |**

The MND is strengthening its environment management organization by

establishing an environment management organization and setting

standards that are appropriate to the characteristics of each Service and

their subordinate units. Additionally, two environment battalions and two

environment companies are being operated as organizations that carry

out initial response measures during accidental environmental contami
nation and provide support for cleanup projects on returned USFK instal
lations.

The MND is continuing to develop training and education programs

related to the environment as a means to enhance the expertise of military

personnel in charge of environmental issues. Also, environment

management education is provided annually to troops serving in units in

charge of environmental issues through entrusting the education to various

outside environmental organizations such as the Korea Environmental

Corporation and the Korea Rural Community Corporation. Additionally,

itinerant education is provided for environmental officials at each unit, and

in 2010 and 2011, two education sessions were provided each year with a

total of 1,869 personnel participating in the sessions. Meanwhile, all

military education agencies operate education programs in a manner that

assist service members in cultivating an environment-friendly thought

process, and the units at each level provide environmental education for


-----

regular service members in cooperation with regional government

environmental agencies.

The MND is carrying out environment-related duties by establishing a

mutual support and coordination system with the Ministry of Environment
(MOE). Since 1998, the MND and MOE have been holding a ‘central

military and government environmental meeting,’ and the local military

units and regional government environment agencies have been holding a

‘regional military and government meeting’ every year. A total of 21 central

military and government environmental meetings have been held as of

2011. The MND is actively making improvements to the environment

management system by inspecting the environment management status

and making recommendations for improvements through on-site guidance

visits to subordinate units.

**| Expansion of Environmental Contamination Prevention Projects |**

The ROK military is operating environmental treatment facilities in

accordance with environment-related laws and regulations to prevent

environmental contamination of the local area caused by environment

contaminating materials produced by the military. For military environ
mental treatment facilities that are dilapidated, renovation projects are

carried out according to the military’s mid- to long-term plan.

As of December 2011, the ROK military is operating 7,248 environ
mental treatment facilities such as water pollution prevention facilities.

With the revision to the Korean Sewerage Act in September 2007 which

tightened the water quality standard for water that are released, the ROK

military has made the necessary improvements to waste water treatment

facilities that treat more than 50 tons of water per day as its first priority in

order to meet the tightened water quality standard. As a result of this

effort, a total of 622 dilapidated facilities have been renovated or

improved as of 2011. In addition, the ROK military is continuing to

expand its efforts to have daily sewerage from the military be treated at

public sewerage treatment facilities operated by local governments. Also it

is tightening its water pollution prevention measures by commissioning

specialized companies to operate and manage the sewerage treatment

facilities of each unit. The status of military environmental treatment

facilities that have been acquired or improved is shown in Chart 10-6.


-----

**Chart 10-6. Status of acquired or improved military environmental treatment facilities**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Unit:|Number of facilities|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Classification||Total Required|As of 2011 (%)|2012|Mid-term Plan from 2013−2017|
|Acquired|Water Pollution Prevention Facilities|4,603|4,400 (96)|48|155|
||Soil Pollution Prevention Facilities|7,249|2,848 (39)|-|4,401|
||Total|11,852|7,248 (61)|48|4,556|
|Improved|Water Pollution Prevention Facilities|1,074|622 (58)|-|452|
||Soil Pollution Remediation|302|211 (70)|18|73|
||Other Environmental Facilities (Noxious work place)|1,036|505 (49)|1|530|
||Total|2,412|1,338 (55)|19|1,055|



For soil environment management, the MND is striving to establish a

contamination prevention system focused on averting contaminations

from occurring in the first place. The ROK military is installing automated

oil leak detection devices that can confirm whether leaks are occurring at

underground oil storage facilities, and is building concrete oil leak

prevention mounts near oil storage facilities above ground that will stop

the oil from spreading outwards in case a storage tank is damaged and an

oil spill occurs. Also, oil pipes are installed above ground in order to

immediately detect leaks and reduce the possibility of underground oil

leaks. The contamination level of the environment surrounding oil storage

facilities is checked every one to three years depending on the number of

years the particular storage facility has been in operation, and if soil

contamination is confirmed, purification work is carried out in accordance

with the relevant law.

Spent ammunitions are regularly collected and antipollution facilities are

being installed to prevent the spread of pollution from shooting ranges.

Also, in order to establish a shooting range antipollution plan, the MND is

regularly measuring the contamination level of the water and soil near

shooting ranges. Furthermore, efforts are being made to improve the water

quality by building detention basin and equalizing reservoir dams

depending on the terrain conditions near shooting ranges. Also, by

planting plants that purify the soil, and appropriately managing marshes

where reeds grow naturally, the spread of pollution is being prevented.


Shooting range antipollution facilities


-----

When military facilities such as shooting ranges and training areas are

closed down, a soil environmental evaluation is conducted prior to the

close down, and if required, purification work is carried out.

The MND is actively exerting its efforts to dispose, reduce, and recycle

military waste materials in a lawful manner. In particular, through efforts

such as the food waste reduction campaign which was initiated in 2010,

the MND is striving to reduce the amount of food wastes to 50% of the

civilian sector output. The disposal of domestic waste materials output by

the military is commissioned to the local government with jurisdiction

over the relevant area and to civilian disposal companies. However, in

areas where commissioned disposal is not possible such as island areas,

the military independently disposes the waste materials by building

military incinerators and food waste disposal facilities. Designated waste

materials and construction waste materials that can pollute the

environment such as waste oil and waste acid are commissioned to

specialized waste disposal companies for disposal. In particular, in order

to lawfully manage and dispose waste materials containing asbestos, an

investigation was conducted and completed on military construction

facilities containing asbestos. Equipment containing polychlorinated

biphenyls (PCBs), which are persistent organic pollutants, are declared to

the relevant local governments, and the disposal of these equipment are

commissioned to specialized disposal companies. The status of military

waste material disposal is shown in Chart 10-7.


**Chart 10-7. Status of military waste material disposal [(]as of 2011[)]**


**Unit: tons**

|Classification|Output|Disposal Status|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Recycled (Commissioned or Internal)|Disposed||
||||Commissioned|Internal|
|Food Waste|34,221|33,405|541|346|
|Domestic Waste|94,934|27,234|67,700|-|
|Designated Waste|11,009|4,824|10,738|-|
|Construction Waste|569,583|529,575|39,967|-|
|Total|709,747|595,038|118,946|346|


**| Natural Environment Preservation Activities | The ROK military**

is supporting environmental purification activities in various forms such


-----

as participating in the whole-of-government national cleanliness

campaign. For example, the ROK military is actively participating in

campaigns such as Springtime National Land Cleansing, Cultivating One

Mountain One River, Han River Underwater Purification, Remote

Islands Environmental Purification, and Waste Roundup in Flood

Damaged Areas. Additionally, the ROK military is contributing to the

efforts to restore damaged forests north of the Civilian Control Line.

Major achievements of these efforts are shown in Chart 10-8.

**Chart 10-8. Nature purification and damaged forest restoration north of the Civilian Control**
**Line [(]CCL[)]**

|Classification|Nature Purification Activities|Col3|Forest Restoration North of the CCL (ha)|
|---|---|---|---|
||Amount of Waste Collected near Military Units (ton)|Civilian-Government-Military Joint Purification Activity Support (number of times)||
|2010|5,755|1,224|14.3|
|2011|4,764|1,056|22.8|



On top of these efforts, the ROK military is carrying out activities to

eradicate alien plants that disturb the ecosystem, and activities to protect

wild animals. Major achievements are shown in Chart 10-9.

**Chart 10-9. Alien plant eradication and wild animal protection activities**

|Classification|Eradication of Alien Plants Disturbing the Ecosystem (ton)|Wild Animal Protection|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|||Roundup of Poaching Equipment (number)|Provision of Wintertime Food (ton)|
|2010|409|1,281|261|
|2011|807|932|284|



**| Military Airbase and Shooting Range Noise Prevention | Due to**

the limited land conditions and the fast pace of urbanization, residential

areas are now being established fairly close to military airbases and

shooting ranges. As such, in order to minimize damages caused by noise

to the local residents living near military airbases and shooting ranges,

the MND is pursuing various initiatives such as establishing noise


Environment purification activities by
ROK Navy Sailors (Jejudo (Island),
September 2012)

Install winter feed bucket for wild
animals


-----

reduction measures, expanding noise prevention facilities, and enacting

relevant laws and regulations.

In order to reduce the amount of noise caused by military aircraft

operations, the course and altitude during takeoff are being adjusted and

the number of nighttime flights is being minimized. Additionally, noise

prevention installations such as airbase hush houses, soundproof walls,

and trees for noise abatement are being expanded. Furthermore, in order to

reduce noise from shooting ranges, shooting hours and firing locations are

being adjusted, and nighttime shooting is minimized.

The MND is also pursuing the enactment of the ‘Bill on Noise

Abatement from Military Airbases and Other Facilities and on Supporting

Areas Requiring Noise Prevention Measures’ in order to provide support

for residents suffering from noise damage. This proposed Bill stipulates

various noise abatement initiatives such as the designation and notification

of areas that require noise abatement measures, noise abatement projects

for afflicted areas, and the establishment of a noise abatement project

midterm plan every five years. In addition, this Bill includes provisions

that mandate the ROK military to measure the level of noise at all times by

installing noise measuring devices at military airbases and shooting areas,

and strive to reduce noise during military training exercises. Once this Bill

is enacted, the MND plans to conduct noise impact evaluations at military

airbases and shooting ranges that urgently require noise abatement

measures, and carry out noise abatement projects by annually investing a

portion of the budget for this initiative.

**| Environment Management of Returned USFK Bases | Bases used**

by USFK are currently being returned in accordance with the Land

Partnership Plan (LPP), the Yongsan Relocation Plan (YRP), and the

Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA). Environmental regulations on the

returned bases include: the environmental provision newly added in the

2001 SOFA (18 January 2001); the Memorandum of Special

Understandings on Environmental Protection (18 January 2001); the

Joint Environmental Information Exchange and Access Procedures (18

January 2002); and Tab A to the Joint Environmental Information

Exchange and Access Procedures (28 May 2003). USFK bases are being

returned in accordance with these procedures agreed to at the SOFA


Inside of a Hush House


-----

environmental subcommittee. Out of the 80 bases that were planned to

be returned by the end of 2011, 48 bases have been returned. After a

report is made to the National Assembly on a management plan on

returned and granted areas, procedures such as base facility investi
gation, environmental contamination purification work, and facility

removal work are carried out.

For those bases that require purification, the purification standard,

investigation of the surrounding area, and the purification method are

determined based on the usage of the base after it is returned in coordi
nation with the relevant local government.

Out of those bases that have been returned as of 2011 and went through

inspection, 23 bases have been determined as exceeding the standards

stipulated in ROK environmental laws and regulations. Out of the 23

bases, purification work has been completed at 17 bases, with 6 bases in

progress. The MND will continue to conduct purification efforts on the

returned USFK bases in a transparent manner.

For those bases that were returned before the environmental procedures

for USFK bases were established in May 2003, domestic environmental

standards and procedures are being applied. Meanwhile, with regard to the

suspicions that were raised in 2011 of chemical materials being buried

inside a USFK base in Bucheon (former Camp Mercer), the MND put

together a joint investigation group composed of civilian, government, and

military experts and officials and conducted a transparent investigation.

However, no contamination was detected. In August 2011, the results of

the investigation on environmental contamination in Camp Market were

disclosed to the public through a press conference and a briefing session

for the local residents. Additionally, as a means to conduct investigations

in an objective manner on those bases that were returned prior to May

2003, the MND carried out a study in 2011 on the method of environ
mental investigations on returned USFK bases. Based on this study,

environmental investigations will be carried out on those bases with a high

possibility of contamination starting from 2012, followed by purification

work, if required, based on the investigation results.


-----

**3. Disaster Preparation and Damage Restoration Support**
**Activities**

Large scale natural disasters such as heavy snowfalls, typhoons, and

torrential rains have been occurring on a frequent basis due to extreme

weather caused by global warming. As these large-scale natural disasters

threaten the lives and safety of the people, a systematic response at the

national level is being required. As such, the military’s role to protect the

lives and property of the people from disasters is increasing. As the

people’s military, the ROK military is exerting diverse efforts to ensure the

safety of the people during national level disasters.

**| Strengthening the Disaster Preparation and Support Posture |**

The MND and the units at each level are establishing a full time

readiness posture together with the relevant local governments to

respond to disasters.

First, unexpected disasters such as the recent earthquake and nuclear

power plant crisis in Japan, nationwide foot-and-mouth disease in the

ROK, and torrential rainfall and landslides in the Seoul metropolitan area

are occurring. In order to proactively respond to such large scale disasters,

the MND has fine-tuned the crisis response action manual that covers 22

different types of disasters. Also, after the large scale blackout accident on

15 September 2011, the MND established a preparedness posture for

interruptions to the supply of major utilities such as electricity, gas, and

water in the military, enabling the military to conduct operations without

break.

Second, the National Defense Disaster Response White Paper, which

analyzes past successes and failures during disaster responses, was

published to assist disaster related action personnel in each Service to

respond to disasters in a systematic manner.

Third, the ‘National Defense Disaster Management Directive’ was

overhauled in September 2011 so that it could be commonly applied by

each Service considering the recent trend of disasters occurring in larger

scales and diverse forms. As a result of this overhaul, contents such as the

systematic management of specially designated facilities requiring

attention, re-establishment of the disaster response headquarters operation


_National Defense Disaster Response_
_White Paper (MND, May 2012)_

Nationwide military disaster related
officials video teleconference meeting
(MND video teleconference room, June
2011)


-----

system, introduction of an evaluation system to assess the emergency

rescue support capabilities of disaster rescue units, and the roles of the

MND and each Service for providing overseas disaster relief support, were

included in the Directive.

Fourth, the MND is actively participating in the ‘Safe Korea Exercise’

hosted by the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) and

jointly conducted with local governments and military units. Through

these exercises, ROK military units above regiment level are gaining the

proficiency to respond to various disasters.

Fifth, the ROK military is upgrading the specialized disaster response

capabilities of its disaster rescue unit[3] personnel by providing these

personnel with expanded education opportunities on expert disaster rescue

such as wintertime disaster rescue, life saving rope training, and urban

search and rescue courses carried out by NEMA. Also, the ROK military

has acquired life saving equipment and materials for general rescue

purposes, heavy load operation purposes, and breathing and body

protection purposes, and evaluated the emergency rescue support

capabilities of the six Special Forces brigade units designated as disaster

rescue units.

Sixth, in order to minimize any interruptions in supplying public

services to the people and to protect the public’s basic daily rights, the

MND is training and managing military functional personnel who are sent

in as backups at times when workers at key national infrastructure

facilities conduct illegal activities and stop working. In 2011, special

education was provided to those 464 who completed the locomotive

engineer development course, and 39 additional personnel were certified

in the area of power generation. The management status of the military’s

functional personnel is shown in Chart 10-10.


Radiological control training at the Uljin
nuclear power plant in preparation of
earthquakes and tidal waves
(50[th] Division, May 2011)

**3. Disaster Rescue Unit**

The six designated Special Forces units
that provide emergency rescue support
based on NEMA’s request during
accidents and incidents such as large
scale explosions, building collapses,
subway fires, etc.

Earthquake response training
(Eunpyeong-gu, Seoul, May 2011)


**Chart 10-10. Management status of the military’s functional personnel**


**As of September 2012**

|Classification|Total|Railroad-Electric Motor Car|Power Generation|Gas|Cargo- Transport|Others|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|No. of Personnel|20,172|482|579|335|900|17,876|


*[ Other areas (10): Deputy locomotive engineers, electricity, water supply, reclaimed land management, ]

communications, medical, mail transport, mail delivery, irrigation system management, ports


-----

The MND will continue to develop a military disaster management

system with the goal of achieving ‘zero damage to life and zero damage to

property’ in the future. Through this effort, the ROK military’s readiness

and support posture against national disasters is expected to be upgraded

to the next level.

**| Emergency Rescue and Disaster Restoration Support | The MND**

is maintaining a full time emergency rescue support and disaster

readiness posture by operating 412 disaster situation rooms at various

units of the Army, Navy, and the Air Force. When a local government or

a regional fire department requests support for emergency rescue or

disaster restoration to the relevant military unit in the area, the

commander of the unit determines the situation and executes measures

most appropriate to the situation in the speediest manner possible. The

overall control and coordination of this process is conducted by the

MND.

During the last five years, the support provided by the ROK military

towards the civilian sector for disaster damage restoration amounts to, on

a yearly average, approximately 290,000 troops and 5,500 equipment. Key

examples of disaster damage restoration support provided to the civilian

sector are as follows.

In February 2011, serious damages occurred due to the heaviest snow

fall in 104 years with the most notable being the isolation of residents of

the Yeongdong area in Gangwon Province. Accordingly, the ROK Army

8[th] Corps and the 23[rd] Division immediately deployed their troops to

conduct snow removal operations while carrying out proactive civilian

support operations such as providing daily necessities to the isolated

residents, rescuing elders living alone, providing medevac for emergency

patients, and salvaging isolated vehicles. Through these efforts, the ROK

military contributed immensely in protecting the lives and property of the

people.

From 2010 to 2011, when the entire nation was suffering from foot-and
mouth disease, approximately 320,000 troops and 3,800 equipment were

utilized to actively support disease control activities and mobile

checkpoint operations which contributed in preventing the spread of the

disease.


Yeongdong area heavy snowfall damage
restoration support (SBS news,
February 2011)

Yeongdong area heavy snowfall damage
restoration support (Samcheock,
Gangwon Province, February 2011)

Disease control support for foot-andmouth disease (Icheon, Gyeonggi
Province, January 2011)


-----

Due to the localized torrential rainfall from 26 to 28 July 2011 (the

largest amount of rainfall measured since 1907 with 587.5mm of

consecutive rainfall), large scale damages occurred such as the Woomyeon

mountain landslide and the flooding of the Sadang area in Seoul. As such,

the Capital Defense Command stood up an on-site command post and

rapidly sent in approximately 39,000 troops and 260 equipment to clean

up flooded households, remove earth and sand, restore drains, repair roads,

and support medical and disease control activities. Through these

dedicated support activities, the Capital Defense Command contributed to

overcoming a national level disaster.

When the ROK government dispatched overseas emergency relief teams

to Japan after the earthquakes and tsunami that occurred in March 2011,

the MND transported rescue teams and 60 tons of relief materials to Japan

a total of four times including a total of 106 personnel from the ‘119

emergency rescue team.’

The status of key emergency rescue and disaster damage restoration

support provided during the last five years is shown in Chart 10-11.

**Chart 10-11. Status of key emergency rescue and disaster damage restoration support during**
**the last five years**


Woomyeon mountain landslide
restoration support (Seocho District,
Seoul, July 2011)

Military transport support for tsunami
damages in Japan (Seoul airport, March
2011)

|Classification|Support|Col3|Restoration Status|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Troops (1,000)|Equipment (No.)|Lives Saved (No.)|Households Cleaned Up (No.)|Farmland (ha)|Roads/ Embank- ments (km)|Greenhouses/ Cattle Sheds (No.)|Disease Control/ Disinfection (ha)|Key Contents|
|2007|182|2,607|182|4,296|945|7|4,252|53|• Typhoon (Nari) damage restoration • Prevention of oil spread in the Taean area|
|2008|73|2,167|11|295|7|3|370|27|• Avian Influenza (AI) stamping out support • Sichuan earthquake restoration|
|2009|59|1,748|6|260|72|18|537|-|• H1N1 Influenza quarantine support • water support for drought areas|
|2010|319|5,500|25|1,985|100|109|3,159|-|• Heavy snowfall damage restoration • Foot-and-mouth disease, AI disease control support • Typhoon (Kompasu) and torrential rainfall damage restoration|


-----

|2011|616|12,010|-|2,195|147|62|3,250|-|• Heavy snowfall damage restoration • Foot-and-mouth disease, AI disease control support • Typhoon (Muifa) and torrential rainfall damage restoration, putting out wildfires|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|September 2012|213|6,506|-|915|97|24|1,361|-|• Heavy snowfall damage restoration • Typhoon and torrential rainfall damage restoration • Drought relief|
|Total|1,462|30,538|224|9,946|1,368|223|12,929|80||


When a national level disaster occurs, it is difficult for the government

alone to restore the damages in a short period. Therefore, the MND will

carry out disaster damage restoration support activities in a proactive

manner in order to protect the lives and property of the people.

**4. Support for Farmers and Fishermen**

The ROK military is conducting civilian support activities for farming

and fishing communities in order to support the vulnerable social groups

created by the rapid aging of the farming and fishing community

population.

For example, the ROK military provides manpower to assist farming

and fishing area that are experiencing difficulties in sowing and harvesting

due to the lack of workers during the busy farming season. Also,

manpower and equipment are provided for infrastructure expansion efforts

such as irrigation ditch maintenance and river improvements in line with

the changes to the farming community structure. Furthermore, the ROK

military has organized an ‘on-the-road farming machinery maintenance

team’ to provide technical support in areas that do not have farming

machinery service centers.

Meanwhile, by establishing sisterhood relationships with farming

communities under the motto ‘one unit for one village’ as part of the

farming and fishing community love campaign, the ROK military is

supporting the farming and fishing villages by assisting harvesting


Farming machinery repair support
(Jangsu, North Jeolla Province, April
2011)


-----

potatoes, picking apples, and cleaning seashores. The status of farming

and fishing community support provided during the past five years is

shown in Chart 10-12.

**Chart 10-12. Status of farming and fishing community support provided during the past five**
**years**

|Classification|Supported Personnel (No.)|Supported Equipment (No.)|Key Support Contents|Col5|Col6|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||Farming Support (km2)|Farming Machinery Repair (No.)|Irrigation Ditch Maintenance (km)|Others (No.)|
|2007|180,103|2,800|24.1|4,491|820|81,834|
|2008|107,849|1,785|189.5|1,727|32|65,598|
|2009|98,074|2,453|34.1|1,126|41|49,239|
|2010|127,343|3,290|32.1|1,980|52|54,167|
|2011|80,777|1,123|25|1,619|30.6|36,276|
|September 2012 (current)|84,753|2,396|2,891|1,699|40.1|30,622|
|Total|678,899|13,847|3,195.8|12,642|1,015.7|317,736|



*[ Others: Medical-disease control support, tab water support, environment purification, etc.]

The MND is planning to further strengthen its ties with the local

residents by continuously conducting ‘on-site support activities for farmers

and fishermen’ that are part of the vulnerable farming and fishermen

community.


-----

**Enhancing Communication**
**with the Public through**
**Policies Focused on Daily Life**

The MND is improving the military service and conscription systems in order
to enhance the military’s combat power and to cultivate an environment of
impartial military service duty. Additionally, it is fulfilling the people’s right to
know by improving the civil service system, and is expanding its efforts to
communicate with the public through a variety of activities. Some of these
activities are public relations activities utilizing various media sources such
as the New Media and the Defense Media Agency, which is the leading
national defense media agency, and a variety of cultural activities.

**1. Improving the Military Service and Conscription Systems**

The MND is improving the military service and conscription systems in

order to contribute to the enhancement of the military’s combat power and

improve the equity and efficiency in carrying out military service duties.

Key areas of improvements are: adjusting the military service period;

improving the paid volunteer system; improving the switchover service

and alternative service systems; improving a full-time reserve service

system; and improving the community service system.

**| Adjusting the Military Service Period for Enlisted Service**

**Members | In accordance with the plan to reduce the number of troops**

outlined in the National Defense Reform Plan, the MND originally

planned to shorten the military service period by six months according to

the service category, as shown in Chart 10-13, from 2008 to 2014.

However, due to the recent changes to the security situation, it was

decided to adjust the reduction period from six to three months.


**Section**
# 2


-----

**Chart 10-13. Military service period adjustment status by category**

|Applicable Category|Original Plan (6-month reduction)|Adjusted Plan (3-month reduction)|Execution Date|
|---|---|---|---|
|Army, Marine Corps, Conscripted Police, Security Personnel in Correctional Facilities, Full-time Reservists|24 18 months|21 months|27 February 2011|
|Navy, Maritime Conscrited Police, Conscripted Firefighters|26 20 months|23 months|3 January 2011|
|Air Force|27 21 months|24 months|1 January 2011|



This adjustment was made in order to deal with continuing military

provocations posed by North Korea, prevent the weakening of the

military’s combat power due to the deterioration in troop proficiency and

expertise caused by reduction in military service period, and to prepare for

the lack of military service resources in the future.

**| Improving the Paid Volunteer System | As the military service**

period of enlisted service members gets reduced, the military’s combat

power is estimated to deteriorate due to faster troop circulating rate and a

lack of skilled service members remaining in active service. As such, the

MND has introduced and has been implementing a paid volunteer

system since January 2008 in order to prevent such deterioration.

Paid volunteers receive the same salary and personnel management as

regular enlisted troops during their mandatory service period. However,

during their extended service period, they are pinned on the rank of a staff

sergeant and are paid an appropriate amount of salary commensurate with

their proficiency and expertise. Paid volunteers are classified into two

categories.

Combat and technically proficient soldiers (type I) are selected from the

regular troops with a high proficiency level, and they serve as staff

sergeants for 6 to 18 months after their mandatory service period as a

regular troop is completed. Advanced equipment operating expert soldiers
(type II) are selected from the civilian pool prior to enlistment, and these

troops serve for three years from the day of enlistment. These troops serve

as regular troops during their mandatory service period, but upon

completion of this period, they serve the remainder of the three years as


-----

staff sergeants. The status of the paid volunteer system by category is

shown in Chart 10-14.

**Chart 10-14. Status of the paid volunteer system by category**

|Classification|Selection|Service Period|Service Area|Salary|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Type I (proficient soldiers)|Chiefs of each Service|6−18 months of additional service|Combat, technically proficient positions (squad leader, radar, etc.)|Approximately 1.25 million won per month|
|Type II (expert soldiers)|Commissioner of the Military Manpower Administration|3 years|Advanced equipment operating positions (next generation tanks, KDX-III, etc.)|Approximately 1.85 million won (including an incentive pay of 600,000 won paid separately) per month|



However, the utilization of this system has been unsatisfactory up to

now with all the volunteers who signed up for proficient soldiers (type I)

getting discharged after completing their short term service period (6 to 18

months). As such, improvements have been made to personnel

management by making it possible for these proficient soldiers to extend

their service period one year on a yearly basis starting from 2012, and for

these proficient soldiers serving an extended duty term to serve as a career

service member. Additionally, considering the negative view towards the

term ‘paid volunteers,’ the MND is planning to change the name to ‘expert

sergeants.’

**| Improving the Switchover Service and Alternative Service**

**Systems | Although the switchover service system[1] and the alternative**

service system[2] were scheduled to be abolished in 2012 in order to stably

secure active service resources, the date of abolishment was adjusted in

order to efficiently utilize the surplus in military service resources due to

the adjustment in the military service period (18 months 21 months),

and to acquire resources for maintaining public order and to vitalize the

economy. The current level of switchover and alternative services

applicants will be maintained until 2015. However, considering the

future security environment and changes to the alternative service

operation concept, the level of switchover and alternative services for

2016 and after will be reassessed in 2014.

Additionally, out of the switchover service personnel, some conscripted


**1. Switchover Service System**

This system allows military service
conscripts to serve as conscripted
police, maritime conscripted police, or
conscripted firefighters instead of active
duty service members.

**2. Alternative Service System**

The purpose of this system is to
efficiently utilize those surplus military
service conscripts, who are remaining
after all active duty positions are filled,
to carry out their national military duty
in alternative services equivalent to
active duty service.


-----

police were forcely selected from those who enlisted for active service

duty, causing dissatisfaction among the military service conscripts as well

as their parents. Accordingly, as of 2012, military service conscripts are

switched over and assigned to the conscripted police service that they

apply for, and the correctional facility security personnel service has been

abolished with the introduction of a guard system which can replace these

personnel.

Meanwhile, in order to conform to the government’s policy of fostering

superior technical personnel and to stably provide customized technical

personnel to small and medium-sized businesses, the pool of skilled

industrial personnel is filled mainly by graduates of vocational high

schools and meister high schools. Also, the system has been improved so

that technical research personnel are no longer assigned to conglomerates,

and that all of them are assigned to small and medium-sized enterprises

starting from 2013.

**| Improving the Full-Time Reserve Service System | The full-time**

reserve service system was introduced on 31 December 1993 to secure

alternative forces in preparation for the reduction of the standing army,

and to acquire a sufficient amount of homeland defense personnel

following the abolishment of the defensive call-up system. Accordingly,

if a military service conscript, who enlists as an active duty service

member and completes basic military training, serves for a given time

period at a military unit that executes homeland defense duties or an

agency that supports such duties, he is recognized as completing his

mandatory military service period.

The MND selects military service conscripts, whose place of residence

is in areas where homeland defense requirements have been requested by

the military, as full-time reservists considering their education level,

physical status, and age. In particular, married conscripts with a child are

selected as full-time reservists as a means to conform to the government’s

policy of guaranteeing conditions for childcare.

However, because married conscripts with a child prior to enlistment are

allowed to serve as full-time reservists while those married active duty

service members who have a child during service are not, the issue of

equity in carrying out military service for these two types of service


-----

members has been raised. Accordingly, the ‘Military Service Act’ was

revised as of 25 November 2011 so that active service members who have

a child during active duty service can also become full-time reservists.

**| Pursuing a Community Service System | In order to supplement**

the problems with alternative service systems such as the public interest

service personnel system, and to accommodate the increase in social

service[3] demands, the MND is pursuing a community service system.[4]

Accordingly, the MND is expanding the military conscript service areas

to social welfare, healthcare, education and culture, and environment and

safety, while moving away from services focused on simple administration

aid work, in order to efficiently utilize personnel in an era of low fertility

and aging population. In order to realize this initiative, the MND is

planning to amend the ‘Military Service Act’ to separate the international

cooperation volunteer personnel and the arts and sports personnel from the

public interest service personnel category, and to change the name ‘public

interest service personnel’ to ‘community service personnel.’

Additionally, in order to assist the service personnel to adjust to the

working conditions and to increase their expertise, diverse efforts to have

the community service system take root are being pursued such as

pursuing the establishment of a public interest service personnel education

center.

First, public interest service personnel are first dispatched to facilities

where personnel support is required but is always lacking, thereby

increasing the level of efficiency of personnel utilization. Examples of

such personnel support are providing aid to the elderly and disabled

persons, and assisting with school related safety activities.

Second, by maintaining an 80 percent and higher military service

volunteer rate for service areas with a high level of difficulty such as

serving at social welfare facilities, the service quality and satisfaction level

for vulnerable members of society are improving.

Third, the establishment of a public interest service personnel education

center is being pursued in order to enhance the effect of occupational

training and knowledge education, which are provided to develop the

necessary expertise and strengthen the sense of duty of community service

personnel, and to save educational costs.


**3. Social Service**

Social services provided in various
social fields such as social welfare,
health and medical, education and
culture, and environment and safety in
order to improve the overall welfare of
individuals and the society.

**4. Community Service System**

A system where military service
conscripts serve in community service
areas such as social welfare, health and
medical, education and culture, and
environment and safety instead of
serving as an active duty military
service member.


-----

**2. Improvements to Conscription Administration**

The MND is improving the conscription administration system and

procedure in order to ensure impartial decisions on assignment to military

service and to prevent attempts to evade military service. To this end, the

draft physical system for conscription is being improved and a compre
hensive military service evasion prevention plan is being pursued.

Meanwhile, by improving the civil complaints handling system and

relaxing the regulations pertaining to conscription administration, various

conveniences are being expanded for those who have to carry out the duty

of military service. Additionally, various policies such as renowned

military service family enhancement projects are being pursued in order to

reinforce the public’s view towards carrying out the duty of military

service.

**| Establishing an Advanced Draft Physical System for Conscription |**

The MND has improved the draft physical system for conscription in

order to ensure that impartial decisions are made on assignment to

military service, and has established a precision examination system by

introducing advanced medical equipment and reinforcing expert

examination personnel. First, the draft physical system, which applied

the same standards for all conscripts, has been broken down so that those

who require advanced examinations are separately examined from those

who are healthy as of 2011. Through this initiative, the length of draft

physical on healthy conscripts has been reduced which increased the

convenience for conscripts, while the length of examinations on those

who require precision examinations has been expanded, thereby ensuring

accuracy and impartiality in deciding the type of military service for

conscripts through precision draft physical.

The MND has acquired a wide range of medical equipment such as 11

computer tomography (CT) scanners for precision draft physical, and

reinforced its expert medical personnel force by hiring 4 civilian doctors

and 21 clinical psychologists. Additionally, it plans to acquire additional

advanced medical equipment such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

equipment, and hire more clinical psychologists. Furthermore, the MND

also strengthened the external monitoring and control functions pertaining


Draft physical for conscription
(Seoul Regional Military Manpower
Administration, February 2012)


-----

to draft physical by continuously expanding commissioned examinations

at civilian medical institutions for rare intractable diseases and appointing

external medical experts as ‘ombudsman for military service determi
nation.’[5]

**| Measures to Prevent Evasion of Military Service | The MND has**

established and is implementing a comprehensive military service

evasion prevention plan to fundamentally prevent attempts to evade

military service.[6]

First, in order to strengthen the effectiveness in preventing crimes

related to military service evasion, the ‘Act on Conducting Judicial Police

Duties and on the Scope of Such Duties’ was revised on 17 January 2012.

Accordingly, Military Manpower Administration (MMA) officials were

mandated with special judicial police authorities[7] and commenced

activities to prevent military service evasion attempts starting on 18 April

2012.

Second, if there is evidence or a high possibility that a person, who has

been designated as a ‘Second Militia Service’ or has been exempt from

active military service, used deceptive measures to evade military service

such as attaining a license or qualification that Second Militia Service or

exempt personnel cannot attain, it is now possible to conduct confirmation

draft physical on that person. As a result of the confirmation examination,

if the physical grade is changed or other suspicions of military service

evasion are detected, the person under suspicion is reported to the investi
gation authorities. Afterwards, if the military service evasion attempt is

confirmed as unlawful, the original assignment to military service is

cancelled and the person in question has to receive another draft physical

for conscription and receive a new assignment to military service.

Third, in order to fundamentally block military service evasion attempts,

the Enforcement Ordinance of the Military Service Act was revised so that

those who have been convicted of military service evasion cannot receive

the benefit of having their military service exempt. The MND is planning

to exert continuous efforts to enhance the fairness and equity in carrying

out the duty of military service by making institutional improvements on

preventing evasion of military service.


**5. Ombudsman for Military Service**
**Determination**

Regional Military Manpower
Administrations appoint ‘ombudsmen for
military service determination’ from
external members of the regional
committee who listen to complaints
raised by conscripts and correct them
during the entire draft physical process
including the determination of the
physical grade of the conscript.

**6. Attempts to Evade Military Service**

Activities involving deception or physical
damage aimed at avoiding military
service. A Key example of manipulating
a change to the body is intentionally
gaining or losing weight.

**7. Special Judicial Police Authorities**

Judicial police authorities stipulated by
law for special matters such as forestry
protection, food and drug control,
customs related criminal investigation,
etc. The scope of authorities of judicial
police personnel is limited in terms of
region and categories, and must be
executed in accordance with the
Criminal Procedure Code, and under the
supervision of a prosecutor.

**Second Militia Service Conscripts who**
have been determined incapable of
active duty service or reservist duties
due to their physical conditions, but who
can carry out military support duties
based on wartime service conscript


-----

**| Expanding the Conveniences for Execution of Military Service |**

The MND has expanded various conveniences for military service

conscripts by improving the civil complaint response system for

conscription administration and by relaxing regulations.

First, since 2010, the MND has been operating an enlistment

postponement system which enables graduates of specialized high schools

working at small and medium manufacturing companies to put off their

enlistment until the age of 24. Additionally, as of 2012, improvements

have been made so that regular high school graduates who get employed
(some jobs are excluded) immediately after graduation can put off their

enlistment until they are 24. Furthermore, those who are attending credit

bank educational institutions recognized by the Minister of Education,

Science and Technology in order to earn academic credits can also

postpone their enlistment.

Second, the initiative to allow university students to choose a date of

their preference for enlistment has been expanded for all conscripts,

thereby improving the equity between conscripts and expanding the

autonomy for carrying out military service.

Third, the ‘enlisting with a buddy’ system was improved so that two to

three multi-cultural family conscripts can enlist together and serve at a unit

where they can share the same barracks. Additionally, the MND is

recruiting active service members considering the characteristics and

conveniences of the conscripts through initiatives such as the Army

Hometown Service Program which allows service members to serve in

units close to their hometown.

**| Creating an Environment for Execution of Impartial Military**

**Service | The MND and MMA are pursuing a variety of policies to**

create a ‘mature social environment’ where those who diligently perform

the duty of military service are respected and can feel honor and pride,

and to enhance the positive perspective of society towards military

service.

Starting in 1999, ‘military service record disclosure program for public

officials with a grade of level 4 and above’[8] was initiated to satisfy the

public’s right to know, and to contribute to improving the transparency and

credibility of military service execution. The MND will continue to put


2012 Renowned Military Service Family
Awardees

**8. ‘ Military Service Record Disclosure**
**Program for Public Officials’**

This program has been in operation
since the enactment of the ‘Act on
Reporting and Disclosing the Military
Service Record of Public Officials’ on 24
May 1999. According to this Act, military
service records of the public officials
listed below and their children need to
be reported and are disclosed.

-  Political service officials (President,
National Assemblymen, Ministers, Vice
Ministers, etc.)

-  Regular public officials (Level 4 and
above)

-  Active Duty Service Members (Colonel
and above)

-  Educational public officials

-  Heads of local governments and local
assemblymen


-----

forth its efforts to dissolve the public’s distrust towards the leaders of

society not carrying out their duties of military service, and to create an

environment of ‘Noblesse Oblige’ throughout society.

Additionally, the MMA has been implementing the ‘renowned military

service family enhancement program’ since 2004 in order to raise the level

of pride of those who diligently carried out their duties of military defense,

and to render them with the appropriate treatment and compensation for

their sacrifice and dedication. Renowned military service families are

selected from those families that have three generation of service members

who have served as active service. The selection status as of 2012 is

shown in Chart 10-15.

**Chart 10-15. Renowned Military Service Family Selection Status**

**Unit: Number of families**

|Total|2004|2005|2006|2007|2008|2009|2010|2011|2012|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1,363|40|84|92|73|132|147|192|302|301|



Starting in 2010, the MND is providing various discount benefits to

renowned military service families by making arrangements with 479

facilities throughout the country such as museums, hospitals, and

condominiums so that these families can actually benefit from their

selection as renowned military service families.

On top of these efforts, the MND is actively promoting a variety of

activities to increase the positive view on carrying out military service by

holding active duty service member enlistment culture festivals where the

anxieties and nervousness of the conscripts can be alleviated, and by

providing introductory education on military service for teenagers.

**3. Communicating More with the People**

Under the vision of ‘realizing an open defense civil petition adminis
tration that serves the people,’ the MND is striving to improve its civil

petition service by improving the civil complaint handling procedures and

making the information disclosure system more substantial. Additionally,

it is expanding the communication infrastructure with the people by


-----

actively advertising the defense policies through the Defense Media

Agency, which is the leading national defense media agency, and by

carrying out more diverse cultural programs inside and outside of the

barracks.

**| Improving the Civil Petition Service | The main areas of civil**

petitions made to the MND are related to: confirmation of death or injury

during military service, benefits for service and sacrifice, reserve force

training, removing the military facility protection zone status, and noise

from fighters and helicopters. Approximately 3,800 civil petitions are

received monthly, amounting to approximately 40 to 50 thousand a year.

The status of civilian petitions received over the past 5 years is shown in

Chart 10-16.

60,000

40,000

20,000

0

**Chart 10-16. Status of civilian petitions received over the past 5 years**

**Unit: Number of petitions**

**Documentation** **Internet** **Total**

**51,153**

**47,117** **45,910**
**43,094**
**40,652**

36,917 36,258 33,684 32,856 43,143

10,200 9,652 9,410 7,796 8,010

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

The MND is maintaining an average level in the civil petition

satisfactory questionnaire taken by the Office of the Prime Minister every

year on all the central government agencies. For two consecutive years in

2008 and 2009, it was selected as an outstanding agency. However, due to

the attack on the ROK Ship Cheonan and the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo
(island) in 2010, the level of satisfaction towards MND’s civil petition

service dropped. The MND’s civil petition satisfactory trend is shown in

Chart 10-17.


-----

**Chart 10-17. The MND’s civil petition satisfactory trend**

90

70



50


**Unit: Points**

**MND** **Average of all government agencies**

**76.97**

**69.2** **71.5** **70.39** **74.43**

**73.32**

**67.0** **68.27** **69.52**
**62.2**


2007 2008 2009 2010 2011


In 2011, the MND USFK Base Relocation Office (MURO) won the

Prime Minister’s award at the 2011 Outstanding Cases in Civil Petition

Administration Improvements competitive exhibition as a result of putting

forward efforts to improve the level of satisfaction such as revising the

‘Directive on Handling National Defense Civil Petitions’ and the

‘Electronic Civil Petition Administration Manual.’

In 2012, the MND pursued the establishment of a national defense call

service system to accommodate the needs of civil petitioners and enhance

the level of quality and service of civil petition administration.

Additionally, it will continue to exert efforts to meet the level of public

expectations.

**| Reinforcing the Information Release System | It is evaluated that**

the releasing of information has become stabilized with recent trends

showing a consistent amount of information release requests being made

after a steady increase since the implementation of the ‘Information

Release Act’ in 1998. The yearly status of information release requests is

shown in Chart 10-18.

**Chart 10-18. Yearly status of information release requests**

|Year|2005|2006|2007|2008|2009|2010|2011|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Number of Requests|492|468|677|748|641|755|749|



The MND is exerting tireless efforts to improve the information release

menu on the MND internet website and to supplement the method in


Civil Petition Administration
Improvements competitive exhibition
awards (Cheongju, November 2011)


-----

which the list of releasable information is provided to the public, so that

the people can access the information they seek in an easy and convenient

manner.

Additionally, the MND is improving its communication with the people

by announcing those policies and information that are of interest to the

public in advance, and informing the public of how long it takes to retrieve

the requested information and providing such information in a timely

manner.

In particular, the MND information release monitoring group was

established for the first time in 2012 and is currently in operation. This

group conducts evaluations on the appropriateness in releasing

information and on the status of releases, and contributes to improving the

accessibility to information stored on the internet website and the

conveniences of the website users.

**| Publicizing National Defense Policies | The MND is striving to**

increase the public’s trust towards the military by better informing the

people of various national defense policies utilizing diverse national

defense media, and by shaping a positive image of the MND and the

military.

The MND is utilizing the broadcasting resources of the Defense Media

Agency, which is being operated as the responsible operating agency, and

daily and monthly newspapers to deliver various national defense news

and information not only to service members but also to the public.

The Korea Forces Network (KFN) TV of the Defense Media Agency

broadcasts nationwide through satellite broadcasting and local cable

stations, and delivers diverse news and information on the military to the

service members and the public through defense related news and

education programs. The KFN Radio delivers how life is in the military

and the activities carried out in the military over the air. The MND airs

various programs that introduce defense policies in an easy-to-understand

manner through the KFN TV and Radio, and provides education and

entertainment programs geared towards service members and civilians

alike. In particular, the program ‘Morale Train’ contributes to boosting the

morale of the service members serving in remote locations through

various entertainment performances.


MND Information Release Monitoring
Group Briefing Session (MND, March
2012)

Recording of Korea Forces Network
program


-----

The National Defense Daily, the daily newspaper published by the

Defense Media Agency, is a tabloid format daily newspaper that provides

articles on defense policies, military activities, barracks life, and other

military related news, and 150,000 copies are published daily. The

‘National Defense Journal,’ which is a monthly magazine, also provides

various information on a variety of national defense policies and military

related information. Around 20,000 copies of this journal are published

monthly.

The MND is actively carrying out diverse on-line public relations

activities in order to adjust to the rapidly changing internet environment in

the information age. First, policy promotions and information related to

various policies are provided via e-mails. Also, by continuously providing

policy information in the form of a newsletter to over 42,000 defense

policy followers of various class, age, and vocation via e-mail, the MND

is exerting its efforts to assist the people in properly understanding the

national defense policies.

The MND is making improvements to its internet website in a

user-friendly manner, and is communicating with netizens by operating

blogs. As a result of these efforts, Donggo-Donglak (Sharing the Joys and

Sorrows), the most famous of MND blogs, won the best blog award in

2009 and the outstanding blog award in 2011 by the Korea Blog Business

Association. As of September 2012, Donggo-Donglak was visited more

than 9 million times. Meanwhile, two blogs that took off in 2009,

_Gunhwa-singgo (With the Boots Strapped On) a theme blog for career_

service members, and Yeolhyeol-Gukbang (Passionate National Defense),

a policy blog, were integrated into a policy promoting blog, called

‘N.A.R.A.’[9] in 2011.

In addition to utilizing blogs, the MND is promoting its policies through

social network services (SNS) such as Tweeter, me2day, and Facebook in

order to inform the public of policies of interest in a prompt manner and to

communicate in a real-time manner.

Through these means, the MND is promoting and informing national

defense policies to the public through direct communication while

listening to and collecting the diverse views and voices of the public.

Public relations activities utilizing SNS allow for accurate and prompt

dissemination of policy information when a national defense issue arises.


**9. N.A.R.A.**

The name N.A.R.A. utilizes the first
letters of the Navy, Army, ROK Marine
Corps, and Air Force. It is a MND policy
information blog, and the name ‘Nara,’
which means nation, describes MND’s
main duty of defending the nation.


-----

This in turn assists the public in clearly understanding the national defense

issue at hand.

Meanwhile, in September 2012, the MND and the Korea Journalists

Association established and announced the ‘Military News Coverage and

Reporting Guideline during National Security Crisis Situations.’ The need

for a ‘Reporting Guideline’ arose after the attack on the ROK Ship

_Cheonan and the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo (island) in 2010, and the final_

product came out after carrying out approximately two years of

discussions and meetings amongst experts in various fields including the

MND, media, and academia.

According to this Guideline, when an emergency situation occurs in the

future that could have a serious impact on national security, the ROK

military provides the relevant information to the media in an accurate and

prompt manner, supports the media’s news coverage and reporting

activities, and devises personal safety measures for reporters. Additionally,

this Guideline requires journalists to observe: operation site control lines

by fully considering military and operation security, procedures for

attaining endorsement prior to carrying out news collecting activities on

operation related items, and basic regulations for news collection set forth

by the military.

**| Pursuing Diverse Cultural Programs | Cultural activities play a big**

part in cultivating the emotions of the service members and generating

intangible combat power. The ROK military provides opportunities to

experience and take part in cultural and arts programs along with reading

opportunities in order to relieve the tensions of the service members

accumulated during training as well as to give service members a sense

of emotional stability. Additionally, international military culture

exchanges are being expanded as well as a variety of activities to

enhance friendly and cooperative relations with the civilian sector and

the U.S.

In order to provide service members with opportunities to experience

culture and arts programs in their barracks, instructors in the fields of

music, traditional dance and video are invited once a week to military

units, and provide culture and arts education for service members.

Furthermore, various cultural and arts organizations visit military units


Culture and arts education at a military
unit (30[th] division RECON unit facility,
August 2011)


-----

and carry out performances more than 170 times annually, and the MND

is planning to increase the number of these kinds of performances in the

future.

Also, approximately 50 books selected by the military are provided

annually to military units above company level in order to cultivate the

emotions of the service members. Setting up a library is mandatory at

military units above battalion level, and currently around 1,800 military

libraries are in operation.

The ROK Armed Forces Symphony Orchestra, established in January

2010, contributes to creating a high standard military culture by holding

concerts on a regular basis. This Orchestra also carries out ‘on-the-road

concerts’ at isolated units and facilities such as military hospitals. Also, it

carried out local concerts in the U.S. in September 2011, and a concert in

Vietnam in March 2012 to commemorate the 20 [th] anniversary of

diplomatic ties between the ROK and Vietnam. As seen here, the MND

has been actively conducting international military culture exchanges, and

in November 2012, it invited the People’s Liberation Army culture and arts

performance group to perform in the ROK in commemoration of the 20[th]

anniversary of diplomatic ties between the ROK and China.

Meanwhile, the ROK military has focused on composing typical

military songs that can be sung by the service members together to

cultivate a military spirit, instead of utilizing ballad-type military songs. In

September 2012, the ‘True Military Song’ competition was held and 10

military songs were selected as newly composed military songs. In

October 2012, the ‘1[st] Military Song Chorus Competition’ was held for

civilian groups in order to create a consensus on the military and national

security by singing these military songs together, and more military song

singing events will be pursued in the future.

Since 1972, opportunities have been provided for new USFK service

members to experience the Korean traditional culture and visit security

awareness sites in order to enhance the friendship between the ROK and

U.S. service members and to assist USFK service members in better

understanding the Korean culture. In particular, various programs in which

the ROK and U.S. service members participate together such as temple

stay, Korean food tasting, Taekwondo, and traditional Korean musical

instrument lessons have been carried out since 2011.


Military library (3[rd] artillery unit, 27[th]
division)

Performance by the People’s Liberation
Army culture and arts performance
group in the ROK (National Theater,
November 2012)

The Minister of National Defense Hosted
1[st] Military Song Chorus Competition
(Seoul National Memorial Board,
October 2012)

Korean culture experience by USFK
service members (Hwaseong Fortress in
Suwon, November 2012)


-----

**4. Recovery of Korean War Remains**

**| Meaning and Progress | The Korean War remains recovery project**

is a patriots and veterans project to recover the remains of those 130,000

plus patriotic heroes who made the ultimate sacrifice during the Korean

War, and to bury them at the National Memorial Board. Through this

project, the MND is cultivating the spirit of patriotism and service to

nation by following through with the nation’s persisting responsibility of

‘taking care of those who have sacrificed themselves for the nation until

the end.’

This project originally commenced as a temporary project as a part of

the 50[th] Korean War anniversary commemorative project led by the Army

in 2000. However, starting from 2003, this project became a permanent

project with a Korean War remains recovery division and recovery team

being established at the Army Headquarters. In January 2007, the MND

Agency for KIA Recovery and Identification (MAKRI) was established

with 85 personnel and 4 recovery teams, and it is being operated as a

remains recovery expert unit. Meanwhile, with the enactment of the ‘Act

on the Excavation of the Remains of Soldiers Killed in the Korean War’ in

2008, the remains recovery project took off in full scale as a whole-of
government initiative. However, the remains recovery project is facing

many difficulties due to the lack of existing data on Korean War heroes,

the aging of the Korean War generation and war veterans, changes to

terrain features due to land development, and the tampering of locations

where remains are presumed to be buried.

**| Remains Investigation and Recovery | The MAKRI organization**

has been reinforced three times since its inception in 2007, and as of

2012, there are 195 personnel working in 5 divisions (planning, investi
gation, recovery, identification, support) and 8 recovery teams.

At first, the MAKRI conducted remains recovery operations at major

combat areas. However, in 2009, MAKRI conducted a basic investigation

based on a map that shows where remains are presumed to be buried,

which was drawn up through war history research and testimonies of

Korea War veterans. In particular, 10 field grade officers in the reserve

force were hired to conduct precision probing activities in 2011, which


The ROK President and First Lady visit
MAKRI (Seoul National Memorial Board,
June 2011)


-----

resulted in the completion of the ‘Comprehensive Analysis on the

Whereabouts of Remains’ in February 2012. Based on this Analysis, the

‘Remains Recovery Five-Year Plan’ was established which set the

conditions to pursue various remains recovery initiatives in a more

systematic and efficient manner.

Additionally, the ‘KIA Total Information System’ (KIATIS) was

established in 2011 as a means to make conduct remains recovery

activities in a more advanced and scientific manner, and enabled the

digitalization of all data and records of those killed in action. Remains

recovery related records, which were all written down manually in the

past, are now inputted into the KIATIS using a computer at the site and are

shared in real-time with all the relevant units and agencies.

Meanwhile, the MND is putting forth its efforts to improve the expertise

and quality level of the remains recovery project by providing domestic

and overseas training for expert personnel and forming professor advisory

groups for various criteria.

As a result of these efforts, more than 1,000 remains are being recovered

every year since 2009. Since the commencement of the remains recovery

project in 2000 up to 30 September 2012, a total of 6,802 remains of

friendly forces have been recovered. The details of this achievement are

shown in Chart 10-19.

**Chart 10-19. Yearly Status of Remains Recovery [(]As of September 2012[)]**

**1,443 1,389**

**1,278**

**Friendly Forces**

**Enemy Forces** **837**

1,331 1,303 **811**

**534** 1,139

673

**344**

**211** **226** **152** **173** **203** **175** 378 788

334

202 165 118 138 141 92

10 9 61 34 35 62 83 156 164 139 112 86 23


2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

**| Remains Identification Activities | Although 6,802 remains have**

been recovered up to now, the personal identities of only 109 remains


KIATIS equipment being utilized at a
recovery site

Joint enshrinement ceremony (Seoul
National Memorial Board, December
2011)

Notifying a bereaved family member of
the remains identity confirmation (39[th]
Division, February 2012)


-----

have been identified as of September 2012. Out of the 109 remains, only

79 have been confirmed by bereaved families. The identification of

remains is carried out by comparing the DNA sample that the bereaved

family members provided. As such, acquiring DNA samples from

bereaved family members is extremely important for confirming the

identity of remains.

The method of comparing and analyzing DNA samples provided by

bereaved family members to identify the personal identity of remains has

been applied since 2003. Up to 2002, identification of remains was carried

out using the articles found with the remains. However, the number of

DNA samples that got collected was less than satisfactory due to the fact

that DNA sample collection activities were only carried out at military

hospitals around the country up until 2006. However, since the

establishment of MAKRI in 2007, collection activities of DNA samples of

bereaved family members are also being conducted in 255 community

health centers nationwide. Additionally, the DNA sample collection

method was changed from a blood collecting method to a buccal swab in

2011, which made it easier to collect DNA samples. Also, the collection of

DNA samples of bereaved family members, which was conducted on

civilians only in the past, has been expanded to include active duty service

members. Taking into account that DNA is a decisive factor in identifying

the identity of remains, a national defense forensics research center was

established at the MND Criminal Investigation Command to conduct

DNA tests.

Through these efforts, the number of DNA samples collected has

increased significantly in the past three years, and as of September 2012,

DNA samples from 21,828 individuals have been collected. The status of

DNA samples collected, confirmed identities, and remains confirmed by

bereaved family members are shown in Chart 10-20.

**Chart 20-10. Status of DNA samples collected, confirmed identities, and remains confirmed**
**by bereaved family members**

**Unit: Number**


Collecting DNA samples from a
bereaved family member

|Classification|Total|2000|2001|2002|2003|2004|2005|2006|2007|2008|2009|2010|2011|2012|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|DNA samples collected|21,828|-|-|-|357|359|609|516|1,418|2,560|4,452|3,535|4,550|3,472|
|Confirmed identities|109|3|36|3|2|7|0|1|9|13|11|6|7|11|
|Remains confirmed by bereaved family members|79|3|1|9|2|3|2|2|9|13|11|6|7|11|


-----

**| Uplifting the Honor and Pride of Fallen Heroes and the Bereaved**

**Families | Those remains whose identities have been identified are**

provided to the bereaved families and buried at the National Memorial

Board. In particular, the method of delivering the ‘Remains Identity

Confirmation Notification’ to the bereaved family members was improved

in February 2011. Previously, notifications were made via mail or phone

call, but starting from February 2011, the local division commander, the

casualty officer, head of the respective local government, a regional

patriots and veterans’ group official jointly visit the residence of the

bereaved family member to deliver the notification personally. During the

notification delivery, the articles of the fallen hero and a consolation

plaque from the Minister of National Defense are also delivered.

Meanwhile, President Lee Myung-bak personally hosted an

enshrinement ceremony for the Korean War ‘Patriotic Brothers,’[10] whose

identities have been confirmed, on 6 June 2011, and consoled the bereaved

family members. Additionally, President Lee hosted a repatriation

ceremony on 25 May 2012 for the 12 ROK military service member

remains that were recovered by U.S. service members in North Korea.

This was the first time that the remains of ROK military service members,

which were recovered in North Korea, have been repatriated to the ROK.

Out of the 12 remains that have been repatriated, the two remains, which

have been identified as private first class Kim, Yong Soo and private first

class Lee, Kop Soo, were buried at the Daejon National Memorial Board

on 20 June 2012.

As such, the ROK government is exerting great efforts to uplift the pride

and honor of the bereaved families. Once inter-Korean relations improve

in the future, the ROK government plans to actively pursue the

repatriation of remains of ROK fallen heroes in North Korea based on the

South-North joint remains recovery agreement made at the South-North

Defense Ministerial Meeting in November 2007.

**| Enhancing the International Status of the MAKRI | The U.S.**

established the Joint POW/MIA Accounting Command (JPAC), a

remains recovery expert agency, in 2003 consisting of special facilities,

equipment and expert personnel to carry out the mission of finding and

recovering all U.S. remains left behind in combat areas worldwide to the


**10. Patriotic Brothers**

The ‘patriotic brothers’ refer to the late
Staff Sergeant Lee, Man Woo (older
brother) and the late Sergeant First
Class Lee, Chun Woo, who enlisted in
August and September 1950,
respectively, and died in May and
September 1951, respectively. The
remains of the older brother were buried
at the Seoul National Memorial Board in
1960. The remains of the younger
brother were recovered in Yanggu,
Gangwon Province in October 2010, and
the identity and bereaved family
members were confirmed in 2011. In
order to honor the noble sacrifice of the
two brothers, the remains of the
younger brother was buried next to the
tomb of the older brother.

Burial ceremony for the ‘Patriotic
Brothers’ (Seoul National Memorial
Board, 6 June 2011)

Repatriation ceremony for Korean War
remains recovered in North Korea
(Seoul Airport, May 2012)


-----

very end.

As such, the ROK MND is maintaining a close cooperation and coordi
nation system with the U.S. Against this backdrop, the ROK MND and the

U.S. Department of Defense signed the ‘Memorandum of Agreement on

War Remains Recovery Cooperation’ on 28 November 2011 which

provides the legal and institutional basis that consolidates the war remains

recovery cooperation between the ROK and the U.S. Joint remains

recovery and identification activities between the ROK and the U.S. are

conducted numerous times on a yearly basis. As a result of these efforts,

the U.S. delivered 15 ROK service member remains to the ROK, and the

ROK delivered 8 U.S. service member remains to the U.S. as of

September 2012.

Meanwhile, the MAKRI held a presentation session on the ROK’s

remains recovery project in Hawaii in August 2011, and a remains

recovery photo and article exhibition in Las Vegas in September 2011.

These initiatives also provided opportunities to introduce the current status

of the MND remains recovery project to Koreans living abroad, and to

strengthen the self-esteem of these Koreans. Additionally, DNA samples

of 16 bereaved family members living abroad were collected in a foreign

country for the first time.

Additionally, a MAKRI delegation participated in the 64[th] AAFS Annual

meeting held in Atlanta, Georgia from 20 to 24 February 2012 where

around 4,000 personnel from 68 nations participated. At the symposium,

the MAKRI delegation presented its ‘forensic analysis of the 4,000 plus

Korean War remains that have been recovered in the past three years’

which showed the world that the ROK is the second nation to have

established a recovery and identification system for war remains after the

U.S.

In 2012, upon the request from the Libyan National Transitional Council
(NTC), the ROK government dispatched a support team of 12 experts to

assist in confirming missing people in Libya. This support was provided to

assist in the national reconstruction efforts of Libya in a humanitarian

perspective, and was decided through the foreign affairs and security

policy coordination meeting and the 6[th] cabinet meeting on 26 January

2012. The ‘ROK Support Team for Identification of Missing Libyan

Nationals’ carries out missions such as training expert personnel to attain


Signing of the ROK-U.S. Korean War
Remains Recovery MOA (U.S.
Department of Defense, November
2011)

Participation in an AAFS Annual Meeting


-----

the capabilities required to execute missions in Libya, building identifi
cation and DNA test facilities and providing the relevant equipment, and

providing support for DNA tests. Through these efforts, this Support Team

is expected to not only enhance the national prestige but also contribute to

strengthening the friendly cooperative relationship between the ROK and

Libya.

**5. Efforts of the ROK Military for a Fair Society**

The ROK government is striving to realize a fair society that is required

for continuous growth and prosperity for all, as well as continued

advancement. A fair society connotes three key values: ‘respect for liberty

and creativity,’ ‘equal opportunities and fair competition,’ and ‘consid
eration for the weak.’

In line with the government’s guidelines, the MND is exerting its efforts

to build an impartial military internally, and to contribute to realizing a fair

society externally.

**| Way Ahead | The three policy initiatives that the MND is pursuing**

with emphasis are: a more autonomous and creative national defense, a

fairer national defense, and a national defense that fulfills its social

responsibilities.

First, ‘a more autonomous and creative national defense’ refers to a

national defense that achieves maximum performance results through

open communication and creativity. In order to create a national defense

culture that is dynamic and communicates more closely with the people,

the MND is operating a national defense information release monitoring

group and promoting various social contribution activities carried out by

the military. Additionally, the MND is innovating the policy and duty

processes to increase the efficiency of national defense management, and

is applying creative management skills of the civilian sector.

Second, ‘a fairer national defense’ refers to a national defense that earns

the trust of the people by ensuring the principle of equal opportunities and

transparency. By enhancing the level of fairness in deciding the type of

military service and fundamentally preventing acts to evade military


President Lee presiding over the 4[th] Fair
Society Promotion Conference (Suwon,
September 2011)


-----

service, the MND is putting forth its efforts to create a social environment

where those who diligently carry out their military service are respected.

Additionally, transparency is strengthened by solidifying the promotion

system based on ability instead of considering the candidate’s hometown,

year of graduation, and year of previous promotion, and expanding full

competition contracts in the national defense procurement process.

Third, ‘a national defense that fulfills its social responsibilities’ refers to

achieving a national defense that gives back to those who have dedicated

themselves to country, and that considers the weak. To achieve this

initiative, the MND is improving the privileges rendered to and treatment

of war veterans and fallen heroes who dedicated and sacrificed themselves

for country. Additionally, the MND is strengthening its support for

vulnerable social groups that need special consideration from within and

outside the military such as service members from multi-cultural families

and residents living near military units.

On top of these efforts, the ROK military is continuously pursuing

various sharing and volunteer activities such as operating a farmer’s

market through the ‘one unit for one village’ initiative and supporting

students that live in isolated areas where educational conditions are poor.

Through these initiatives, the ROK military plans to transform itself into a

military that is loved and respected by the people.


Seamen from the Navy Jeju Defense
Command carrying out civilian support
volunteer activities. (Jeju Island, May
2012)


-----

-----

