## Chapter 1

**South African Defence Review 1998**

**_Introduction_**

**_Aim and Focus of the Defence Review_**

1. In May 1996 the Minister of Defence presented to Parliament the White Paper
on National Defence for the Republic of South Africa. Parliament approved the
document, with strong support expressed by all political parties.

2. The overarching theme of the White Paper is the transformation of defence
policy and the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) in the light of the
momentous political and strategic developments which have occurred at national,
regional and international levels following the demise of the Cold War and the
ending of apartheid.

3. At national level these developments include the establishment of a
democratic government; the introduction of the Reconstruction and Development
Programme (RDP) to address poverty and socio-economic inequality; the policy
of national unity and reconciliation; and the adoption of a new Constitution which
outlaws discrimination, enshrines fundamental human rights and lays thebasis for
democratic civil-military relations.

4. After two and a half decades of isolation, South Africa has been welcomed
back into the international community and has joined a host of important regional
and international bodies. South Africa now engages in defence co-operation with
a number of countries and participates in regional security arrangements under
the auspices of the Southern African Development Community (SADC).

5. In the light of these developments and the integration of the former statutory
and non-statutory forces, the challenge of transformation is substantial and
complex. The White Paper addresses this challenge at the level of broad policy.
It establishes a policy framework and the main principles of defence in our new
democracy.

6. The White Paper also provides for a Defence Review, the aim of which is to
elaborate on this policy framework through comprehensive long-range planning
on such matters as posture, doctrine, force design, force levels, logistic support,
armaments, equipment, human resources and funding.

7. More specifically, the White Paper provides that the Review will encompass
the following:

7.1 It will present options with respect to the size, roles and structure of
the SANDF.

7.2 It will address the implications of the core force approach, described in
Chapter 5 of the White Paper, for the size, doctrine, posture, weaponry,
equipment and other features of the SANDF.


-----

7.3 It will address the strategic and technical implications of the
constitutional provision that the SANDF "shall be primarily defensive in the
exercise or performance of its powers and functions".

7.4 It will deal with the implications of the principles of defence in a
democracy, described in Chapter 2 of the White Paper, for the orientation
of the SANDF.

7.5 It will present, for the consideration of Parliament and the public,
detailed and well-motivated budgetary forecasts and proposals; specific
policies regarding the provisioning of logistic resources; and the
identification of appropriate technology to optimise the cost-effectiveness
of the core force.

7.6 It will deal with the size and structure of the Part-Time Component
(PTC).

7.7 It will include an examination of prevailing conditions in the SANDF
with the view to rationalising current spending, eliminating waste and
unnecessary duplication, and determining the most cost-effective means
of managing human and material resources.

7.8 It will provide details on the rationalisation, redesign and right-sizing of the SANDF
given the absence of a foreseeable conventional military threat.

7.9 In the context of demobilisation and rationalisation, it will outline a formula and
guidelines for ensuring that the former statutory and non-statutory forces are equitably
represented in the SANDF.

**_Process of conducting the Defence Review_**

8. The drafting of the Defence Review was the responsibility of a Working Group appointed by the
Minister of Defence and co-ordinated by the Secretary for Defence. The Working Group
established specialist sub-committees on defence posture, functions and force design; human
resource issues; the PTC; the arms industry; legal issues; and land and the environment.

9. The Working Group and its sub-committees comprised members of Parliament, the Defence
Secretariat, the regular and part-time components of the SANDF, Armscor and the defence
industry, the academic community, and non-governmental organisations.

10. In the interests of achieving a national consensus on defence matters, the Minister decided at
the outset that the Review should be subject to a process of consultation with defence
stakeholders and interest groups.

11. To this end, national consultative conferences were held on 12-13 February 1996, 12-13
August 1996 and 16 May 1997. Two rounds of regional workshops were held in Gauteng,
KwaZulu/Natal, Western Cape, Free State, Eastern Cape, Mpumalanga, North West, Northern
Cape and Northern Province in both July 1996 and May 1997. The conferences and workshops
were open to the public. They were attended by national and provincial parliamentarians,
members of political parties and government departments, and a broad cross-section of the
defence establishment and civil society.

12. The Work Group presented several briefings on the Defence Review to the parliamentary
Joint Standing Committee on Defence. The Working Group has endeavoured to address the
questions and concerns of committee members in the Defence Review.


-----

13. The Defence Review has been reviewed by the decision-making bodies of the Department of
Defence and by the Minister of Defence. The reports submitted by the Work Group were
submitted to Cabinet and Parliament for their consideration.

14. In addition to the Defence Review, the Minister established a Transformation Project which is
intended, _inter alia, to redesign the non-combat structures of the Department in the light of_
budgetary constraints, new defence policy and approved force design. The goal is to ensure
adequate, appropriate, accountable and affordable defence for South Africa. This entails an
investigation aimed at eliminating inefficiency and minimising costs through, _inter alia, the_
rationalisation of units and headquarters and the development of sound administrative, command
and management principles.

**_Scope of the Defence Review_**

15. The Defence Review considered and presented proposals on the following subjects:

15.1 Defence posture and doctrine. [Chapter 2]

15.2 The primary function of the SANDF, namely the defence of the RSA and its people
against military threats; defence tasks and contingencies in relation to this function; the
Dcore forceD approach; and the implications thereof for the structure of the Dpeace-time
forceD. [Chapter 3]

15.3 The secondary functions and tasks of the SANDF with respect to regional security

[Chapter 4]; international peace support operations [Chapter 5]; internal deployment in
co-operation with the SA Police Service (SAPS) [Chapter 6]; and non-military activities

[Chapter 7].

15.4 Force design options for the structure, weaponry and equipment of the Army, Navy,
Air Force and Medical Services of the SANDF, and the budgetary implications thereof.

[Chapter 8]

15.5 Force structure which examines the support structures of the Department of
Defence in the light of pronouncements thus far in the Transformation Project. These are
preliminary indications and may change as the Transformation Project develops further.

[Chapter 9]

15.6 The Human Resource vision of the Department of Defence, including its policies
currently under formulation. [Chapter Ten]

15.7 The Part-time Force vision of the Department of Defence. [Chapter Eleven]

15.8 The land and environment policies of the Department of Defence as informed by
national policy. [Chapter Twelve]

15.9 Acquisition management which outlines the processes pertinent to acquisition
management in the Department of Defence. [Chapter Thirteen]

15.10 The revision of defence legislation which will be taken forward in the revision of the
Defence Act and the Military Disciplinary Code. [Chapter Fourteen]

15.11 A conclusion which examines the Medium Term Expenditure Framework and the
impact of constraints on national resources on the attainment of the Department of
DefenceDs policy vision. [Chapter Fifteen]

**_Logic of the Defence Review_**


-----

16. The Defence Review seeks to determine the appropriate size, structure and force design of
the SANDF into the next century. To make such determination, it is necessary to first establish
the following:

16.1 The tasks which the SANDF will and may have to perform in the future.

16.2 The manner in which these tasks should be undertaken.

16.3 The equipment and weaponry required by the SANDF to fulfil these tasks.

17. The identification of SANDF tasks is based on the following:

17.1 The Constitutional provisions on defence.

17.2 The policy contained in the White Paper on Defence.

17.3 An analysis of the internal and external security environment. This analysis entails
the following steps:

17.3.1 identifying defence contingencies (ie situations in which the SANDF will or
may have to be employed);

17.3.2 assessing the probability of such situations arising;

17.3.3 assessing the impact on South Africa if the SANDF does not or cannot
take the necessary steps to address these situations; and

17.3.4 prioritising the contingencies in the light of the above.

18. The determination of the manner in which the SANDF will fulfil its tasks is based on the
following:

18.1 The national policy and foreign policy of government.

18.2 The provisions in the Constitution and the White Paper on Defence regarding the
posture and functions of the SANDF. The most important provisions in this regard are
that DSouth Africa shall abide by international law on armed conflictD and that Dthe
SANDF shall have a primarily defensive orientation and postureD.

19. The size, structure and weaponry of the SANDF will be based not only on the considerations
outlined above, but also on budgetary restraints. Defence planning can therefore be described as
Dneeds-driven and cost-constrainedD. Budget constraints will make it necessary to prioritise
and stagger major weapons procurement programmes.

20. The force design proposed in Chapter 8 of the Defence Review takes cognisance of the
process described above. The initial Defence Review reports were presented in such a way that
decision-makers (ie the Minister, Cabinet and Parliament) were able to review and, if necessary
adjust, the reasoning which led to the force design.

21. The vision force structure described in Chapter 9 of the Defence Review is firmly rooted in a
holistic understanding of transformation of the defence function, and is not limited to merely
addressing organisational restructuring. The vision force structure described in the chapter is not
cast in stone, but is open to amendment as the transformation project progresses.

22. Both Chapter 8 and Chapter 9 set a policy vision for the force design and the force structure
of the SANDF. This will be tempered by national priorities and the budgetary realities presented in
Chapter 15, the concluding chapter of the Defence Review.


-----

23. Defence policy on human resource management and the part-time force are outlined in
Chapter 10 and Chapter 11. These chapters encapsulate broad pronouncements on these
issues, setting the foundation for a range of topical issues and firmly locates the management of
defence personnel within Constitutional requirements and a cognisance of fundamental human
rights.

24. Policy on defence land, facilities and environmental management is developed in Chapter 12,
within the framework of national policy on land and environment management.

25. Defence acquisition management processes and structures are outlined in Chapter 13. These
attempt to bring the acquisition of defence capital equipment in line with the demand for
accountable and transparent governance and also gives expression to strategic technologies and
equipment required by the SANDF.

26. The process adopted to revise defence legislation is outlined in Chapter 14. This relates to
the process identified to revise both the Military Disciplinary Code and the Defence Act, a process
which exists outside of this Defence Review.

**_Key concepts underpinning the Defence Review_**

27. The following key concepts, drawn mainly from the White Paper on Defence, underpin the
Defence Review.

**Approach to Security**

28. The government has adopted a broad, holistic approach to security, recognising the various
non-military dimensions of security and the distinction between the security of the state and the
security of people. The greatest threats to the security of the South African people are socioeconomic problems like poverty and unemployment, and the high level of crime and violence.

**Approach to Defence**

29. The government has adopted a narrow, conventional approach to defence. The primary
function of the SANDF is defence against external aggression. The other functions are
secondary.

30. The Defence Review therefore sets a policy vision for the size, structure, weaponry,
equipment and funding requirements of the SANDF, mainly on the basis of its primary function.
Where the self-defence capabilities are insufficient for certain secondary functions - such as
peace support operations and internal deployment in co-operation with the SAPS - additional
capabilities may be required.

**Arms Control and Disarmament**

31. South Africa is committed to the goals of arms control and disarmament at national, regional
and international levels. It has introduced new policy on conventional arms transfers, banned the
manufacture and export of anti-personnel mines, and endorsed the international prohibitions on
the manufacture, use and export of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons and related
technology.

**International Law on Armed Conflict**

32. The Constitution provides that South Africa will conduct its defence policy, and the SANDF
will execute military operations, in accordance with international law on armed conflict.

33. International law prohibits the initiation of armed hostilities by states. This does not preclude
the exercise of the right of self-defence if South Africa is subject to an act of aggression. [Chapter
2]

34. The Review also provides that deterrence - which seeks to dissuade aggression by promising
to inflict severe harm on an attacker - will be based on a counter-force rather than a counter-value


-----

doctrine. In other words, deterrence threatens to destroy enemy forces and capabilities rather
than civilian institutions and populations.

**Defensive Posture**

35. The government does not currently, and will not in the future, have aggressive intentions
towards any state. It regards the use or threat of military force as a measure of last resort in the
face of aggression when non-violent forms of conflict resolution have failed. The emphasis lies on
preventing conflict through co-operation with other states, particularly in Southern Africa.

36. In the light of the above and South AfricaDs commitment to abide by international law, the
SANDF will have a primarily defensive orientation and posture. This has implications for doctrine,
training and force design. For example, manifestly offensive armaments and systems have been
excluded from the force design. Other potentially offensive weapons systems which give undue
strategic reach have been limited in number.

**Defence spending and the Peace-Time Force**

37. The Department of Defence accepts the national imperative of channelling the financial
resources of the state to the RDP in order to alleviate socio-economic problems like poverty and
unemployment. In the light of this imperative, and in the absence of any foreseeable external
military threat, the Defence Review seeks to establish an affordable peace-time force.

38. The peace-time force will comprise a relatively small regular component backed up by a
sufficiently large part-time component. These components should constitute a balanced and
sustainable Dcore forceD capable of dealing with small-scale defence contingencies which arise in
the short-term. Since the long-term future is inherently uncertain, it is also necessary to maintain
the capabilities required to expand the core force if the security situation deteriorates significantly.

39. The SANDFDs annual budget makes provision for the maintenance, development and
preparation of the peace-time force. As a general rule, it does not provide for operations due to
the unpredictable nature thereof; special budgetary allocations therefore have to be made where
the President authorises the employment of the SANDF in operations, including peace support
operations and co-operation with the SAPS in the maintenance of law and order. Currently, the
SANDF does budget for its internal deployments because of the on-going nature of this task.

**International Peace Operations**

40. With the advent of democracy, South Africa has moved from an isolationist position to one of
engagement in international fora and participation in regional, continental and international peace
initiatives. This will lead, in time, to South AfricaDs involvement in multi-national peace support
operations.

**Regional Security**

41. South AfricaDs relations with neighbouring states have shifted from animosity to friendship
and co-operation. South Africa is committed to strengthening common security arrangements,
defence co-operation and confidence- and security-building measures within the framework of
SADC and the Inter-State Defence and Security Committee (ISDSC).

**Internal Deployment**

42. The government regards the on-going deployment of the SANDF in an internal policing
capacity as undesirable. Ideally, the military should be utilised only in extreme situations, such as
a state of emergency and against threats to the constitutional order.

43. Notwithstanding the above, deployment in co-operation with the SAPS is likely to persist for
some time because of on-going public violence and the relative shortage of police personnel.

Table of Contents


-----

### Chapter 2

**South African Defence Review 1998**

_Defence Posture and Doctrine_
**_Policy Framework_**

1. The Constitution provides that the primary object of the SANDF is to defend
and protect the Republic, its territorial integrity and its people, in accordance with
the Constitution and the principles of international law regulating the use of force.

2. In respect of defence posture, the White Paper provides the following
additional directives:

2.1 National security shall be sought primarily through efforts to meet the
political, economic, social and cultural rights and needs of South Africa s
people, and through efforts to promote and maintain regional security.

2.2 South Africa shall pursue peaceful relations with other states. It will
seek a high level of political, economic and military co-operation with
Southern African states in particular.

2.3 The SANDF shall have a primarily defensive orientation and posture.

2.4 South Africa is committed to the goals of arms control and
disarmament at national, regional and international levels.

3. The White Paper states that South Africa does not now, and will not in the
future, have aggressive intentions towards any state.

4. The White Paper asserts further that governments have an inherent right and
responsibility to ensure the protection of the state and its people against external
military threats. South Africa will employ the following principal strategies to this
end:

4.1 Political, economic and military co-operation with other states. In this
context, a common security regime, regional defence co-operation and
confidence- and security-building measures in Southern Africa are
particularly important.

4.2 The prevention, management and resolution of conflict through nonviolent means. Conflict resolution, in the form of diplomacy, mediation or
arbitration, may take place on a bilateral basis or under the auspices of an
international or regional body.

4.3 The deployment of the Defence Force. The use or threat of force
against external military aggression is a legitimate measure of last resort
when political solutions have been exhausted.

5. It is thus clear that the government s preferred and primary course of action is
to prevent conflict and war. South Africa will only turn to military means when
non-violent strategies and deterrence have failed.


-----

6. Deterrence requires the existence of a credible defence capability to inhibit
potential aggressors. Although South Africa is not confronted by any foreseeable
external military threat, this capability cannot be turned on and off like a tap. It is
therefore essential to maintain a core defence capability with the potential for
expansion should this ever be necessary.

7. In summary, South Africa has turned away from an isolationist and offensive
posture to one of common security in Southern Africa; defence co-operation with
other states; respect for international peace and security; and adherence to
international law.

8. In terms of domestic security, the SANDF is currently employed in cooperation with the SAPS in the maintenance of law and order and in border
protection against non-military threats. Ideally, the SANDF should be deployed in
the former role only in the most exceptional circumstances.

**_Deterence_**

9. As noted above, the White Paper requires the maintenance of a defence
capability which is sufficiently credible to deter potential aggressors. Deterrence
plays a crucial role in preventing armed conflict.

10. The maintenance of this capability should take account of the following:

10.1 A potential aggressor must believe that South Africa has the capacity
to apply sufficient force to thwart an act of aggression.

10.2 A potential aggressor should also believe that South Africa has the
political will to apply such force if it is compelled to do so.

11. The Constitution states that the security services will adhere to international
law on armed conflict (Articles 198(c), 199(5) and 200(2)). This includes the
Geneva and Hague conventions and protocols, referred to as international
humanitarian law, which provide, _inter alia, that armed forces may only attack_
military targets and must refrain from attacking civilians and civilian property.
These rules necessarily circumscribe deterrence doctrine.

12. South Africa s approach to deterrence encompasses the following:

12.1 South Africa will pursue military co-operation with other states in such
a way that potential aggressors run the risk of encountering collective
military capabilities in response. Collective capabilities would also deter
threats to the region as a whole.

12.2 Capabilities to neutralize possible threats should be at a level of
readiness commensurate with the lead time for such threats to develop.
This should be clearly visible. Care must be taken not to open strategic
gaps in the capability of the SANDF when reducing force levels.

12.3 Deterrence will not only be pursued against potential short-term
aggression through immediate force readiness. Potential aggression in the


-----

longer term will also be deterred by maintaining the capability for
expansion.

12.4 Even if South Africa is not strong enough to ensure dominance in
defensive actions, the risk to any potential aggressor should be
unacceptably high.

12.5 Deterrence should not be counter-productive in that it triggers an
arms race. This has implications for doctrine, force design and force
levels.�

**_SANDF Doctrine_**

13. Operational doctrine consists of the main principles and concepts by which
armed forces guide their actions in military operations in support of national
objectives. Doctrine derives from, and must be consistent with, defence policy
and posture.

14. The doctrine of the SANDF should therefore reflect the international
prohibition on acts of aggression; the exercise of the right of self-defence in a
manner which is consistent with international law; a defensive posture at
strategic level; and the employment of the SANDF as a measure of last resort.

15. The policy of non-aggression and the constitutional commitment to
international law, which outlaws the initiation of armed hostilities by states,
constitute the basis of SANDF doctrine. International law does not preclude the
exercise of the right of self-defence against external aggression.

16. In the light of the above, the doctrine of the SANDF will be based on a
strategic defensive posture with sufficient capabilities to protect military and
economic assets against offensive actions by an aggressor.

17. Further, capabilities to reverse the effects of offensive actions are required.
The SANDF must be able halt, contain and roll back such actions. Accordingly,
appropriate offensive capabilities will be required at operational level.

18. This approach will be complemented in times of conflict by government
spelling out clearly the threshold for offensive action by the SANDF. In practice
this may take the form of a declaration of appropriate exclusion zones or similar
mechanisms.

19. Finally, it is important to note that the defensive orientation of the SANDF is
reinforced by Executive and Parliamentary control over its employment.

**_Implications for Force Design_**

20. The above provisions, and particularly the requirement that the SANDF shall
have a prmarily defensive orientation and posture, impact directly on force
design. The rationale for a small but efficient and sustainable core force is in line
with this requirement (Chapter 3). The implications for force design are as
follows:


-----

20.1 The size and capabilities of the SANDF, in the context of government
s defence policy, should not be seen as threatening by other states in
Southern Africa. The emphasis will be on confidence-building defence in
the regional context.

20.2 Force levels will be limited to what is needed to maintain essential
capabilities and expertise. These will serve as a basis for expansion if
required.

20.3 The potential for expansion should be consistent with a realistic
appreciation of warning times for the development of military threats.
Participation in regional early warning structures will reinforce such
appreciation.

20.4 SANDF doctrine requires an emphasis on defensive rather than
offensive force elements. Manifestly offensive armaments and weapon
systems have therefore been excluded from the force design. Other
potentially offensive weapon systems which give undue strategic reach
have been limited in number.

20.5 The design of the SANDF should allow for dispersion of own forces.
This leads to a reduction in target concentration and therefore less
vulnerability in the event of an attack. It also contributes to regional
confidence-building since mobilisation can easily be observed.

20.6 Great reliance will be placed on the PTC. This ensures that
mobilisation will be more visible and thus less threatening than a large
standing force.

20.7 Where practically possible and financially viable, mobile and
offensive forces will be drawn away from border areas to deeper internal
bases.

20.8 Training and force preparation should be consistent with defence
policy, posture and doctrine.


-----

### Chapter 3

##### Self-Defence and the Peace-Time Force
###### Introduction

1. The White Paper on Defence states that the size, design, structure and budget of the SANDF
will be determined mainly by its primary function of self-defence.

2. The White Paper states further that the absence of a foreseeable external military threat
provides an opportunity to rationalise, redesign and right-size the defence force. The size and
features of the SANDF should be consistent with that of a peace-time force.

3. In identifying and designing the capabilities of the peace-time force, a range of considerations
have to be taken into account. The previous chapter discussed defence posture and doctrine.
This chapter considers the following:

3.1 the SANDF s tasks related to the self-defence function;

3.2 the core force approach outlined in the White Paper;

3.3 defence contingencies (ie situations in which the SANDF will or may have to be
involved in the exercise of self-defence);

3.4 the key characteristics of the peace-time force; and

3.5 the capabilities required by the SANDF in the light of the above.

###### Tasks

4. For effective and efficient planning it is necessary to translate the self-defence function into
specific tasks. This serves to allocate responsibility, assists government to define the output it
expects to achieve from military expenditure, and provides a system for categorising and
prioritising such expenditure.

5. The following tasks relate to the self-defence function:

5.1 To provide a core defence capability against external military threas and execute
military operations in defence of the Republic, its interests and its citizens when ordered
by the President.

5.2 To provide a defence capability against internal threats to the constitutional order and
execute operations in a state of emergency when ordered by the President.

5.3 To promote regional security through defence co-operation within the SADC
framework.

5.4 To promote international security through participation in peace operations and
military co-operation in support of foreign policy.

###### Defence Contingencies


-----

**Method**

10. A major consideration in designing the peace-time force and the capabilities it requires is the
nature of the defence contingencies against which the SANDF may have to act.

11. The White Paper asserts that South Africa is not confronted by an immediate conventional
threat and does not anticipate external aggression in the short- to medium-term (approximately
five years). The longer term future cannot be determined with any certainty because international
relations are inherently unpredictable.

12. The examination of defence contingencies must therefore rely ona threat-independent, as
opposed to a threat-specific, approach. If a concrete threat were to emerge, the examination
would naturally become more specific.

13. The threat-independent approach should be rooted in an analysis of the external
environment. It should take account, in particular, of the political, strategic and geographic
situation in Southern Africa. The current reality is that Southern Africa is a region of allies. South
Africa is a member of SADC and the ISDSC, and participates in common security arrangements
under the auspices of these bodies (Chapter 3).

14. Further, planning for defence contingencies should be based on a realistic appreciation of the
probability of such contingencies occurring and the impact on South Africa should the SANDF be
unable to meet a contingency. This will help to prioritise contingencies for which the Defence
Force should prepare.

15. Certain contingencies may occur with little warning, but in the Southern African context other
contingencies are likely to be of a longer term nature where early warning will be obtained. This
will allow for timely preparation and expansion.

16. Although the SANDF must ultimately be ready to deal with a range of contingencies, it need
not maintain forces at immediate readiness for the longer term contingencies. However, it must
retain the core for expansion.

17. The advantage of this approach is that substantial savings will be effected. As noted above,
the core force will comprise a relatively small full-time component and a sufficiently large parttime component.

18. There are inherent risks in this approach, however. The warning period required to expand
the core force may not be available due to strategic or operational surprise as a result of
intelligence failure or an unwillingness of deciion-makers to heed the warning. After warning has
been received, such expansion might be thwarted by sanctions and the inability of the defence
industry to deliver equipment timeously.

19. Defence contingencies are examined below on a continuum from major contingencies such
as an invasion to lesser contingencies such as threats against off-shore assets. For the sake of
comprehensive analysis, all possible contingencies related to the primary function of self-defence
are considered.

**Analysis of Contingencies**

20. Invasion. Invasion is defined as a major attack aimed at occupying the South Africa or part of
it, replacing the government by force and conquering its people. This contingency is considered
to be fairly remote since South Africa has no present or foreseeable enemies.

21. Further, a potential enemy does not stand to gain a major advantage from an invasion:

21.1 Although South Africa is relatively rich in resources, these do not have sufficient
strategic importance given the resources available in other parts of the world.


-----

21.2 The isolated geographic position of the Republic diminishes the possibility that it
may be used by an external force as a springboard, base area or thoroughfare for military
operations elsewhere. The only exception is the remote possibility of a world war where a
belligerent has the capability to attack shipping on the Cape sea route. If an aggressor
desires to launch an attack against a neighbouring state in Southern Africa, it would be
far simpler to avoid South African territory.

21.3 The international situation would have to change considerably before an external
power seeks to impose its ideology on South Africa through the use of force.

22. The probability of an invasion is therefore extremely low. However, the impact of a successful
invasion would be so catastrophic that it cannot be ignored totally as a contingency.

23. From an operational perspective, an invasion can take place over the landward border, from
the sea or a combination of the two.

23.1 An invasion over the landward border would require a major military build-up to the
north. For a number of decades into the future, an operation of this kind could not be
undertaken solely by an African state or alliance of African states. It would require the
participation of a major power. It would also require coercion or invasion of one or more
states to the north. The terrain to the north would present the attacker with logistic
problems and restrict its mobility. These constraints provide a substantial warnin period
for defensive action.

23.2 An invasion from seaward would require substantial specialist resources and could
be undertaken only with the involvement of a superpower or coalition of major powers.
Opportunities for strategic and deep interdiction in such a case would be more restricted.
Factors favouring South African defences are natural obstacles to the attacker and ocean
conditions favourable to defensive counter-strikes. As in the previous scenario, these
factors provide a substantial warning period for defensive action.

24. Limited neutralising attacks. In this scenario a third party, such as a major power, wants to
prevent the Republic from interfering militarily in that party s designs in Southern Africa. South
Africa s approach to common security implies that it would threaten a major act of aggression
against a SADC state.

25. The aggressor might therefore seek to neutralise South Africa s ability to project military
power. The targets of an attack might include air and naval transport assets, air and naval attack
assets, and mobile ground forces. Capabilities to defend these assets should thus be provided for
in the peace-time force.

26. Such a scenario would probably entail UN, OAU and SADC condemnation of the aggressor,
and would obviously be preceded by diplomatic efforts to avert a crisis. The development into an
attack on the South Africa is therefore unlikely, although this scenario has a higher probability
than the invasion contingency. The impact would be much smaller, however, making the total risk
lower than that of an invasion. Nevertheless, force design should take note of this contingency.

27. **Internal military threats to the constitutional order. The SANDF may be employed to**
combat internal military threats to the constitutional order. Such threats could take the form of civil
war or general insurrection on a national or provincial scale. Such threats might be supported by
external agents or forces. While the probability of this contingency is low, the impact would be
considerable if it were not met successfully. This is therefore a contingency for which the SANDF
should be prepared.

28. **Raids. Raids of lesser intensity may occur against the RSA for the purpose of coercion or**
castigation. Coercion would aim to force South Africa to change its behaviour which is in conflict


-----

with another state s interests or goals, and castigation would be retaliation against South African
actions regarded as offensive by such a state.

29. Raids could be launched by a major or smaller power. They could take many forms, such as
air raids by aircraft or missiles; landward raids by mobile or unconventional forces; and maritime
raids by surface vessels, amphibious craft or clandestine forces.

30. The impact of such raids, although considerable, would be lower than that of the previous
scenarios. In contrast, the probability of such actions by irresponsible and irrational governments
is higher than for the contingencies of invasions and limited neutralising attacks. Since raids may
also be launched by non-governmental, radical organisations, the probability must be considered
as real. The SANDF should therefore plan for these contingencies in designing the core force.

31. Blockades. Blockades may be invoked to coerce South Africa to change its behaviour which
is in conflict with the interests and goals of another power. Blockades may take the form of
interference in South Africa s sea lines of communications through mining of harbours or attacks
on shipping within South Africa s maritime zone; landward blockades of trade routes to
neighbouring states; or the enforcement of no-fly zones.

32. Given South Africa s dependence on trade, especially maritime trade, this could have an
extremely negative effect on the well-being of the country and its people. The impact would thus
be considerable and should be taken into account in designing the peace-time force.

33. **Attacks on embassies, ships and aircraft. South Africa has a responsibility to protect its**
embassies, ships and aircraft outside its national borders. The threat against these assets is
mainly one of piracy and international terrorism. Protection by host nations may not always be
forthcoming or effective.

34. Although the impact of such contingencies is relatively low, the probability of their occurrence
is relatively high. The capability to protect and release captured embassies, ships and aircraft
should therefore be provided for in the core force. This capability must be at immediate readiness
since the contingency may arise with little or no warning.

35. **Law enforcement of marine resources and maritime zone.** Maritime law enforcement is
not a primary defence task and is discussed in chapter 7. However, a state may use military force
to back up its exploitation of South African resources. The impact of such a contingency might be
significant although the probability can presently be considered as low. This contingency requires
capabilities similar to those needed to protect sea lines of communication.

36. Islands. The level of threat against South African islands (the Prince Edward Island group)
and the impact if this threat materialises are such that no special or additional defence
capabilities are required. However, it should be noted that the South African sea areas around
these islands are rich in potential food sources.

###### Characteristics of the Peace-Time Force

37. The peace-time force should be designed and structured to meet the strategic realities of
South and Southern Africa. The following discussion considers the geographic, technological,
organisational and operational factors in force design.

**Geography**

38. The features of the SANDF s likely area of operations should obviously serve as a force
design determinant. Assuming that this area will be mainly South Africa, Southern Africa (for
regional defence co-operation) and the surrounding seas, key factors to be taken into account
include:


-----

38.1 The large geographical area to be defended by relatively small forces.

38.2 Low infrastructure development which can be exacerbated by adverse weather
conditions.

38.3 A scarcity of natural obstacles such as rivers and mountains.

38.4 Frequently adverse sea conditions.

38.5 Underwater ocean conditions which are favourable to submarines.

38.6 Access to and from South Africa largely dependent on sea and air transport.

38.7 A hostile health environment.

39. The peace-time force should thus have the following characteristics:

39.1 Mobility, including air and sea transport; self-contained ground forces suitable to
rugged terrain and all-weather conditions; and ships with good sea-keeping capability.

39.2 Good underwater detection, location and attack capabilities.

39.3 Capabilities to ensure appropriate control of air and sea areas.

39.4 Operational medical support.

**Technology**

40. The technology employed by the peace-time force should be appropriate and affordable. Two
main factors underpin this policy:

40.1 Given the lack of clarity on the possible enemies that the SANDF might have to
counter, it would be imprudent to assume that a potential enemy will be unsophisticated.
With the present proliferation of armaments and military technology, it must be
anticipated that any future enemy will have sophisticated weapons and systems.

40.2 South Africa s regional obligations require the maintenance of a relatively high level
of technological sophistication.

**Balance and Flexibility**

41. The SANDF must be a balanced force. A balanced force is one with the capabilities to meet a
wide range of contingencies rather than one with equal numbers of all possible weapons
systems.

42. Balance implies that the force should not be over-specialised to the extent that strategic gaps,
which could be exploited by an enemy, are created. This is especially important in view of the
uncertainty regarding future threats.

43. Balance also means that force structure elements should complement each other since a
specific capability may be rendered ineffective because of technological advances, surprise
attack or other factors.

44. The aim is to achieve a balanced defence force rather than a balanced Army, Air Force and
Navy. For this reason, jointness between the arms of service will be promoted. The SANDF must
also be a flexible force which allows for expansion or reduction of force levels according to
operational requirements and budgetary considerations.

**Expansion Potential**

45. Maintaining a viable expansion potential is critical to the defence of South Africa.


-----

46. The major determinants of expansion potential include the following:

46.1 A realistic determination of warning lead times.

46.2 The procurement times of main equipment. This depends on the nature of the
specific equipment but is typically in the order of ten years from conceptualisation to
operational availability. This period may exceed warning lead times provided by
intelligence.

46.3 The time required to train and prepare leader groups and troops. This will influence
the relative size of the full-time force and the part-time force.

46.4 The critical mass to which force structure elements can be reduced and below which
no expansion would be possible.

**Sustainability**

47. The SANDF force structure must be sustainable. In other words, the SANDF must live within
its means .

48. The aim is to have both a stable force and a stable defence budget commensurate with the
threat situation and the lead times available for expansion. Should the threat situation change, a
new force design and funding level would have to be determined.

49. An appropriate balance should be found between operating expenditure and spending on
capital renewal or upgrading. Fluctuations in the capital budget should be equalised by long-term
budgetary scheduling rather than through fluctuations in annual budgets. Fluctuationsand
uncertainty in planning result in substantial fruitless expenditure. A long-term view is necessary
and multi-year budgetary guidelines are highly desirable.

###### Capabilities Required by the Peace-Time Force

50. In the light of the previous discussion, it is possible to list the specific capabilities required by
the peace-time force.

50.1 Defence intelligence capability. Intelligence is an overarching capability required by
the DoD. Strategic intelligence is the basis for force design, as well as early warning to
ensure maximum time for expansion and defence preparation. Good tactical intelligence
is a force multiplier during operations.

50.2 Landward defence. Capabilities to counter attacks over land should be mobile and
largely self-contained.

50.3 Air defence. Air defence, including fighter-based capabilities and localised antiaircraft capabilities, is needed to counter air attacks.

50.4 Maritime defence. Maritime defence capabilities to counter attack from seaward and
on shipping should include mine clearance and the ability to act against air, surface and
submarine attacks.

50.5 Biological and chemical defence. Subject to the provisions of the chemical and
biological weapons conventions, the SANDF should maintain the capability to detect the
use of chemical and biological weapons in a given area, to protect its personnel against
such weapons, and to decontaminate forces and equipment which have been under such
attack.


-----

50.6 Interdiction capabilities. Once armed hostilities have begun, the SANDF should have
the capability to interdict the battlefield.

50.7 Counter-offensive capabilities. On halting aggression, the SANDF should have the
capability to drive the enemy from own or friendly territory.

50.8 Command and control. This is critical to the effective execution of the self-defence
function at all levels. The diversity of military tasks performed by the different combat,
combat support and supporting elements of the SANDF requires both single service and
joint command and control capabilities. Great emphasis should be placed on electronic
warfare and command information systems.

50.9 Force preparation. The SANDF must be able to prepare its forces continuously for
self-defence. Force preparation should concentrat on two categories: i) formal training of
personnel at all ranks for conventional operations; and ii) training and exercising force
structure elements at arms of service level, as well as joint and combined operations.

50.10 Support capabilities. The SANDF must maintain effective support capabilities.
These include operational medical support; operational logistics support and technology
development; land, air and sea transport; personnel and chaplaincy services to maintain
the morale of soldiers engaged in operations; and legal support to commanders during
operations.

51. In summary, the defence capability of the SANDF should be cost-effective; sustainable;
capable of appropriate expansion; technologically appropriate; balanced and flexible; and highly
motivated and prepared.


-----

### Chapter 4

**_South African Defence Review 1998_**

###### Regional Security Co-operation Policy Framework

1. After decades of isolation, South Africa has been welcomed back into the international
community and has joined or returned to a host of regional and international organisations. The
most important of these are the United Nations, the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) and the
Southern African Development Community (SADC).

2. South Africa has also entered into a number of international, regional and bilateral or trilateral
defence agreements. These generally entail reciprocal obligations and an undertaking to engage
in some form of co-operation.

3. The most significant strategic development over the past few years is South Africa s new
status in Southern Africa, previously an arena of intense conflict. With the election of a
democratic government in April 194, relations with neighbouring states changed from suspicion
and animosity to friendship and co-operation.

4. For political, strategic and geographic reasons, the government regards security and defence
co-operation in Southern Africa as a priority.

5. Since the end of the Cold War the region has undergone substantial change. Considerable
progress has been made towards the resolution of internal conflicts, the establishment of
democracy, and disarmament. The prospects for regional peace and stability are greater today
than at any other time in recent decades.

6. Nevertheless, much of the sub-continent is stricken by underdevelopment and the attendant
problems of poverty, illiteracy and unemployment. There are large numbers of refugees and
displaced people; an acute debt crisis; and disease and environmental degradation. Certain
states remain politically volatile. The worst case scenario, as experienced intensely in Angola and
Mozambique, is civil war.

7. These phenomena are not confined to national borders. They impact negatively on
neighbouring states in the form of a range of non-military threats: environmental destruction; the
spread of disease; the burden of refugees; and cross-border trafficking in drugs, stolen goods and
small arms.

8. Following trends in other parts of the world, South Africa is committed to the development of a
common security approach in Southern Africa. In essence, this will entail the SADC states
shaping their political, security and defence policies in co-operation with each other.

9. Common security arrangements have many advantages. They can facilitate sharing of
information and resources; early warning of potential crises; joint problem-solving; implementing
confidence- and security-building measures (CSBMs); negotiating security agreements; and
resolving inter-state conflict through peaceful means.

10. Certain of these endeavours are the responsibility of the Department of Foreign Affairs. Chief
amongst them is the prevention, management and settlement of conflict through negotiation and
mediation.

11. Other types of activity, some of which are already under way, will be undertaken by the
Department of Defence (DOD).

11.1 Regional defence co-operation can be promoted in the fields of logistics; training
and education; aviation; protection of marine resources; intelligence; combined exercises;


-----

secondment of personnel; goodwill visits; and the development of combined doctrines
and operational procedures.

11.2 The government may be called on by neighbouring countries to play a number of
supportive roles. For example, the SANDF can provide assistance with respect to
disaster relief; controlling cross-border trafficking in small arms; clearing minefields;
training; field engineering; medical support; and maintaining and upgrading weaponry
and equipment.

11.3 The DOD will pursue the implementation of CSBMs. These are measures which
provide greater transparency in military matters in order to alleviate mistrust, prevent
misunderstandings from developing into crises, and thereby promote collective
confidence and stability. Appropriate CSBMs might include the following:

11.3.1 Annual consultation and exchange of information on defence budgets,
force structure, modernisation plans and troop deployment.

11.3.2 Consideration of national threat perceptions which inform force structure
and modernisation plans.

11.3.3 The establishment of a regional arms register which records imports,
exports, production and holdings of conventional arms and light weaponry.

11.3.4 Notification and on-site observation of military exercises and other
specified activities.

11.3.5 Verification procedures in respect of the above.

11.3.6 A communications network and a crisis hotline .

11.3.7 Procedures for dealing with unusual or unscheduled military incidents.

###### Peace Support Operations

12. Situations may arise in Southern Africa where inter- or intra-state conflict poses a threat to
peace and stability in the region as a whole. If political efforts to resolve the conflict are
unsuccessful, it may become necessary to deploy the SANDF in multi-national peace support
operations.

13. South Africa shares the view of many of its neighbours that the creation of a standing
peacekeeping force in the region is not required or feasible. The SADC countries are more likely
to engage in peace support operations on an ad-hoc basis if the need arises.

14. Nevertheless, the SADC states are committed to regional co-operation in preparing for peace
support operations. It may therefore be worthwhile to establish a small peace support operations
centre, under the auspices of regional defence structures, to develop and co-ordinate planning,
training, logistics, communication and field liaison teams for multi-national forces.

###### Posture

15. South Africa has a common destiny with Southern Africa. Domestic peace and stability will
not be achieved in a context of regional instability and poverty. It is therefore in South Africa s
long-term security interests to pursue mutually beneficial relations with the other SADC states
and to promote reconstruction and development throughout the region.

16. Given South Africa s relative military strength on the sub-continent, the adoption of a
defensive and non-threatening posture would contribute to building confidence and positive
relationships. Reductions in force levels and weapons holdings might stimulate a broader process


-----

of regional disarmament. However, force reductions should be kept within reasonable proportions
if South Africa is to play an active support role in the region.

17. South Africa will support the conclusion of multi-lateral treaties on disarmament, arms control
and foreign military involvement in the region. The most important agreement would be a nonaggression pact which endorses the prohibition in international law regarding the threat or use of
force.

###### Regional Structures

18. South Africa is a signatory to the SADC Treaty and participates fully in all the structures of the
organisation. These include the following:

18.1 The Summit, comprising Heads of State and Government.

18.2 The Organ on Politics, Defence and Security, comprising the ministers responsible
for foreign affairs and defence, which reports to the Summit.

18.3 The Inter-State Defence and Security Committee (ISDSC), comprising the ministers
responsible for defence, policing and intelligence, which reports to the Organ. The ISDSC
has defence, public security and state security sub-committees.

19. The main functions of the defence sub-committee of the ISDSC are as follows:

19.1 to review and share experiences on the military-security situation in member states;

19.2 to explore areas for multi-lateral defence co-operation and the practical
implementation thereof; and

19.3 to exchange views and propose mechanisms for the prevention, management and
resolution of conflict in Africa in general and in Southern Africa in particular.

20. The defence sub-committee has sub-sub-committees on specialist areas, including
operations; intelligence; personnel development; logistics; maritime and aviation co-operation;
and chaplains, legal and medical associations.


-----

# Chapter 5

#### International Peace Support Operations
###### Policy Framework

1. As a fully fledged member of the international community, South Africa will fulfil its
responsibility to participate in international peace support operations.

2. In the short-term, however, such participation will be regarded with caution since the political
and military dynamics of these operations are new to South Africa and the DoD.

3. In order to prepare for peace support operations, the DoD is investigating the development of
appropriate doctrines, operational procedures and training programmes in co-operation with
foreign partners.

4. Public awareness and parliamentary debate on the complexities and different types of peace
support operations are equally important.

5. South Africa will only become involved in specific peace support operations if the following
conditions are met:

5.1 There should be parliamentary approval and public support. This requires an
appreciation of the associated costs and risks, including the financial costs and the risk to
military personnel.

5.2 The operation should be authorised by the UN Security Council.

5.3 Operations in Southern Africa should be sanctioned by SADC and undertaken with
other SADC states. Similarly, operations in Africa should be sanctioned by the OAU.

5.4 The operation should have a clear mandate, mission and objectives.

5.5 There should be realistic criteria for terminating the operation.

6. Involvement in peace support operations will not be limited to the deployment of troops. It could
also take the form of providing equipment, logistical support, humanitarian aid, engineering
services, communications systems and medical personnel and facilities.

7. The acquisition and maintenance of military equipment will take account of the particular
requirements of peace support operations.

###### Types of Peace Support Operations

8. **Preventive diplomacy** involves diplomatic action taken in advance of a predicted crisis to
prevent or limit violence. In particularly tense situations, preventive deployment of military forces
may support such action. The deployment may be aimed at deterring violence; assisting local
authorities to protect threatened minorities; securing and maintaining essential services; and
ensuring access to an area of operation.


-----

9. **Peacemaking is a process of diplomacy, mediation, negotiation or other form of peaceful**
settlement of conflict that seeks to end disputes and resolve the issues which give rise to conflict.
Military forces may be required to support this process.

10. **Peace building** consists of post-conflict actions that strengthen and rebuild civil
infrastructures and institutions in order to provide a lasting peace. Military forces may assist in
restoring the civil authority; rebuilding physical infrastructures; conducting elections; demobilising
former belligerents; and collecting and controlling small arms.

11. Peacekeeping involves military or para-military operations undertaken with the consent of the
disputant parties. The operations aim to monitor and facilitate the implementation of an existing
peace or truce agreement, and to support diplomatic efforts to reach a long-term settlement.
Peacekeeping activities include observation, monitoring and supervision of the provisions of
peace agreements. These typically relate to cease-fires; arms control; withdrawal and
demobilisation of combatants; denial or freedom of movement; and elections.

12. **Peace enforcement is the application or threat of military force, authorised by the UN**
Security Council, to compel compliance with Security Council resolutions. The aims are to
maintain or restore peace and to support diplomatic efforts to reach a long-term settlement.
Unlike other peace support operations, peace enforcement may include combat action. Military
missions may include the restoration and maintenance of order and stability; guarantee or denial
of movement; enforcement of sanctions; establishment and supervision of protected zones; and
forcible separation of belligerent parties.

13. **Humanitarian or relief activities may constitute a discreet operation or be part of the**
operations described above. Such activities, in which military support may be required, include
provision of humaniarian aid, disaster relief, health care and assistance to refugees and displaced
persons.

14. It is evident from the preceding paragraphs that peace support operations may require the
involvement of medical, communications, engineering, logistical, administrative, transport, combat
and other components of armed forces.

###### Authority and Decision Making

15. As a rule, the UN Security Council decides on the establishment of a peace support operation
and is responsible for extending or terminating the mission. (Peace enforcement operations which
take place under the auspices of the OAU or SADC require prior endorsement by the UN Security
Council.)

16. A resolution of the Security Council authorises the operation and determines the mandate.
The resolution typically covers the terms of reference for the mission; the appointment of the
Force Commander; force levels and contributing countries; and administrative, logistical and
budgetary arrangements.

17. The overall direction of the operation is in the hands of the Secretary-General who acts on
behalf of, and reports to, the Security Council. The Secretary-General delegates the daily
operational management to a Head of Mission, but will usually retain direct control over policy
matters and major decision-making.

18. The Secretary General is assisted in the exercise of these functions by a secretariat of
political and military advisers in the Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Special Political
Affairs (OUSGSPA).


-----

19. The Force Commander, who may or may not be the Head of Mission, is responsible to the
Secretary General for the efficient operation and administration of the multi-national force. He/she
exercises this responsibility through OUSGSPA which actually runs the mission.

20. The Force Commander exercises operational control of the national forces of participating
countries. He/she gives direct orders for execution by these forces, without resort to the
contributing countries. The contingents execute his/her orders without clearance from their
governments. The Commander does not maintain formal contact with contributing countries.
Such contacts are maintained by the Secretary General through OUSGSPA.

21. National commanders are directly responsible and answerable to the Force Commander for
the effective operational and administrative functioning of their units. Personnel serving in these
units remain under the command of their national commanders.

22. Where South Africa is requested to participate in a peace support operation, the following will
apply:

22.1 The request will be routed to the Department of Foreign Affairs. That Department will liaise
closely with the National Intelligence Co-ordinating Committee and the Department of Defence,
through the Minister of Defence, with regard to the nature of South Africa s potential involvement.

22.2 Additional agreements relating to the determination of the mission and objectives of the
operation will also be negotiated by the Department of Foreign Affairs in consultation with the
Department of Defence.

22.3 The Departments of Foreign Affairs and Defence will advise Cabinet on the matters referred
to above. Cabinet is responsible for final decisions.

22.4 In terms of the Constitution, the employment of the SANDF in peace support operations
requires the authorisation of the President.

22.5 In terms of the Constitution, Parliament is empowered to review the President s decision
regarding such employment.

###### Departmental and Operational Considerations

23. The following issues should be addressed before committing SANDF forces to a peace
support operation:

23.1 There must be a realistic appreciation of the extent of the SANDF s involvement in
the light of its capabilities and other commitments.

23.2 Liaison channels must exist with UN peacekeeping structures. A clear command
and control system must be established, and rules of engagement must be determined.

23.3 Channels of finance must be opened both with the UN and between the relevant
South African government departments, and financial arrangements must be finalised in
the contract.

23.4 Standardisation and compatibility must be established with other peacekeeping
forces regarding drills; telecommunications; language; and doctrine and procedures for
combined operations.


-----

23.5 A time scale for the period of involvement must be established, and a
disengagement plan for own troops must be in place.

23.6 South African forces must be supported logistically from own resources for at least
28 weeks, after which UN support shoul be available.

23.7 Planning and execution of operations must be compatible with UN operating
procedures.

23.8 Forces must be familiar with the conditions prevailing in the area of operations.

23.9 South African Military Health Services (SAMHS) support for own troops must be in
place.

24. The SANDF has particular skills and expertise in communications, field engineering (including
mine-clearing), medical, and command and control functions which are relevant to peace support
operations. Consideration should be given to designating these areas as the preferred mode of
participation in the short- to medium-term. Decisions in this regard will depend on the nature of
the operation and the country of deployment.

25. The following considerations must be taken into account with regard to the area of operations:
the potential political risk to South Africa if it deploys forces in neighbouring countries; and the
need for foreign assistance should forces be deployed beyond the operational reach of the
SANDF.

26. The Defence Act currently provides that SANDF personnel may only be compelled to serve
outside the borders of the RSA "in time of war... against the enemy". The legal implications of
deploying personnel in peace support operations will therefore have to be addressed in new
defence legislation.

###### Training

27. Peace support operations are fundamentally different from traditional approaches to fighting
wars. The differences are manifest in the mission, objectives and doctrine of these operations,
and in the role and tasks of the forces involved therein. Offensive action by these forces is usually
prohibited, although it may receive limited expression in peace enforcement.

28. The skills, attitudes and expectations of SANDF personnel therefore need to be addressed
through thorough training prior to deployment. They must be briefed properly on the political,
cultural, linguistic and geographic features of the country of deployment. Failure to understand
and respect the nuances of local culture and politics will undermine the efficacy and perceived
impartiality of the peacekeepers.

29. All personnel involved in the operation must know and understand the rules of engagement. If
possible, they should have an opportunity to practise the rules through simulation exercises prior
to deployment.

30. Personnel also require training in mediation, negotiation and consensus-building skills. They
should be psychologically prepared to back down and lose face in certain circumstances. They
should appreciate the importance of impartiality, patience, tolerance and political sensitivity.

31. Training should be based on typical peace support operation tasks. These include cease-fire
monitoring and maintenance; checkpoint operations; medical assistance to the civilian population;


-----

crowd control at food distribution points; apprehension of criminals; and performing certain of the
responsibilities of the civil authority if it has collapsed.

32. Military forces involved in peace operations should comply strictly with international
humanitarian law, and may be mandated to oversee compliance with this law by the belligerent
parties. It is therefore essential that SANDF personnel deployed in such operations are familiar
with the relevant provisions of the law and with the application thereof in situations of conflict.

33. Combined training should be undertaken with the forces of countries with which South Africa
is likely to be involved in peace support operations.

###### Force Design

34. In terms of the mandate of the SANDF, participation in international peace support operations
is a secondary function. The SANDF will therefore not normally create special structures for such
operations, but will rather provide for them within the primary structure.

35. More specifically, peacekeeping and peace enforcement are secondary functions of the Army
s Rapid Deployment Ground Force which includes mechanised, parachute and motorised forces.
Two motorised infantry battalion groups will be prepared for peacekeeping operations on a relay
basis. The capabilities of the mechanised and parachute forces will be used in _peace_
_enforcement operations if required._

36. Similarly, the Air Force, Navy and SA Military Health Services will not provide dedicated force
components for peace support operations but will ensure that the components which might be
deployed in these operations are equipped and trained appropriately.


-----

# Chapter 6

**South African Defence Review 1998**

#### Co-operation with the SA Police Service
###### Policy Framework

1. South Africa is characterised by a high level of crime and criminal violence which affects all
sectors of society and is exacerbated by a proliferation of light weapons in private hands.
Violence in certain parts of the country remains unacceptably high and poses a serious threat to
public order and the security of citizens.

2. The government is tackling this problem through efforts to strengthen the criminal justice
system, community policing and a National Crime Prevention Strategy. Long-term solutions
include upgrading the conditions of impoverished communities through the RDP, and supporting
economic growth and development in Southern Africa.

3. Public order policing is primarily the responsibility of the SAPS. Given the relative shortage of
police personnel, a large number of troops are currently deployed to assist them in the
maintenance of law and order.

4. Despite public calls for greater military involvement in combatting crime, the government
regards this tendency as undesirable. The history of South Africa and many other countries
indicates that it is inappropriate to utilise armed forces in a policing role on a permanent or semipermanent basis. This perspective is based on the following:

4.1 Armed forces are not trained, orientated or equipped for deployment against civilians.
They are typically geared to employ maimum force against an external military aggressor.

4.2 On-going employment in a law and order function may lead to the defence force
becoming politicised and increasingly involved in non-military activities.

4.3 Such employment may also undermine the image and legitimacy of the defence force
amongst sections of the population.

4.4 Internal deployment places a substantial burden on the defence budget. It also has a
disruptive effect on the economy when large numbers of part-time soldiers are called-up.

4.5 Efforts to apply military solutions to political problems are inherently limited and may
undermine resolution of these problems.

5. The Departments of Defence and Safety and Security are formulating plans for the withdrawal
of the SANDF from a policing role. The SANDF would then be deployed only in exceptional
circumstances, such as a state of emergency or national defence or a breakdown of public order
beyond the capacity of the SAPS.

6. Until this goal is attained, the employment of the SANDF in co-operation with the police will
continue. Such employment will be authorised by the President, regulated by legislation and
subject to the Bill of Rights and parliamentary approval and safeguards. Officers and other ranks
deployed in internal operations will be equipped and trained appropriately.

7. To ensure effective deployment and maximum co-operation with the SAPS, the following steps
should be taken: the creation of formal liaison committees; analysis and determination of the role,
method of employment and duties of the SANDF; the establishment of a clear chain of command
and control, a code of conduct and appropriate rules of engagement; agreement on the duration


-----

of the SANDF deployment; and a thorough review of the deployment if the objective of the
mission is not achieved within the agreed time-scale.

8. The Department of Defence will establish mechanisms to facilitate communication and liaison
between the SANDF and provincial and local authorities regarding the internal deployment of
troops. However, these authorities will have no decision-making powers over such deployment.
Command of the SANDF remains centralised at national level.

9. The SANDF is currently employed in border protection in co-operation with the police. Those
activities which relate to combatting crime and controlling the flow of illegal immigrants into South
Africa are more properly the responsibility of the SAPS. This matter is similarly under review by
various government departments in the context of the National Crime Prevention Strategy.

###### Strategic Approach

10. The internal employment of the SANDF will take place within the framework of the National
Crime Prevention Strategy. This will ensure effective co-ordination, an integrated approach and
synergy of effort.

11. In implementing this strategy, a clear distinction between the roles of the military and the
police will be maintained.

11.1 Types of activity. The defence force will not perform police functions such as
criminal investigation, arresting suspects, preparing dockets and involvement in the
criminal justice system.

11.2 Powers. The SANDF does not have normal powers of arrest, detention and search
and seizure; these are legally the preserve of the SAPS. Certain exceptions may be
made by government regulation in a state of emergency.

11.3 Geographic focus. SANDF employment should be concentrated in rural and border
areas since these coincide with the military s conventional theatre of operations. As an
interim measure, an expansion of the military s role in border protection will free police
resources for combatting routine and priority crimes.

11.4 Types of crime. The SANDF should not be involved in combatting routine crime but
should rather focus on i) crimes which constitute a threat to the constitutional order; ii)
crimes where military employment is consistent with international practice; and iii) serious
crime. These categories are described below.

**Crimes Constituting a Threat to the Constitutional Order**

12. Crimes which constitute a threat to the constitutional order might include extremist political
groupings which are armed; the expansion of para-military forces; large scale political instability;
mass civil disobedience; and a complete breakdown of law and order.

**Crime Combatting in Accordance with International Practice**

13. It is acceptable internationally to deploy armed forces to counter certain types of crime which
have serious socio-economic, security and/or environmental implications.

13.1 The SA Army is deployed, in co-operation with the SAPS and other state
departments, in border protection. This is intended to prevent illegal immigration and the
smuggling of drugs and weapons across landward borders.

13.2 Smuggling, illegal entry, plunder of marine resources and other crimes occur along
the coast of the Republic. The Navy is deployed in co-operation with the SAPS and the
departments of environmental affairs, home affairs and revenue services in patrolling the
coast to prevent such activities.


-----

13.3 The Air Force has air space surveillance and control capabilities which assist in the
protection of the country s air space against smuggling and illegal entry.

13.4 The SA Military Health Services provides medical support to the SANDF and SAPS
during crime prevention operations.

**Serious Crime**

14. The SANDF can contribute to combatting serious crime such as attacks on farms; stock theft
by armed groups; illegal trafficking in drugs, arms and ammunition; car hijackings; and taxi
violence.

15. Such SANDF activities include monitoring and surveillance; providing air transport support to
the SAPS; providing logistic and personnel support to police engaged in roadblocks, cordons and
vehicle and foot patrols. The SANDF also provides reaction force back-up to the police where this
is required.

###### Cost-Effective Utilisation of Resources

16. The SANDF has a range of capabilities which can be utilised to assist the police. In the
interests of cost-effectiveness, these assets are put at the disposal of the police and therefore
need ot duplicated by the SAPS.

17. Relevant capabilities include fixed wing and helicopter transport; specialised aerial and naval
reconnaissance; naval transport; air space control; operational medical support; communications;
and logistic support.

###### Force Design and Force Levels

18. Employment in co-operation with the SAPS is not a primary factor in determining force
design. The SANDF relies mainly on its core defence capabilities to prepare and equip for the
above tasks.

19. The extent of military deployment is determined by the security situation and is reviewed
periodically. Where core defence capabilities are insufficient, additional personnel are required. In
1997 approximately 6 000 soldiers were deployed on a daily basis in co-operation with the police.


-----

# Chapter 7

**South African Defence Review 1998**

#### Non-Military Tasks
###### Policy Framework

1. The SANDF is designed and equipped chiefly to fulfil its primary mission of defence against
aggression. Nevertheless, it has personnel, skills and resources which are utilised for various
non-military tasks, normally in support of the civil authority. They are regarded as secondary
functions and are not a major factor in the determination of force design and force levels.

2. The SANDF does not budget for the execution of these functions since they derive from
existing defence capabilities. In some cases the Department of Defence claims from the users the
cost of activities which are undertaken on a regular basis. There are exceptions where provision
of a service by the SANDF is the most cost-effective option for the state. This is normally the case
where an extension to existing SANDF capabilities is preferable to creating the same capabilities
in another department. Examples are VIP air transport, hydrographic services and the national
codification bureau.

3. Government regards inappropriate use of armed forces in non-military activities as
economically inefficient and politically unwise Such activities are appropriate in extreme situations
and where they derive from capabilities which are unique to the Defence Force.

4. More specifically, government is disinclined to employ the SANDF in socio-economic
development. Such employment blurs the distinction between the military and civilian spheres; it
contributes to the militarisation of civil society; and it undermines the preparedness of the force
with respect to its primary function.

5. However, there may be exceptional circumstances which mitigate against the delivery of
services by line function departments. The support of the SANDF may be required as a matter of
urgency because of its specialised skills and resources; an example of this might be assisting
with emergency provision of water to a rural community. The details of such support are currently
under review by a ministerial task group.

6. The following guidelines will govern these situations: the employment of the SANDF should be
requested by the relevant government department; it should have the consent of the affected
community; it should have a limited time duration; and it should be subject to civilian control.

7. The SANDF makes an important contribution to developing human resources through its
education and training programmes. Special training programmes are associated with integration,
demobilisation and rationalisation. For example, the Service Corps trains its members in a range
of vocational and other skills to prepare them for employment in civil society (see paragraphs 23
and 24 below).

8. The rest of this chapter describes the main non-military tasks of the SANDF.

###### Description of Non-Military Tasks
**Maritime Services**

9. The SANDF provides surveillance and enforcement support to the relevant authorities for the
protection of marine resources against illegal plunderig; the protection of the marine environment
against pollution; and maritime law enforcement with respect to piracy and smuggling of drugs
and weapons.


-----

10. The magnitude of these tasks is such that the Navy and the Air Force are required to support
other state departments. This state of affairs is expected to continue indefinitely since
government is unlikely to establish a new organisation for maritime protection.

11. Marine resources are steadily gaining importance and the marine environment is under
growing pressure. The scope of the protection task is therefore expected to increase. Maritime
aircraft and naval vessels currently conduct extensive patrols on a regular basis as part of their
normal employment.

**Air Space and Traffic Control**

12.The SANDF may be required to provide support to air space and air traffic control where the
relevant civilian body lacks capability. An example is the service provided by the Air Force to
augment Civil Aviation in Mpumalanga.

**Disaster Relief**

13. The SANDF provides support for the preservation of life, health and property in emergency
situations which exceed the capacity of the civil authorities. These situations typically arise from
fires, floods and other disasters, such as forest fires. Assistance is subject to financial
reimbursement, as determined by the Department of Defence.

**Maintaining Essential Services**

14. The SANDF provides emergency support to the civil authority for the maintenance of
essential services which have been temporarily disrupted through natural disaster, large-scale
failure or sabotage. Examples include drought relief; the provision and distribution of purified
water; and the continuation of hospital services during large-scale labour action.

**Search and Rescue**

15. The SANDF provides search and rescue support to the relevant authorities and in terms of
South Africa s international obligations. It is a major participant in the national search and rescue
structure (SASAR) co-ordinated by the Department of Transport.

**VIP Air Transport**

16. The SANDF provides VIP air transport for the President, the Deputy President, the Minister
and Deputy Minister of Defence and, where capacity allows, other cabinet ministers and
provincial premiers.

**Antarctic Transport Support**

17. The Navy and the Air Force provide the Department of the Environment and Tourism with
transport support to the Prince Edward Island group and the Antarctic. This is a long term national
commitment because South Africa is a signatory to treaties governing the management and
preservation of the Antarctic, and because the marine resources in areas over which the Republic
has sovereignty will gain importance in years to come.

**Hydrographic Services**

18. The Navy provides hydrographic services for its own purposes, to South Africa s mariners
and to other mariners in terms of international obligations. The Hydrographer of the Navy charts
the Republic s territorial waters and maritime zone, as well as international waters for which
South Africa has responsibility in terms of the International Hydrographic Organisation.

19. The Hydrographer promulgates radio navigation warnings, notices to mariners, and tidal and
related meteorological data to seafarers passing through South African waters. Requests have
been received from the coastal states in Southern Africa for assistance in surveying their coasts,
harbours and harbour-approaches.

**Medical Services**


-----

20. The SA Military Health Service (SAMHS) provide medical management and health services
and support to various departments (eg the SAPS and the departments of health, foreign affairs,
the environment, transport and correctional services).

21. Such support can include the provision and distribution of medicine to national and provincial
authorities; the provision of specialised facilities (eg air medical, dive medical and hyperbaric
treatment facilities); immunization campaigns; maintaining essential medical services during
labour unrest; assisting in disaster relief operations; training primary health care personnel; health
service management and treatment of SAPS and Department of Correctional Services personnel
and animals; and social upliftment programmes where required.

22. SAMHS also provides medical care to the President, the Deputy President, the Minister and
Deputy Minister of Defence and, at the request of the Department of Foreign Affairs, foreign VIPs
visiting South Africa.

**Service Corps**

23. The SANDF provides the infrastructure for the management of the Service Corps which
equips former combatants for re-entry into civilian society through the provision of vocational
skills training and adult basic education.

24. In March 1996 Cabinet tasked an inter-departmental committee to investigate the extension of
this structure into a National Service Corps to train youth and unemployed people. The
investigation will determine the appropriate place of the new initiative within government
structures, probably outside the Department of Defence.

**Communication Security Service**

25. The SANDF provides and maintains an infrastructure for ensuring that government
communication is secure.

**Election Support**

26. As in previous elections, the SANDF may be required to deploy large numbers of troops to
support the police during the 1999 elections. It may also be requested to provide support during
elections elsewhere in Southern Africa.


-----

# Chapter 8

**South African Defence Review 1998**

#### Force Design Options
###### Introduction

1. During peace-time the SANDF must maintain, develop and prepare forces that form the basis
of its conventional defence capabilities. It must also employ such forces in the execution of
secondary functions, as described in the White Paper and preceding chapters of this report. At all
times, the SANDF must be ready to act in defence of South Africa in response to various defence
contingencies. This is reflected in the vision of the Department of Defence:

_To ensure, in accordance with the Constitution, effective defence for a democratic South Africa,_
_enhancing national, regional and global security, through balanced, modern, affordable and_
_technologically advanced defence capabilities._

2. Accordingly, the Department has the following mission:

_To provide, manage, prepare and employ defence capabilities commensurate with the needs of_
_South Africa as regulated by the Constitution, national legislation and parliamentary and_
_executive direction._

###### Tasks

3. To plan and prepare for the execution of the above mission, the tasks associated with the
defence needs of South Africa need to be defined. The following tasks are derived from the
previous chapters of this report:

3.1 Providing core defence capabilities for defence of South Africa against external
military threats, and the execution of military operations in defence of South Africa, its
interests and its citizens when so ordered by the President.

3.2 Providing defence capabilities against internal threats to the constitutional order, and
the execution of such operations in a state of emergency when so ordered by the
President.

3.3 Promoting regional security through defence co-operation within the SADC
framework.

3.4 Promoting international security through military co-operation in support of South
Africa s foreign policy.

3.5 Providing a military capability for participation in regional and international peace
support operations.

3.6 Providing and applying forces for land, air and maritime border protection against
non-military threats.

3.7 Providing a capability to maintain law and order in co-operation with the SAPS on an
ongoing basis. This will remain necessary until the police are able to fulfil the ask without
assistance from the military, other than in exceptional circumstances.


-----

3.8 Providing surveillance and enforcement support to relevant authorities for protection
of marine resources, control of marine pollution, and maritime law enforcement.

3.9 Providing air traffic control services in support of civil aviation authorities.

3.10 Providing military support for the preservation of life, health and property in
emergency situations where the scale of the emergency temporarily exceeds the capacity
of the relevant civil authorities.

3.11 Providing emergency capabilities for the maintenance of essential services which
have been temporarily disrupted and where the capacity of the relevant civil authorities is
exceeded.

3.12 Providing medical and health services in support of relevant authorities in
accordance with approved policy.

3.13 Providing search and rescue support to the relevant authorities in accordance with
domestic agreements and South Africa s international obligations.

3.14 Providing an air transport service for VIPs and other officials in accordance with
approved policy.

3.15 Providing support to other state departments for missions to the Antarctic and
Southern Ocean.

3.16 Providing hydrographic services to South African mariners and in compliance with
the international obligations of the RSA.

3.17 Providing an infrastructure for the management of the service corps.

3.18 Providing a communications security service to other state departments.

3.19 Administering the National Key Points Act.


-----

###### Force Design Logic

4. Notwithstanding this extensive list of tasks, the White Paper provides that force design should
revolve chiefly around th SANDF s primary function of defence against military aggression. While
the process of force design involves considerable military technical detail, the design is
determined largely by decisions regarding three parameters: the level of defence required; the
approved defence posture; and the defence budget.

5. The level of defence is reflected in the definition, scale and intensity of military operations
associated with the defence contingencies and tasks discussed in Chapter 3 of this report. The
size and configuration of the defence capabilities are in turn strongly influenced by the choice of
defence posture, as elaborated in Chapter 2. The process is further constrained by budgetary
guidelines and the costs associated with particular capabilities. In summary, the force design of
the SANDF is needs driven, but cost constrained.

6. While the process is intended to produce a force design representing the best defence value
for money within the selected parameters, it may not be possible to ensure the capabilities for a
required level of defence within a restrictive budget. The resulting imbalance or inadequacy in
defence capability represents a risk to the country, which must either be accepted or reduced by
other means. Throughout the process there is thus an interplay of political judgement and military
expertise.

###### Force Design Options

7. The Department of Defence developed various force design options, reflecting different
permutations of level of defence, defence posture and cost, for public consideration during the
consultative conferences of the Defence Review. Four options were presented to the
parliamentary defence committees and cabinet and were discussed in detail. Option One, as set
out in this report, was approved subject to available finances.

###### Status of a Force Design

8. The approval of a force design by the parliamentary defence committee, Cabinet or Parliament
does not constitute blanket approval for all implied capital projects or an immutable contract in
terms of the exact numbers and types of equipment. At best, it constitutes approval in principal for
the maintenance of the specified capabilities at an approximate level. There are several reasons
for this.

9. The affordability of the force design, which is central to its implementation, is subject to certain
assumptions and qualifications. The long-term sustainability of the design requires a continuous
investment in the periodic upgrading and replacement of equipment. The costing of the design
thus incorporates annualised upgrade and replacement costs over the life span of the equipment.
This is based on realistic assumptions, under present conditions, of the anticipated life span and
cost of such equipment. Since the life span of major equipment is measured in decades and
many replaement projects will commence many years hence, it is impossible to predict with
absolute accuracy the actual annualised cost of equipment.

10. The process further assumes that the current imbalance in the so-called tooth-to-tail ratio of
the SANDF will be corrected by the transformation process, thus releasing a greater portion of the


-----

budget for combat capabilities. The ratio on which the calculations are based is an estimate of the
anticipated result of transformation.

11. The numbers and costs of equipment in future replacement projects will also be affected by
technological developments which may improve future equipment capabilities. On the other hand,
less capable equipment may be available at a lower unit cost. During each procurement project a
trade-off will thus have to be made between the required overall capability, the equipment
available to the SANDF, cost, and available funds. These details can only be determined under
the conditions prevailing at the time, and all major acquisition projects will thus be subject to the
processes and levels of approval provided for in the White Paper on Defence.

12. The processes and assumptions on which the force design is based will be reviewed in
successive planning cycles. This is bound to produce new insights that will require a periodic
revision of the force design. The planning assumptions also reflect perceptions of the geopolitical
environment, which will inevitably change. While no major discontinuities are anticipated, even
gradual, relatively orderly change will require adjustments to defence planning on a continuous
basis.

13. The force design thus reflects a dynamic environment and is itself dynamic. It represents the
best present indication of the type and scale of defence capabilities that South Africa should
establish and maintain, but its future orientation makes deviations inevitable. The transformation
process in particular will impact directly on the force structure required to support the force
design: force structure is subject to the Department s transformation project which will be
discussed in detail in the course of the Defence Review process.

###### Option 1: Recommended Growth-Core Force Design

14. The absence of any immediate military threat to South Africa, the low probability of a
significant threat within the foreseeable future, the reductions in the defence budget since 1989
and the likelihood that the budget will remain restricted for some time, have created a situation
where the maintenance of extensive military capabilities is neither necessary nor affordable.
Option 1 therefore represents the minimum force level that can be maintained as a growth core,
in accordance with the core force approach detailed in Chapter 3, without the permanent loss of
capabilities. This growth core will enable limited force employment, but will maintain the expertise
and technological base for growth when warranted by the strategic or economic situation.

15. This option provides for a range of defence contingencies but excludes higher-level
contingencies in the category of invasions and neutralising raids as described in Chapter 3. It also
assumes substantial warning periods for the more severe contingencies. It allows for reasonable
freedom of action for the SANDF at operational level, including interdiction and counter-offensive
actions within a broadly defensive orientation. It also provides for peace support operations at a
level of up to one infantry battalion group, for border protection and other secondary tasks, and
for internal commitments in the short term.

16. At the broadest level of detail, this peace-time force will require some 22 000 full-time and
some 70 000 part-time members; this includes only combat units and does not include noncombat personnel. The annualised cost of the combat units of this force will be in the order of R5
000 million in 1996 rand value[1].

17. Defence is conducted jointly, with each Combat Service providing specialised capabilities to
Landward, Air and Maritime Defence. Organisationally, however, land assets reside in the SA
Army, air assets in the SA Air Force and naval assets in the SA Navy. The discussion below is
thus structured in terms of Landward, Air and Maritime Defence, indicating under each heading


-----

the contribution of the Combat Services to defence in that dimension. The contribution of the SA
Military Health Services is common to all the dimensions and will be discussed independently.

18. Landward Defence. Landward defence is conceptualised in terms of Conventional Defence
(mobile operations) and Area Defence. Mobile conventional forces provide the first and main line
of defence against external military threats. Area Defence comprises border safeguarding (border
protection and border control) and area protection. Border protection entails defending the border
against military threat and against crossings by armed and unarmed individuals or groups.

19. Area protection provides defence in depth against military incursions by external military
forces, as well as a firm base from where mobile operations can be conducted. Within the
primarily defensive orientation of the SANDF, a high premium is placed on firepower, night
fighting ability, manoeuvring, quick reaction, surprise and tactical mobility. These features are
reflected in the requirements of Option 1 regarding the land forces of the SA Army, which is the
main provider of landward defence capability.

20. **SA Army in Landward Defence. The basis for conventional defence is the Rapid**
Deployment Force (RDF). This comprises of a mechanised infantry brigade, a parachute brigade
and a special forces brigade, which maintain immediate readiness for all shorter term
contingencies. Potential for expansion is provided by the Part-Time Component mobile division,
consisting of three balanced brigades at various levels of preparedness.

21. These conventional, mobile forces are supplemented by border and area protection forces.
Their main purpose is the protection of landward borders and interior assets against enemy
mobile, airborne and special forces. During peace-time they form the backbone of SANDF
participation in border protection and maintenance of law and order tasks. These forces consist
principally of 14 light infantry battalions, 12 territorial infantry battalions and 183 area protection
units. Command and Control is currently effected through 27 Group Headquarters within nine
Command Areas of responsibility throughout South Africa[2].

22. Army main equipment associted with the force design includes the following:

22.1 Main Battle Tanks. Tanks provide a unique combination of mobility, firepower and
resilience, and are the main combat element of the conventional land battle. The SA
Army presently has 224 Olifant Mk1A/1B tanks on inventory, while Option 1 requires 154.
The capability of tanks is vastly improved by using tank transporters for deployment over
distances. The Olifant is due for replacement by a new generation main battle tank
system from the year 2009[3].

22.2 Armoured Cars. Armoured cars are used in reconnaissance, attacks and counterattacks against minor enemy strongholds, and in rear areas against lines of
communication, providing high mobility and firepower in situations where heavy armour is
uncalled for. They are a vital component of peace support/enforcement operations.
Armoured cars cannot replace tanks and will only be used against tanks from defile
positions or in static direct fire support. The Eland armoured car system is largely being
phased out and replaced by the Rooikat. In 1989 the SA Army had 1 268 Eland and 18
Rooikat, compared with the present 235 Eland and 176 Rooikat. Option 1 requires 146
Eland and 242 Rooikat.

22.3 Anti-Armour Missile Systems. The ZT-3 anti-tank missile system, mounted on the
Ratel 6 x 6 chassis, provides effective, highly mobile defence against tanks and other
armoured vehicles. There are presently 53 systems on inventory, meeting the Option 1
requirement. Replacement by a new-generation system is anticipated from 2008.

22.4 Artillery Systems. Artillery provides indispensable indirect fire support to the land
battle. This capability is provided by the G5 155mm towed medium artillery gun, the G6
155mm self-propelled medium artillery gun and the Bateleur 127mm multiple rocket


-----

launcher. There are presently 72 G5, 43 G6 and 25 Bateleur on inventory, compared with
the Option 1 requirement of 45 G5, 43 G6 and 25 Bateleur.

22.5 Infantry Combat and Mine Protected Vehicles. The present Ratel infantry combat
vehicle (ICV), in service since 1976, provides mobility for the infantry and command and
control elements of the mechanised forces of the SA Army. The present inventory of 1
243 is close to the 1 214 required by Option 1. It will be replaced by a new generation
ICV from 2005. The mobility of the bulk of the infantry units is presently dependent on a
range of vehicles, including the mine-protected Casspir, Buffel and Mamba (numbering 3
227 in total) and the unprotected Samil/Kwe 20 and the Samil/Kwe 50. The Option 1
requirement is for 4304 protected vehicles due to a greater emphasis on protection
against mines, small-arms fire and shrapnel. These vehicles are essential for mobility in
conventional operations, area protection and peace support operations, and are due for
replacement from 1999.

22.6 Anti-Aircraft Systems. Air attacks can have a devastating effect on unprotected
ground forces and the mere threat of air attack can seriously inhibit mobility and combat
effectiveness. The present SA Army air defence capability consists of a variety of towed
and vehicle mounted anti-aircraft guns and associated radars. This is inadequate,
however; some systems are obsolete and need to be supplemented and extended by
new systems to fulfil the concept of layered air defence. The Opton 1 requirement thus
includes towed guns, man-portable missiles, short range missiles and search- and firecontrol radars.

23. SA Air Force in Landward Defence. The SA Air Force is a vital participant in landward
defence, defending land forces against air attack and providing surveillance, mobility (air
transportation) and firepower in support of landward operations. Fixed wing aircraft and
helicopters provide the following capabilities toward landward defence:

23.1 Combat Support Helicopters (CSH). These provide direct fire support to land forces.
They greatly enhance anti-tank capability and provide rapid support to the parachute and
special forces brigades. Option 1 thus provides for 12 CSH as a core capability.

23.2 Fighter Aircraft. Fighters are the main means of ensuring a favourable air situation
over an area of operations, thereby preventing enemy air operations and enabling aerial
support to own ground forces. Their employment in air defence thus has important
benefits in landward defence. Direct fighter support includes fire support, interdiction of
the battlefield and enemy rear lines of communication. Both medium and light fighters are
included in Option 1 (32 and 16 aircraft respectively). Light fighters can, however, only be
used in a relatively benign air defence environment.

23.3 Aerial Surveillance. Knowledge of enemy dispositions and movements is essential
to the successful conduct of defence. Aerial surveillance gives a unique vantage point,
covers both large and selected areas rapidly, and enables a quick response to requests
for information. This capability is provided in Option 1 by 16 light reconnaissance aircraft,
4 electronic warfare aircraft (see paragraph 27.5) and a squadron of remotely piloted
aircraft. (See Note 2 above).

23.4 Air Mobility. Air transport is essential to the mobility of forces engaged in landward
defence and is a critical component of the rapid deployment force concept. Fixed wing
aircraft of various types provide mobility over longer distances, the most cost-effective
type of aircraft being determined by distance and load considerations. Light and medium
helicopters provide tactical mobility for troops in the field, and contribute to logistic
support and casualty evacuation. VIP aircraft provide rapid, efficient transport of senior
staff to and from theatres of operations. Option 1 thus provides for 44 transport aircraft of
various types, 9 VIP aircraft, 96 transport helicopters and nine Voluntary Squadrons.
(See Note 2 above).


-----

24. SA Navy in Landward Defence. The SA Navy can provide fire support to landward defence
operations in coastal areas and can transport forces, equipment and supplies to harbours serving
an area of operations.

25. Air Defence. The use of the air for surveillance, mobility and firepower is a basic tenet of
modern conventional warfare. Air superiority is the ability to make unhindered use of the air, while
denying an enemy that capability. Air defence is the protection of assets against all forms of
enemy air interference and involves both defensive and offensive measures.

26. The active component of defensive counter air measures include the early detection and
warning of enemy air activity, ground- or shipboard-defence by means of gun or missile systems,
and the use of fighter aircraft to intercept enemy aircraft. The passive component comprises the
hardening of potential targets, the dispersion of assets, camouflage, damage repair capabilities,
and so forth. Offensive counter air measures consist of direct attacks on enemy air assets
including bases, aircraft, air defence systems, radars and command and control centres to
neutralise enemy air capabilities. As detailed in Chapter 2, offensive action at an operational level
in response to an enemy attack would not violate South Africa s primarily defensive posture.
Offensive counter air measures are thus not excluded from the range of possible air defence
actions.

27. While each Combat Service is responsible for the local defence of its own assets and the
Navy can assist in harbour protection using the capabilities of ships in port, the SA Air Force is
responsible for area defence and the defence of National Key Points against air attack. The SA
Air Force is thus the main provider of air defence capabilities.

28. SA Air Force in Air Defence. The defence of South African airspace is the primary task of
the SA Air Force. Flexible air defence is provided for in this force design option through a
combination of airspace control radars (both static and mobile), point defence missile systems,
and aircraft.

28.1 Command and Control. The Air Force employs an integrated command and control
system linking subsidiary structures to a central Air Force Command Post. This provides
an integrated picture of air operations and enables the efficient use of air resources.

28.2 Sensors. Radar coverage is essential to detect and track enemy air operations and
to direct own operations. Present radar deployments provide only limited coverage of the
country s airspace and borders. Option 1 makes provision for 3,5 radar squadrons, which
constitute the required core capability.

28.3 Medium Multi-Role Fighter Aircraft. Medium fighters are essential for air defence.
Obsolescence and dfence cutbacks have led to a reduction in medium fighter numbers
from 89 in 1989 to 51 aircraft. The F1 s are to be phased out in 1999 subject to annual
review, while the Cheetah C will stay in service until 2012. The Option 1 requirement is
for 32 medium multi-role fighters.

28.4 Air Defence Missile Systems. The Cactus missile system, used for the defence of
primary air bases, has been retired from service. One system is being kept functional as
a technology and capability retention programme. Option 1 makes no provision for
missile defences.

28.5 Electronic Warfare/In-Flight Refuelling. Electronic surveillance provides vital early
warning of air attacks and other enemy actions, while in-flight refuelling extends the
range and endurance of fighter aircraft employed in air, land and maritime defence.
Retention of this capability thus makes a vital contribution to the other limited capabilities
of Option 1 in all dimensions of defence. The recommended option includes five aircraft,
reflecting the retention of four equipped aircraft, with a fifth unmodified aircraft used for
training and transportation.


-----

29. SA Army in Air Defence. The responsibility of the Army toward air defence consists of selfdefence of its own assets, as detailed above.

30. SA Navy in Air Defence. The responsibility of the Navy toward air defence consists of selfdefence of its own assets and harbour defence by ships in port, as detailed above.

31. Maritime Defence. South Africa s dominant position on a vital global trade sea-route, its
dependence on sea trade and its vast maritime area make maritime defence a matter of great
importance. The protection and defence of maritime life lines of commerce during times of conflict
and hostilities may prove crucial to the survival and well-being of our people.

32. South Africa has six major commercial ports and two main naval bases - in Simon s Town
and Durban. It is of vital importance that these ports be kept open to shipping during times of war
or tension. The present lack of finance for defence, however, has determined that two critical
areas - comprising Durban and Richard s Bay on the east coast and Cape Town, Saldanha Bay
and Simon s Town on the west coast - should be prioritised. To this end, two maritime defence
areas have been planned, based on these two areas.

33. Maritime warfare is multi-dimensional and effective maritime defence requires balanced air,
surface and sub-surface capabilities. Surface vessels can conduct sustained operations,
maintaining a presence unequalled by other systems, and have substantial capabilities in
countering aircraft, other surface vessels and submarines. Submarines can control their visibility
and pose a threat to even the most sophisticated surface forces, thus providing great deterrent
and defence value. Aircraft provide area coverage and a rapid response capability that ships and
submarines cannot equal. There is thus a complementary relationship between these elements
and the neglect of any one has a disproportionate effect on the overall defence capability.
Maritime defence is vested primarily in the capabilities of the SA Navy.

34. SA Navy in Maritime Defence. The maritime defence areas are defended by means of a
layered approach where vessels with different capabilities are used in concentric layers extending
outward from the harbours. The capabilities of each class of vessel contribute uniquely to overall
defence capability.

34.1 Frigates/Patrol Corvettes. Frigates or corvettes are the workhorses of any navy.
They are capable of countering aircraft, submarines and other surface vessels and can
conduct sustained operations in sea conditions like those off the South African coast.
They will patrol to the outer layer of about 200 nautical miles (370 kms) from the coast.
Such ships, as a rule, carry helicopters which significantly improve and extend their
defence capabilities. The SA Navy has no ships in this class, having lost its destroyers
and frigates between the mid-1970s and late 1980s. Option 1 includes four corvettes.

34.2 Submarines. Submarines have built-in stealth, mobility, firepower, endurance and an
ability to control their visibility that present significant problems for hostile naval forces.
They patrol throughout the outer and inner layers of defence, providing early warning and
a great deterrent against even the most powerful of surface forces. Without submarines,
a navy would have to have a considerably larger surface fleet with higher sophistication
at a significantly higher cost to provide the same deterrent and defence value. The three
Daphne-Class submarines in service at present are coming to the end of their
economical service life and their replacement should be seriously considered. Option 1
includes four submarines.

34.3 Inshore and Harbour Patrol. Inshore patrol vessels patrol the inshore waters of the
maritime defence areas, primarily in the approaches to harbours. Harbour patrol boats
are ski-boat sized vessels used for patrol purposes in the harbours themselves. These
vessels form the inner layer of defence against smaller enemy forces that may have
infiltrated through the outer defences. Option 1 provides for two inshore patrol boats and
39 harbour patrol boats.


-----

34.4 Rapid Reaction Vessels. A number of strike craft or corvettes should be kept on
stand-by to react against enemy forces encountered by the outer layers of defence and to
patrol the intermediate area. The SA Navy has nine strike craft facing block
obsolescence, six of which will have to be replaced shortly after the turn of the century.
Option 1 therefore includes six strike craft.

34.5 Mine Countermeasures Forces. Mine hunters and minesweepers are required to
keep the harbour approaches clear of mines. Option 1 includes four of each of these
vessels, corresponding to the number presently in service. However, the minesweepers,
being almost 40 years of age, require a life extension program and upgrade of their
minesweeping gear to make them operational.

34.6 Combat Support Ships. Combat Support Ships provide replenishment at sea for
combat ships and submarines, enabling operations on a sustained basis with minimal
base support. These helicopter carrying ships are capable of performing multiple tasks
and are vital in peace support operations because of their inherent cargo and personnel
carrying capacity. Option 1 includes one such sip.

35. These forces will be divided up equally in defence of the two Maritime Defence Areas when
so required. They can, however, be regrouped as required to meet other contingencies.

36. SA Air Force in Maritime Defence. Air participation in maritime defence provides enhanced
surveillance capabilities and firepower, and plays a significant role in layered defence.

36.1 Maritime Patrol Aircraft. Maritime Patrol Aircraft have area coverage and long-range
rapid reaction capabilities that enable surveillance far beyond the capabilities of naval
vessels. Some are also fitted with weapons that enable attacks on surface ships or
submarines. They can patrol throughout and far beyond the maritime defence areas,
providing an outer layer of defence, giving early warning of approaching hostile forces,
tracking those that have been detected, and assisting in the direction of maritime
engagement. Such aircraft are a vital component of maritime warfare. Option 1 therefore
includes six long range and 10 short range maritime patrol aircraft. The need for maritime
patrol aircraft is, however, presently driven by surveillance requirements rather than full
surface and sub-surface combat capability. In view of budgetary restrictions it may
therefore be expedient to consider long range maritime patrol aircraft with downgraded
combat capabilities, but with a possibility of upgrading when so required, rather than
more combat capable medium range aircraft. The early warning capability provided by
these aircraft can be supplemented by the surveillance capability of the electronic warfare
aircraft of the SA Air Force.

36.2 Shipborne Maritime Helicopters. Helicopters increase the range of ships detection
systems and weapons and may possess systems to help counter hostile surface
warships or submarines. They therefore vastly improve the defence value of ships that
carry them. Option 1 provides for five such helicopters to be carried on the patrol
corvettes.

36.3 Fighter aircraft. Fighters provide rapid reaction to a naval threat and can
substantially complement naval fire power, thereby compounding the self-defence
problem of the enemy. While Option 1 makes no special provision for this role, multi-role
fighters dedicated primarily to air and landward defence can be employed in this capacity.

37. SA Military Health Services. The medical services support the three combat services during
operations. This support entails operational health services during deployments. The SAMHS
participate actively in search and rescue missions, and provide casualty evacuation during
missions. Direct support is given to the Army rapid deployment forces through the full-time force
medical battalion group, and the part-time medical battalion groups provide direct support to the
part-timeforce mobile division. The SAMHS also provide early warning of chemical and biological


-----

agents being used against own forces and carry out decontamination of personnel and
equipment.

38. Strategic gaps and risks. The major strategic gaps in this force design are as follows:

38.1 Interventions by major powers and neutralising attacks can only be defended
against in a limited way. This will require armed action, regular and irregular, supported
by civilian based defence if military resistance fails. This limits the deterrence value of the
SANDF.

38.2 Limited strategic mobility in the ground forces due to a low force to space ratio.

38.3 Limited strategic reconnaissance capabilities in the Air Force, exacerbated by the
absence of high-speed autonomous unmanned aircraft.

38.4 Insufficient air defence capabilities for a classical defensive counter-air posture.

38.5 Restricted maritime capabilities for defence of all harbours and maritime areas
outside the two mentioned critical areas.

38.6 Restricted maritime reconnaissance, limiting the operational options of naval surface
and submarine forces.

38.7 If large scale forces are employed for peace support operations, this will further
restrict capabilities for self-defence.

39. These strategic gaps limit the political freedom of the government in times of crisis and
conflict and must be kept in mind during conflict management.

###### Option 2: Department of Defence Long-Term Vision Force Design

40. This option provides for a broad range of defence contingencies, excluding major
interventions by major powers as described in Chapter 3 under "invasion". It is based on the
assumption that reasonable warning would be received for such contingencies to develop and
that time for expansion of capabilities would be available. It allows for reasonable freedom of
action for the SANDF at operational level, including interdiction and counter-offensive actions. It
makes ample provision for peace support operations, border proection, and other secondary
tasks but scales down on internal commitments in line with national defence policy.

41. At the broadest level of detail this peace time force will require some 36 000 full time and
some 98 000 part time members (for combat units only). The annualised cost of the combat units
of this force will be in the order of R6 000 million in 1996 rand value. As qualified in the discussion
of Option 1, the cost does not include common support costs.

42. Land forces. This force design includes all the components of the conventional land forces
but significantly scales up the parachute and special forces brigades relative to Option 1.

43. The territorial forces include 20 motorised infantry battalions and 205 area protection units.
Command and Control is effected through 18 group headquarters throughout South Africa.

44. Army main equipment remains the same as in Option 1 with slight increase in quantity.

45. **Air Forces. The concept of air operations in this force design is the same as for Option 1.**
Major changes in force elements are the inclusion of four long-range maritime patrol aircraft and
high-speed autonomous unmanned aircraft. This enhances the effectiveness of the maritime
defence and reconnaissance capabilities of the SANDF.


-----

46. Numbers of light reconnaissance aircraft are reduced since their dual use as transport aircraft
is made unnecessary through an increase in light transport aircraft. Two point defence systems
are included, thereby improving this capability from technology retention to a limited operational
capability. The airspace control radar squadrons are slightly reduced since there is less reliance
on fighter interception for air defence.

47. Maritime Defence. Naval forces in this option differ only slightly from the previous option. The
minesweepers and mine hunters remain the same in number but readiness levels are slightly
improved. The inclusion of the long range maritime patrol aircraft will however substantially
improve maritime defence capabilities.

48. **SA Military Heath Services. The operational capabilities of the medical services are the**
same in this option as in Option 1.

49. **Strategic gaps and risks. The strategic gaps of Option 2 remain largely in force, with the**
following reductions:

49.1 Neutralising attacks can be successfully countered, leaving only invasions as a
strategic gap.

49.2 Maritime reconnaissance is significantly improved, enhancing the operational
options of naval surface and submarine forces.

49.3 Strategic reconnaissance is enhanced by the inclusion of high speed autonomous
unmanned aircraft.

50. The reduction in the strategic gaps improves the political freedom of the government in times
of crisis and conflict somewhat, but significant gaps till exist and must be kept in mind during
conflict management.

###### Option 3: Lower Level Demonstration Option

51. Option 3 demonstrates the effect of a reduction below the level considered to be the minimum
growth-core. This force design also provides greater emphasis on the secondary functions than
Options 1 and 2.

52. This force design requires some 26 000 regular force members and 78 000 part-time
members (for combat units only). The annualised cost of the combat elements of this force design
is approximately R4 000 million in 1996 rand value.

53. The general characteristic of this force design is the removal of certain capability areas rather
than simply the reduction of capabilities over a broad range. Conventional capabilities in
particular are traded for non-conventional territorial forces. Conventional air and naval capabilities
are severely curtailed.

54. This option reduces the Army s conventional forces and increases the area protection units
and the readiness level of the groups. In the Air Force, fighter capability is lost, combat support
helicopters are excluded and transport helicopters are halved in relation to the previous options.
The Navy loses its submarines, corvettes and the combat support ship. No provision is made for
defence against chemical and biological attack.

55. The operational effect is to shift the emphasis from conventional to non-conventional
operational concepts. It is for this reason also that personnel numbers are increased despite the
reduced cost of this force.

56. Strategic gaps and risks. This force design has all the strategic gaps of Option 2. In addition
the following gaps are evident:


-----

56.1 The absence of fighters, combat support helicopters, corvettes and submarines, as
well as the reduced conventional capabilities of land forces, severely limits the deterrent
value of this force design.

56.2 The emphasis on the non-conventional elements of the Army implies a severe
restriction on the operational concepts open to it.

56.3 No provision for defence against air attack.

56.4 The elimination of larger surface vessels and submarines severely restricts the
effective radius at whch the Navy can operate effectively, and seriously compromises its
ability to protect the sea lines of communication.

56.5 The design leaves South Africa vulnerable to any form of chemical and biological
attack.

56.6 The strategic mobility of the SANDF is severely limited.

56.7 The force has a greatly reduced capability to contribute specialised capabilities to
peace support operations.

56.8 In times of conventional conflict, South Africa will be forced into adopting nonconventional methods of defence which will be costly in terms of lives and territory lost.

57. These strategic gaps imply serious political risks for government. Since the SANDF cannot
provide the deterrent capability outlined in the White Paper, the political management of conflict
will require special attention. South Africa will be open to punitive and coercive actions by future
enemies due to a lack of air and maritime defence.

###### Conclusion

69. The Department of Defence considers Option 2 to be the most prudent force design for the
SANDF in the long term. This should remain the vision of the Department.

70. In the shorter term, however, due to financial restrictions and other national priorities, Option
1 will form an acceptable growth-core for the maintenance of military capabilities and skills.

71. Option 3 is considered unacceptable by the Department, and leaves strategic gaps and risks
that should be unacceptable to government. It is well below the minimum growth-core for any
future expansion.

72. Option 4 involves major deviations from present capabilities and doctrine, and will require
more study before it can be recommended. If future tendencies are in this direction, Option 1 will
be an acceptable base for such development.

73. In the light of the above, Option 1 is the recommended force design for the SANDF.

74. The chosen forces design option will become the object of implementation planning for the
next decade or longer. However, the realisation of this force design will be influenced by periodic
revisions of the Defence Review and subsequent planning to reflect the continuously changing
strategic environment and prevailing circumstances. The result is that the exact details regarding
the type and quantities of main equipment will inevitably deviate from the vision. Such deviations
will be subject to parliamentary oversight and the stipulations of the acquisition process.


-----

|SANDF Force Design Options|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|ARM OF SERVICE AND ELEMENT|Option 1 Recommended|Option 2|Option 3|Option 4|
|Total Cost, SANDF (Rm) Personnel Full-Time Component Part-Time Component|5 010 22 000 69 400|6 014 36 000 98 000|4 084 26 200 77 900|5 912 27 200 82 000|
|SA Army Mobile Division Mechanised Brigade (RDF) Parachute Brigade (RDF) Special Forces Brigade Territorial Forces : Group Headquarters Light Infantry Battalions Territorial/Motorised Infantry Battalions Area Protection Units|1 1 1 1 27 14 12 183|1 1 1 1 18 10 20 205|1 1 1 1 32 8 205|1 1 1 1 18 10 20 205|
|Total Cost (Rm)|2 517|3 289|2 869|2 998|
|SA Air Force Fighters Light Fighters Medium Fighters|16 32|16 32|16|16 44|
|Reconnaissance Light Reconnaissance Aircraft Medium Sigint Aircraft Long Range Maritime Patrol Aircraft Medium Range Maritime Patrol Aircraft Short Range Maritime Patrol Aircraft Remotely Piloted Sqns|16 6 10 1.00|16 3 4 8 1.50|16 8 0.75|16 4 4 8 1.25|
|Helicopters Combat Support Helicopters Maritime Helicopters Transport Helicopters|12 5 96|12 6 96|48|16 6 64|
|Transport Aircraft Transport Aircraft VIP Voluntary Squadrons|44 9 9|64 9 9|64 9 9|64 9 9|
|In-Flight Refuelling/Electronic Warfare A/C Airspace Control Radar Squadrons Point Defence Squadrons Mobile Ground Sigint Team|5 3.50 3|3 2.50 2 6|1.00|4 5.67 4 1|
|Total Cost (Rm)|1 725|1 941|868|2 070|
|SA Navy Submarines Corvettes Strike Craft Combat Support Ships Minesweeper/Hunter Inshore Patrol Vessels Harbour Patrol Boats|4 4 6 1 8 2 39|4 4 6 1 8 2 39|8 3 16|4 4 6 1 8 8 39|
|Total Cost (Rm)|715|731|309|790|
|SA Military Health Services|1|1||4|


-----

|CB Defensive Programmes Medical Battalion Groups (FTC) Medical Battalion Groups (PTC)|1.00 1.50|1.00 1.50|1.00 1.00|1.00 1.00|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total Cost (Rm)|53|53|38|54|


-----

### Chapter 9

**South African Defence Review 1998**

**_Force Structure_**
_The Transformation of the Department of Defence_

1. The transformation of the Department of Defence (DoD) takes place against the
broader backdrop of the transformation process in South Africa generally. The post-1994
period has ushered in a series of challenges for South Africans which require a
fundamental transformation of economic relations, political structures, and culture and
values of South African society. This is reflected in key government policy documents
including the Reconstruction and Development Programme, the Growth, Employment
and Redistribution Strategy, the White Paper on the Transformation of the Public Service
and the Defence White Paper. It is also reflected in the fact that the posture of the country
has changed from that of an aggressive stance - as reflected in the doctrine of "Offensive
Defence" - towards the region to a posture of co-operative and confidence-building
defence.

2. Although the transformation of the organization and structures of the DoD is an
important process with which the DoD is currently underway, structural transformation
consittutes part of a much braoder process of transformation within the DoD generally.
The transformation of the DoD covers four major areas:

2.1 Civil-Military Relations : This entails transforming the relationship between
the armed forces, the defence function and its constitutional and legal status. The
two critical areas of civil-military relations transformation cover the following :

2.1.1 **Constitutional and Legal Transformation.** This refers to the
reorientation of the defence function in light of new constitutional and
legal realities. The Constitution outlines the political channels of
accountability governing the DoD, the functions of defence, its
organizational outline and its composition. The institution of a new
Constitution has required a corresponding revision of the Defence Act, the
creation of appropriate Codes of Conduct and the internalization of these
values in the education and training culture of the DoD. The key
constitutional principles upon which the defence function is based are
outlined in the Constitution. The key legal principles and laws governing
the defence function are in the process of being revised - the process of
which is outlined in the Legal Environment chapter of this Review.

2.1.2 Oversight Mechanisms. A key feature of democratic civil-military
relations is the inviolability of the principle of civil control over the armed
forces. This is reflected in the primacy afforded to parliament in approving
the finances for the armed forces, the legislation governing the activities of
the armed forces, and the approval of the policy framework within which
the armed forces will function. To ensure that effective civil control is
maintained over the armed forces, and that the activities of the armed
forces are harmonized with broader government policy, a range of


-----

additional mechanisms are instituted to ensure robust and effective civilmilitary relations. These include the following:

2.1.2.1 Legislation passed by parliament which determines the
defence mandate of the Department of Defence.

2.1.2.2 The creation of Parliamentary Committees responsible for
the oversight of the defence function. The Joint Standing
Committee on Defence and the defence committees in the National
Assembly and the National Council of Provinces fulfill this
function.

2.1.2.3 The Parliamentary Committees of Finance and Public
Accounts which has the authority to summon any public account
holder with concerning their expenditure of funds.

2.1.2.4 The Auditor General and his staff who report directly to
parliament on the handling of finances by the Department of
Defence.

2.1.2.5 The creation of a Ministry of Defence responsible for
ensuring political control over the DoD and ensuring that the
activities of the DoD are consistent with government policy.

2.1.2.6 The creation of a largely civilian Defence Secretariat
responsible for formulating policies, programes and budgets and
controlling the execution of the mandate of the SANDF.

2.1.2.7 The creation of additional mechanisms to ensure that the
activities of the DoD are consistent with the letter and the spirit of
the new democracy - the role of the Public Protector and the
Military Ombuds for example.

2.2 Normative and Cultural Transformation. This refers to the transformation
of the culture of the DoD in relation to its values, traditions, human resource
practices and managerial practices. Cultural transformation, therefore, refers to a
wide range of activities reflected in a diversity of policy and programmes within
the DoD including the following:

2.2.1 The institution of equal opportunity and affirmative action
programmes within the DoD. This will ensure that the DoD will be
broadly representative of South Africa s demographic composition. These
programmes are reflected in the Human Resources and Part Time
Component chapters in this Defence Review.

2.2.2 The transformation of the traditions of both the full-time and parttime components of the DoD. This will ensure that the emerging South
African military culture will be reflective of the diverse military traditions
within South African society. It is significant to note that a DoD


-----

Committee has been established to oversee the transformation of the
traditions of the new Department of Defence.

2.2.3 The creation of a military professional ethic which is consistent with
the moral imperatives of the new political dispensation and accords with
the ethical obligations of a soldier functioning in a democracy. This is
reflected in the current Civic Education Programme within the DoD.

2.2.4 The transformation of the management practices of the DoD to
ensure that such practices are normatively and practically consistent with
the ethos of a new democracy. This is reflected in the design and
institution of a Civic Education Programme within the DoD and the design
of new Leadership, Command, Administrative and Management practices
for use within the DoD.

2.3 **Organizational Restructuring.** Organizational restructuring refers to the
rationalisation and right-sizing of the DoD so as to ensure the more efficient and
effective utilisation of state resources. This entails a range of measures including
the disbanding of units, demobilisation and rationalisation of defence personnel,
elimination of wasteful practices, eliminating the duplication o services, and the
more efficient co-location of military bases and units. This component of
transformation is addressed in greater detail in this chapter.

**_Civil Control over the Military_**

3. Armed forces play an important role as an instrument of state policy in contributing
towards the realization of the goals of our new democracy. The armed forces, however,
like all government departments, and particularly in light of their coercive powers, must
remain subordinate to elected government and respectful of the principle of civil
supremacy. This done through the institution of appropriate oversight and control
mechanisms as both a parliamentary and executive level and via programmes within the
armed forces such as highlighting the need for military professionalism and the
inculcation amongst members of the armed forces respect for civil control through
training programmes.

4. With the advent of democracy in South Africa in 1994, government undertook to
establish civil control over the armed forces in line with democratic practice throughout
the world.

5. Civil control is established by the elected democratic authority appointing a political
head over the respective forces and department. In South Africa the Constitution
mandates the Minister of Defence to exercise control over and be accountable for the
entire defence function.

6. To support the Minister, civilians are appointed in the department to assist policy
functions. This includes setting the ends of defence, establishing the ways and means of
defence through programming and budgeting and assisting the Minister in control of the


-----

Defence Force to ensure that it fulfils its mandate in line with the Government s
directions.

**Management of the Defence Function**

7. The SANDF s mandate is firstly that of the defence of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the country. It should be able to meet this obligation with force should it be
called upon to do so.

8. Management of the defence force is established constitutionally and through the
Defence Act in the following way:

8.1 The SANDF must be structured and managed as a disciplined military force
(Constitution 200(1)).

8.2 The President as head of the national executive is Commander-in-Chief of the
defence force, and must appoint the Military Command of the force (Constitution,
200 (1)).

8.3 Command of the defence force must be exercised in accordance with the
directions of the Minister of Defence under the authority of the President
(Constitution, 202 (2)).

8.4 C SANDF shall have the powers and be charged with the duties functions and
be responsible to the Minister for the efficient management and administration of
the SANDF, including the effective utilisation and training of all members of that
force [Defence Act, 8(3)(b)].

8.5 The Secretary, by virtue of the Defence Act and Public Service Act, shall
exercise his functions and powers as Head of Department and Accounting Officer
with reference to the SANDF by providing C SANDF with comprehensive
instructions for the issuing of orders and directives and the giving of commands
(Defence Act 7C(e)).

8.6 The Chief of the Defence Force:

8.6.1 Is responsible for the issuing of such orders and directives and the
giving of commands and for ensuring that such orders, directives and
commands are complied with (Defence Act 8(3)(e)).

8.6.2 Must also see to the execution of all budgetary programmes relating
to the SANDF (Defence Act 8(3)(d)).

8.6.3 Has to supply all information and inputs with regard to the SANDF
to the Secretary to enable him or her to perform his or her functions
properly (Defence Act 8(3)(f)).

**The Defence Secretariat**

9. The role of a Department of State is to formulate policies, programmes and budgets
and to control the execution of the mandate of the defence force.


-----

10. The Constitution establishes a Defence Secretariat to assist the Minister with the
above mentioned functions. Section 204 of the Constitution states: A civilian Secretariat
for Defence must be established by national legislation to function under the direction of
the Cabinet member responsible for defence .

11. The national legislation referred to in the Constitution is provided in Section 7A and
7B of the Defence Act by virtue of item 2, Schedule 6 of the Constitution. The Defence
Secretariat is established by Section 7A(1)(a): There is hereby established in the
Department of Defence a Defence Secretariat .

12. Section 7A(1)(b) of the Defence Act states: the officers and employees within the
meaning of the Public Service Act 1994 (Proclamation No 103, 1994) which are
necessary for the performance of the work connected to the functions of the Secretary
shall be appointed to posts in the Defence Secretariat in consultation with the Minister .

13. This section clearly indicates that the members named here are civilian members as
envisaged in the Constitution. Section 7A(2) also allows for members of the SANDF with
their consent to be placed at the disposal of the Secretary to serve in posts in the Defence
Secretariat. These personnel do not lose their identity as members of the SANDF.

**Role of the Secretary for Defence**

14. Section 7C of the Defence Act defines the role of the Secretary for Defence. The
Secretary shall be a citizen of the Republic and may not be a member of the SANDF. The
Secretary shall:

14.1 Be the head of the department and accounting officer of the DoD.

14.2 Be the head of the Defence Secretariat and as such be responsible for the
management of and administrative control over the staff of the Defence
Secretariat.

14.3 Be the principal departmental adviser to the Minister with regard to defence
policy matters as well as any matter which may be investigated by the Joint
Standing Committee on Defence of the Parliament under section 228(3)(d) of the
Constitution and in respect of which that committee may make recommendations.

14.4 Advise the Minister on any particular matter referred by Minister to the
Secretary.

14.5 Perform such duties and functions as may from time to time be assigned or
referred to him or her by the Minister, in particular any function or duty necessary
or expedient to enhance Parliamentary oversight and Miisterial control over the
SANDF.

14.6 Provide C SANDF with comprehensive instructions for the issuing of orders
and directives and the giving of commands with regards to the functioning of the
Secretary as head and accounting officer of the DoD.

14.7 Monitor compliance with directions issued by the Minister under the
Constitution, to C SANDF and report thereon to the Minister.


-----

14.8 Perform all functions of head of department regarding the effective
management and administration of the DoD.

**Establishment of the integrated head office**

15. The integrated head office was established in order to achieve synergy between the
work of the Defence Secretariat and that of the SANDF. The Secretariat has to fulfill its
functions in conjunction with the SANDF. International practice has evolved from a
position where the functions were performed in parallel to one where they are fulfilled in
interaction with each other. It is pointless for policy formulators to suggest ends which
the military do not agree with or are unable to fulfill, and to allow for a practice of going
back and forth between the Secretariat and the SANDF to come to acceptable solutions.

16. Accordingly, it was decided that military and civilian personnel should work closely
together with regard to the Secretariat function in determining departmentally with the
approval of the Minister the ends, ways and means of defence, and to effect savings and
avoid duplication of effort. Similarly, civilians work closely with military personnel in
establishing accountability and checking on proper utilisation of state resources.

17. Civilian personnel, however, do not intervene in the military operational chain of
command, ie when military personnel are implementing military operations.

18. Diagram 1 (Diagram 1 : Reporting Responsibilities in the Integrated DoD
Headquarters) sets out the newly established organisation of the integrated head office
and serves to identify the reporting functions and lines of control between the Secretary
and C SANDF. The blocks indicated in white in the diagram are those functions which
the Secretary needs to control to fulfil his function as Head of Department - to formulate
policies, programmes and budgets and to control the execution of the mandate of the
defence force. The black blocks are indicative of force functions and the incumbents
report to C SANDF.

19. Further studies on the clarification of these primary lines of responsibility and
accountability for these functions (whether they report to the Secretary for Defence or the
Chief of the National Defence Force) will have to be investigated in further work of the
Transformation process and duly approved by the Minister of Defence.

20. The Transformation Project will need to determine which of the posts in the
integrated head office are civilian, and which are military. Ideally, those functions which
are the responsibility of the Secretary should have chiefs of division which are civilian,
while those which are the responsibility of C SANDF should be military posts. Those
which are their joint responsibility could either be civilian or military.

**_Organisational Transformation_**

21. The DoD is being organisationally transformed to ensure that it carries out its roles
and functions efficiently and effectively and within the framework of national values and
policies. A key aspect to this is to enhance performance management and to improve cost
effectiveness. This section sets out a vision for an organisationally transformed DoD.


-----

This vision will need to be elaborated on, modified and improved through planning and
consultation in line functions and costed in terms of implementation.

**Key Concepts**

22. The following key concepts underpin the transformation of administrative, command
and control and supporting structures of the DoD:

22.1 A systems approach to the management of defence.

22.2 Maximum synchronisation between arms of service (known as jointness )
while preserving essential service uniqueness.

22.3 A focus on the core business of defence and the out-sourcing of non-core
functions.

22.4 Civilianisation where uniformed posts are not required.

22.5 Maximal reliance on the Part-Time Component.

22.6 Exploiting information technology.

**_Systems Approach_**

23. The DoD adopts a systems approach to organisational restructuring. In terms of this
approach, the DoD consists of elements or sub-systems which work together to produce a
specific output - in the DoD s case this is output is defined as being those combat-ready
forces that can be employed on operational missions. The combat forces can, in turn, be
viewed as systems.

24. The systems approach is based on four main processes: Strategic Direction, Support
Forces, Provide Forces, and Employ Forces. The latter three are executive processes.
Diagram 2 (Diagram 2: Core departmental processes with inputs and outputs) presents
the relationship between these processes and are explained below.

25. The **Strategic Direction process is vested in the integrated MoD, and directs the**
three executive processes through ministerial direction, the policy framework of the DoD,
and the departmental strategy and plan.

26. The Support Forces process aims at providing forces, material and personnel to the
combat forces so that these can be used operationally.

27. The Provide Forces process integrates and converts force components into combatready forces. This has three distinct sub-processes:

27.1 Force components are integrated and converted into combat-ready units,
such as battalions, squadrons and ships.

27.2 Combat-ready units are integrated and converted into combat-ready single
service forces such as brigades(ie forces drawn from one arm of service).


-----

27.3 Combat-ready single service forces are integrated and converted into
combat-ready joint forces (task forces).

28. The **Employ Forces process involves the deployment of forces in an operational**
capacity. Combat-ready forces are used to accomplish specific missions as ordered by the
appropriate presidential directions.

29. The systems approach aims to achieve effectiveness, efficiency and economy and to
facilitate the following policy objectives, although these objectives will only be achieved
through careful planning and costing:

29.1 Performance management is facilitated and accountability enhanced.

29.2 Total costs of outputs are made visible.

29.3 Empowerment of lower hierarchical levels can take place and bureaucracy
can be reduced.

29.4 Control over military power is enhanced through separation of the Provide
Forces and Employ Forces processes.

**_Jointness_**

30. Jointness seeks to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of all military operations
by synchronising the actions of the four arms of service (army, navy, air force and
military health service) and the civilian component of the DoD at every level. In
developing force components and preparing forces, joint integrators such as technologies,
command and control sub-systems and administrative and training procedures, will be
nurtured. However, jointness will not be achieved by destroying the unique features of
the arms of service: service cultures are necessary for the different operating
environments and will be maintained, although some adaptations may be necessary.

**_Organisational Structure_**

31. It is envisaged that the DoD, as indicated in Diagram 3 (Diagram 3: Organisational
Structure of the DoD), will be a three-tier organisation with five levels. The three tiers
are:

31.1 The Ministry of Defence (MoD) [level 0] tier with the Department of
Defence Headquarters (DoD) levels [levels 1 and 2]

31.2 The intermediate tier [level 3]

31.3 The unit level [level 4].

**Structural building blocks**

32. The three-tier organisational structure will comprise the following building blocks:


-----

32.1 **The DoD HQ as an integrated head office and the highest military**
headquarters.

32.2 Task forces as the intermediate level force employment structures.

32.3 Type formations as the intermediate level force providing structures.

32.4 Support formations as intermediate level force support structures.

32.5 Bases as unit level supporting structures for units and satellite DoD offices in
a specific geographical location.

32.6 Combat and supporting units.

32.7 Regionally decentralised DoD satellite offices.

32.8 **Service centres that perform high volume repetitive transactions on a**
centralised basis as an agency service.

32.9 A state corporation as an acquisition agency.

**Ministry of Defence and the Department of Defence Headquarters**

33. The DoD is an integrated organisation comprising all the elements that together form
the departmental head office and highest military headquarters. The DoD is small and
focuses predominantly on policy, plans and control (directing and not operating
activities). All the elements of the DoD are co-located in a single building complex.

33.1. The Office of the Minister of Defence (MoD) is responsible for the
following:

33.1.1 Ensuring political control and direction over the activities of the
DoD.

33.1.2 Ensuring that government policy is communicated to the DoD and
the activities of the DoD are consistent with government policy.

33.1.3 Determination of defence policy.

33.1.4 Ensuring that the needs of the DoD are communicated to
government.

33.2 The Office of the Secretary for Defence and CSANDF (including their
respective deputies)

33.3 Corporate divisions reporting primarily to the Secretary for Defence

       - The Policy and Planning division

        - The Finance division

        - The Defence Inspectorate

        - The Personnel division (including Joint Training Division)

        - The Legal Services division


-----

     - The Command and Management Informa- tion (CMI) division

        - The Logistics division

        - The Departmental Acquisition and Procure- ment division

     - The Corporate Communication division.

33.4 Corporate divisions reporting primarily to the C SANDF- The Joint
Operations Staff division

      - The Defence Intelligence division includ- ing Foreign Relations division

      - The Chaplain General

      - The Army division (comprising Chief of the Army and Staff)

      - The Air Force division (comprising Chief of the Air Force and Staff)

      - The Navy division (comprising Chief of the Navy and Staff)

      - The Military Health Service (MHS) division (comprising Surgeon
General and Staff)

      - The Military Policing agency

     - The Part Time Component advisor

      - The Service Corps.

**Task forces**

34. Task forces are employment structures under task force commanders, which are
created for executing specific operations or exercises. They disband on completion of the
operation or exercise although some forces may be relatively permanent if the operations
for which they have been created are enduring.

35. Combat-ready units and formations constituting task forces are usually prepared and
provided by arms of service, although there may be minor exceptions. Task forces are
generally joint structures. Task force commanders are intermediate level (operational)
commanders appointed for the duration of the operation, and will exercise unified
command over assigned forces, under the overall command of C SANDF.

**Type formations**

36. A type formation is a structure responsible for the preparation and development of a
specific type of combat-ready unit. As far as possible type formations have the following
features:

36.1 Integration within a type formation of all units and support elements required
to make the formation work.

36.2 The ability to provide fully supported units to a commander in either a land,
air, maritime or military health capacity.

36.3 The ability to provide fully supported units to a task force commander
appointed by C SANDF.

36.4 A type formation improves on the cost effectiveness of providing combatready systems. It does this via a consolidation and rationalisation of functions and
structures, eliminating duplication and providing more integrated management
practices.


-----

36.5 A type formatio has a specific geographic location where as many as
possible of its combat and support units are concentrated, and is usually supported
by a base which in some cases may form part of the type formation itself. Type
formations can also have satellite units and may be co-located with other type
formations, sometimes sharing a base.

**No** **Base** **No** **Base**

1 Bloemfontein 14 Middelburg
2 Bloemspruit 15 Mmabatho
3 De Aar 16 Mtubatuba
4 Ellisras 17 Phalaborwa
5 De Brug 18 Potchefstroom
6 Durban 19 Port Elizabeth
7 Grahamstown 20 Simon's Town
8 Ladysmith 21 Tek Base (Pretoria)
9 Kimberley 22 Upington

10 Langebaanweg 23 Thaba Tshwane (Voortrekkerhoogte)
11 Lohatla 24 Waterkloof
12 Louis Trichardt 25 Wonderboom
13 Messina 26 Youngsfield

_Table 2 : Possible option for 26 bases after transformation._

37. The functions of type formations include:

37.1 Providing combat-ready user systems of its specific type, including the
training and exercising of the systems and their personnel.

37.2 Acting as a centre of excellence for its specific types of user system,
developing expertise on the systems and providing advice on their use. This
includes administrative, operating and technical expertise and policies.

37.3 Managing a business plan for the type formation. The commander compiles a
plan as a subset of higher order plans within the DoD, is a budget holder for the
user systems and manages the finances of the formation.

37.4 Career management for personnel responsible for specific user systems takes
place within the type formation below the level of Colonel (or Captain in the
navy). The formation also provides personnel for other DoD clients.

37.5 Managing user system logistics if the product is unique to the type formation
(e.g. torpedoes).

37.6 Managing quality assurance to ensure that the required outputs are met and
that documentation is provided.

37.7 Managing command, control, communications, computers, information and
intelligence within the type formation.

38. A table of envisaged type formation per Arm of Service and their proposed associated
units is described in detail in Appendix A to this chapter.

**Support formations**

|No|Base|No|Base|
|---|---|---|---|
|1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13|Bloemfontein Bloemspruit De Aar Ellisras De Brug Durban Grahamstown Ladysmith Kimberley Langebaanweg Lohatla Louis Trichardt Messina|14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26|Middelburg Mmabatho Mtubatuba Phalaborwa Potchefstroom Port Elizabeth Simon's Town Tek Base (Pretoria) Upington Thaba Tshwane (Voortrekkerhoogte) Waterkloof Wonderboom Youngsfield|


-----

39. Support formations are intermediate-level support structures. They are similar to type
formations except that they do not provide combat-ready forces, but give support to type
formations and other system structures. Examples would be a formation providin
logistical and administrative services for a wide range of units.

**Bases**

40. Formations and units are clustered on or around bases and share their common
facilities and services. Bases are provided by the army, air force or navy, but may have
attached support units from other arms of service, MoD satellite offices or service
centres.

41. Units attached to a base are concentrated at that base as far as possible although some
satellites may exist. Studies indicate that optimal economies of scale will be achieved
with approximately 26 bases covering South Africa. A list of these proposed bases is
shown in Table 2 while Map 1 (Map 1: Location of Bases) indicates their location. Final
decisions on these and the closure of the other bases are still to be taken after more
detailed evaluation and consultation. It is important to note that base closure is a process
that affects the careers and livelihoods of not only military personnel but also
communities within which bases are located. Detailed guidelines governing the process
of base closure and the consultations requires to ensure that this is conducted in a free and
fair manner are contained in the Land and Environment chapter of the Defence Review.

42. Bases may be tasked to support specific operations or exercises, but do not have
command over attached units although they exercise administrative control for specific
purposes. Base commanders may be type formation commanders or may be appointed as
task force commanders. Bases have self-accounting status and support attached units for
accounting purposes.

**Combat and supporting units**

43. Units, which are clustered on or around bases may be combat units (eg artillery
regiments, air force squadrons, ships or medical battalion groups) or support units (eg
depots or schools).

**MoD satellite offices**

44. DoD satellite offices are extensions of DoD divisions located outside headquarters to
provide services on a geographically dispersed basis. They are located on bases and share
common facilities and services with units. The legal services regional offices and defence
inspectorate regional audit offices are examples of these.

**Service centres**

45. Service centres are unit-level structures that perform high-volume repetitive
transactions on a centralised basis as an agency service. They are located on bases and
share common facilities.

**Acquisition agency**

46. It is foreseen that Armscor will remain the state corporation responsible for the
acquisition of complex defence equipment as long as it remains unfeasible to attract the
required engineering specialists within the constraints of public service salary scales.


-----

**INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY**

47. One of the cornerstones of DoD transformation is the use of appropriate
communication and information technology. This promises significant efficiency
improvements and will also give operational and combat advantage to the SANDF.

48. The Command and Management Information system takes into account the erosion of
the distinctions between strategic, operational and tactical systems and between
information and communication systems. Such systems are therefore being integrated
into one coherent system which serve the needs of DoD business as a whole.

**PART-TIME COMPONENT**

49. The core force approach of the DoD relies extensively on the expansion capability
inherent in the part-time component. All structures that may require expansion at a more
rapid rate than normal recruiting and career development timescales will allow will have
a part-time component. The part-time component will be organised around two concepts:
the multi-regiment battalion, and the expandable single permanent structure.

50. The multi-regiment battalion concept is used mainly in the army (both conventional
and territorial) and military health service. It calls for the maintenance of virtual units at
low levels of readiness across different type formations which maintain the necessary
equipment. Permanent training staff in the type formations manage force preparation
cycles while personnel are maintained in part-time units.

51. There should be no limit to the number of part-time units provided funds are available
in terms of the order of battle of the type formation. To encourage volunteers, the unique
cultures, traditions and individual identities of part-time units should be encouraged.

52. Parts of full-time units may also be designated as virtual parts to be staffed by parttime units, for example by maintaining full-time personnel for two squadrons of an
armour regiment and filling the third from part-time units.

**CIVILIANISATION**

53. In general civilians are considerably less expensive than uniformed personnel in the
same post due to the higher cost of military service conditions. Civilians should therefore
be used where uniformed posts are not justified. Considerable improvements
indepartmental education and training opportunities for civilians will need to be made.

54. An holistic systems view will however be maintained: availability of rotation posts
for operational personnel, feasibility of career patters and availability of a ready internal
reserve are essential factors to consider in the civilianisation process.

**CORE BUSINESS FOCUS AND OUTSOURCING**

55. A policy of focusing on core business and outsourcing of non-core functions will be
followed in line with international practices in improving efficiency in armed forces and
the significant achievements in public and private enterprises. Areas within which
outsourcing can be done include the logistics arena (vehicle maintenance, catering etc)
and aspects of administrative and financial services for example.


-----

56. It is foreseen that the volume and scope of services brought in from outside the DoD
will expand considerably, with commensurate savings.

57. A section will be set up in the Acquisition Division to manage the administrative
complexities and to support and promote outsourcing.

**IMPLEMENTATION**

58. Implementation of structural transformation has already begun and it is envisaged that
the process will be completed within three years, with some exceptions. As the
implementation phase is already under way (although detailed design will need to
continue until the end of 1998) the process is no longer being managed as a separate
project, but is integrated into the mainstream strategic management process of the DoD.
Divisional chiefs have been appointed project officers for implementation and this task
has been incorporated into their work plans.

**_Annual Budget Required_**

59. Two graphs illustrate the annual budget required.

59.1 The first, "transformation sustainable cash flow", illustrates what should
ideally be invested annually to ensure sustainability. It is clear that the budget is
not available to fund this.

59.2 The second graph illustrates what is available for capital, should operating
and transition cost be funded first. Capital planning will have to take this limit
into account. Depending on the speed of transition, a sustainable situation could
be reached between 2004 and 2012.

60. Ongoing monitoring of Transformation, both in its broader sense and in relationship
to organizational restructuring, will be a key factor in ensuring its success. This will be
effected outside the DoD via such structures as the JSCD, Cabinet and other appropriate
executive oversight mechanisms and within the DoD via the Secretary for Defence and
the relevant staff.

**_Appendix A: Proposed Type Formations and Units_**

|Structure|Association|Name|
|---|---|---|
|Joint Training Division|Joint Training Formation|Defence Institute Defence Institute (Satellite)|
|CMI Division|Command Management Information Formation|CMI Formation HQ School of Signals Regional Services Centres (CMI) 1 Siganl Regiment 2 Signal Regiment 3 Electronic Workshop 5 Signal Regiment 8 Signal Unit Mobile Communication Unit SAAF Telecom Centre 44 Signal Unit 71 Signal Unit 73 Signal Group 84 Signal Unit|


-----

|Logistic Division|Log Formation|DoD Log Formation HQ Log School including Auction Centre Catering School Technical Training Centre SAFI Base Production Depot 97 Ammo Depot including Ammo School Main Ordnance Depot (With satelllite units in Durban and Grahamstown) Central cash store and Auction Centre Mobilisation Centre including Auction Centre Mobilisation Centre (Satellite) Regional Log Services 101 Air Supply 4 Maint Unit 44 Maint Unit 7 Maint Unit 11 Maint Unit 15 Maint Unit 19 Transit Maint Unit 7 Field Workshop 30 Field Workshop 31 Field Workshop 32 Field Workshop 38 Field Workshop 71 Field Workshop|
|---|---|---|
|Militray Policing Agency|Military Policing Formation|Provost Marshall and Staff Base Offices (including DB's) Provost Company PTC 7 Provost Company 8 Provost Company 9 Provost Company|

|SA ARMY TYPE FORMATIONS WITH PROPOSED ASSOCIATED UNITS|Col2|
|---|---|
|Army Base Support Formations|Base: Bloemfontein Base: De Aar Base: Ellisras Base: Grahamstown Base: Kimberley Base: Lohatla Base: Matubatuba Base: Messina Base: Middelburg Base: Mmabatho Base: Phalaborwa Base: Potchefstroom Base: Pretoria (TEK) Base: Pretoria (Thaba Tshwane) Base: Pretoria (Wonderboom) Base: Upington Base: Wynberg/Youngsfield|
|Anti-Aircraft Formation|Anti Aircraft (AA) Formation HQ AA School|


-----

|Col1|AA Regiment (Composite) - 10 AA Regiment Mobile AA Regiment PTC Towed AA Regiment PTC 6 Light AA Regiment Cape Garrison Artillery Regiment Oos Transvaal Regiment Vaal River|
|---|---|
|Armour Formation|Armour Formation HQ School of Armour Tank Regiment( at School of Armour) Tank Transporter Regiment (at school of Armour) Armoured Car Regiment (Rooikat) - 1SSB Armoured Reconnaissance Regiment - 1SSB Tank Regiment PC Tank Transporter Regiment PTC - 7TTR Armoured Car Regiment (Rooikat) PTC 1 Light Horse Regiment 1 Natal Mounted Rifles Pretoria Regiment Pretoria Highlanders Regiment Mooirivier Regiment Oranjerivier Regiment Pres Steyn Umvoti Mounted Rifles|
|Army Battle School|Army Battle School HQ 12 Field Engineer Regiment|
|Artillery Formation|Artillery Formation HQ School of Artillery 4 Artillery Regiment (Composite) Self Propelled Medium Artillery Regiment PTC Towed Medium Artillery Regiment PTC Multiple Rocket Artillery Regiment PTC Cape Field Artillery Natal Field Artillery Regiment Potch Universiteit Transvaal Horse Artillery Transvaalse Staatsartillerie Vrystaatse Artillerie Regiment|
|Brigade Headquarters Formation|73 Brigade HQ Mechanised Brigade Headquarters|
|Engineer Formation|Engineer Formation HQ School of Engineers 2 Field Engineer Regiment 35 Engineer Support Regiment 1 Construction Regiment 1 Military Printing Regiment 4 Survey & Mapping Regiment Field Engineer Regiment PTC 3 Field Engineer Regiment 6 Field Engineer Regiment 19 Field Engineer Regiment|
|Infantry Formation|Infantry Formation HQ Infantry School Basic Training Depot (3 SAI)|


-----

|Infantry Formation|Mechanised Infantry Battalion Group Mechanised Infantry Battalion (1 SAI) Motorised Infantry Battalion - Middelburg 1 (4 SAI) Motorised Infantry Battalion - Grahamstown (6 SAI) Motorised Infantry Battalion - Phalaborwa (7 SAI) Motorised Infantry Battalion - Upington (8 SAI) Motorised Infantry Battalion - Wynberg/Youngsfield (9 SAI) Motorised Infantry Battalion - Mmabatho (10 SAI) Motorised Infantry Battalion - Wonderboom/Wallmanst (115 SAI) Motorised Infantry Battalion - Messina (116 SAI) Motorised Infantry Battalion - Ellisras (118 SAI) Motorised Infantry Battalion - Mtubatuba (121 SAI) Mechanised Infantry Battalion PTC Motorised Infantry Battalion PTC Motorised Infantry Battalion PTF (minus Equipment) National Ceremonial Guard 1 Battalion Regiment De La Rey 1 Battalion Regiment Northern Transvaal 1 Battalion Transvaal Scottish Cape Light Infantry Cape Town Highlanders Cape Town Rifles Durban Light Infantry Durban Regiment First City Johannesburg Regiment The Buffalo Volunteer Rifles Regiment (Kaffrarian Rifles) Kimberley Regiment Koeberg Battalion Natal Carbineers Prince Alfred s Guard Rand Light Infantry South African Irish Regiment Witwatersrand Rifles Wynberg Battalion Regiment Bloemspruit Regiment Botha Regiment Christiaan Beyers Regiment Congella Regiment De Wet Regiment Groot Karoo Regiment Langenhoven Regiment Louw Wepener Regiment Natalia Regiment Oos Rand Regiment Piet Retief Regiment Port NatalRegiment Pres Kruger Regiment Skoonspruit Regiment Western Province GP HQ - Bloemfontein 1 GP HQ - Bloemfontein 2 GP HQ - Bloemfontein 3 GP HQ - Durban GP HQ - Grahamstown 1 GP HQ - Grahamstown 2 GP HQ - Langebaanweg|
|---|---|


-----

|Col1|GP HQ - Matubatuba GP HQ - Messina GP HQ - Middelburg 1 GP HQ - Middelburg 2 GP HQ - Mmabatho GP HQ - Phalaborwa GP HQ - Potchefstroom GP HQ - Upington GP HQ - Thaba Tshwane 1 GP HQ - Thaba Tshwane 2 GP HQ - Youngsfield/Wynberg Commandos|
|---|---|
|Intelligence Formation|Intelligence Regiment FTC Intelligence Regiment PTC|
|Parachute Formation|Parachute Formation HQ Parachute Packing & Training Wings Parachute Battalion - 1 Parachute Bn Parachute Pathfinder Platoon - 44 Pathfinder Platoon Parachute Battalion PTC - 2 Parachute Bn Parachute Field Workshop PTC (37 Field Wksp) Parachute Maintenance Unit PTC Parachute Signal Unit PTC|
|Special Forces Formation|Special Forces Brigade Headquarters Special Forces Landward Battalion (FTC) Special Forces Seaborne Battalion (FTC) Special Forces Maintenance Unit Special Forces Landward Battalion (PTC) Special Forces Seaborne Battalion (PTC)|

|SA AIR FORCE TYPE FORMATIONS WITH PROPOSED ASSOCIATED UNITS|Col2|
|---|---|
|Basic Flying Training Systems Group (BFTSG)|BFTSG HQ BFTSG Functional Training Unit BFTSG Intermediate Maintenance & Supply Support Unit Central Flying School 80 Air Navigation School|
|Air Force Command Posts|New AFCP New Lohathla FACP New SAFCP New FACP #1 (Attached to TFC) New FACP #2 (Attached to TFC) New FACP #3 (Attached to TFC) New FACP #4 (Attached to TFC)|
|Ground Systems Group (GSG)|Ground Systems Group HQ GSG Functional Training Unit GSG Intermediate Maintenance & Supply Support Unit 120 Sqn (Point Defence) 140 Sqn (Transportable Long Range Radar) 142 Sqn (Tactical Mobile Radar) Tactical Airfield Unit Air Space Control School Ellisras Reporting Post Mariepskop Reporting Post|
|Helicopter Systems Group (HSG)|HSG HQ|


-----

|Col1|HSG Functional Training Unit HSG Intermediate Maintenance & Supply Support Unit 87 HFS 15 Sqn 17 Sqn 22 Sqn 19 Sqn|
|---|---|
|Maritime Systems Group (MSG)|MSG HQ MSG Functional Training Unit MSG Intermediate Maintenance & Supply Support Unit 35 Sqn xx Sqn|
|Transport Systems Group (TSG)|Transport Systems Group HQ TSG Functional Training Unit TSG Intermediate Maintenance & Supply Support Unit 28 Sqn (12 Medium Heavy) 44 Sqn (12 Medium Transport) 44 Sqn (8 Medium Light) 21 Sqn (6 VIP) 42 Sqn (16 Light Recce) 101 Sqn (Louis Trichardt) 102 Sqn (Louis Trichardt) 104 Sqn (Waterkloof) 105 Sqn (Durban) 106 Sqn (Bloemspruit) 107 Sqn (Bloemspruit) 108 Sqn (Port Elizabeth) 110 Sqn (Langebaanweg) 111 Sqn (Waterkloof) Joint Air Recce & Int Centre|
|Fighter Systems Group (FSG)|Fighter Systems Group HQ FSG Functional Training Unit FSG Intermediate Maintenance & Supply Support Unit 2 Sqn 8 Sqn 60 Sqn 85 Combat Flying School|

|SA NAVY TYPE FORMATIONS WITH PROPOSED ASSOCIATED UNITS|Col2|
|---|---|
|Fleet Command|Fleet Cmdr & Staff Naval Base SMST Naval Base SMST: Band Naval Base SMST: Ops Diving Team Naval Base Durban Prod Support Depot: Dockyard Prod Support Depot: Engineering Services Prod Support Depot: Fleet Maint Unit Prod Support Depot: Supply Support Services Publications Unit Hydrographer Quality Assurance: Naval Weapons Analysis Section Quality Assurance: Electronic Warfare Analysis Section|


-----

Communication Centre (Dbn)
Communication Centre (SMST)
Armament Depot
Functional Schools: Military Training for Ratings
Functional Schools: Technical Training
Functional Schools: Warfare Training
Functional Schools: Initial Military Training for Officers
Corvettes
Submarines
Mine Hunters
Coastal Mine Sweepers
Combat Support Ships
Harbour Patrol Boats
Air Sea Rescue Launches
Hydrographic Vessels
Tugs

|SA MILITARY HEALTH SERVICE TYPE FORMATIONS WITH ASSOCIATED UNITS|Col2|
|---|---|
|Medical Training Formation|SAMHS Academy|
|Medical Support Formation|Medical Base Depot|
|Tertiary Health Formation|Tertiary Health Formation HQ 1 Mil Hosp 2 Mil Hosp 3 Mil Hosp Institute of Aviation Medicine Institute of Maritime Medicine Military Phycological Institute|
|Area Military Health Formation|MHS Form HQ EC MHS FN/MP MHS FS/NC MHS GT MHS KZN MHS NW MHS WC MHS|
|Mobile Medical Formation|Mobile Medical Form HQ 7 Med BN Gp (Including CB Wing) 8 Med BN Gp 1 Med BN Gp 3 Med BN Gp 6 Med BN Gp|

|SERVICE CORPS TYPE FORMATION A WITH PROPOSED ASSOCIATED UNITS|Col2|
|---|---|
|Headquarters|SA Service Corps Head Office|
|Service Corps Training Centres|Service Corps Centre for Advanced Training Service Corps Training Institute Service Corps Practical Business School|
|Service Corps Units|North West Service Corps Unit Western Cape Service Corps Unit Northern Cape Service Unit Free State Service Corps|


-----

|Col1|Eastern Cape Service Corps Unit Kwa Zulu Service Corps Unit Northern Province Service Corps Unit Mpumalanga Service Corps Unit Gauteng Service Corps Unit|
|---|---|


-----

# Chapter 10

**South African Defence Review 1998**

#### Human Resources
###### Policy Framework

1. The DoD’s most valuable resource is its personnel. Human resource policies are
directed at ensuring maximum efficiency, effectiveness, appropriateness, accountability
and affordability, and providing job satisfaction, fairness and equity. The members of the
DoD shall be non-partisan, subject to the control and oversight of the duly elected and
appointed civil authority and obliged to perform all functions and conduct all operations
within the parameters of the Constitution, domestc legislation and international
humanitarian law and the law on armed conflict.

2. The DoD upholds a non-racial, non-sexist and non-discriminatory institutional culture.
The DoD aims to be broadly representative of the human resources available in South
Africa.

3. The rights and dignity of all members of the DoD shall be respected but the uniformed
members who serve in the SANDF will voluntarily accept limitations of their rights
which are reasonable and justifiable within the constraints of military discipline and
training and are specified in terms of the Defence Act.

4. The HR practices and policies are based on the broad philosophy that the DoD is
managed as a coherent focused entity in which the uniformed component is governed,
regulated and administered in terms of the Constitution, the Defence Act, the Military
Disciplinary Code, General Regulations and SANDF Orders. The civilian component is
similarly managed in terms of the Public Service Act, the Public Service Staff Code and
the Public Service Regulations.

5. The SANDF has a full-time and a part-time component. In this chapter, where the
human resource practices and policies are similar for both components no special
mention is made of the Part-Time Component (PTC) as the,one force concept’ is the
overriding principle. Where special measures or issues pertain to each component, a clear
indication is given under a separate heading.

###### Composition of the DoD

6. In terms of Section 224 and 236 of the Interim Constitution (1993), the SANDF at its
establishment consisted of

6.1 all members of the South African Defence Force (SADF)

6.2 all members of any defence force forming part of a national territory (ie the
former Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Venda and Ciskei defence forces)


-----

6.3 members of a defence force or armed force of a political organisation under
whose authority and control it stands, initially only uMkhonto we Sizwe (MK)
and later also the Azanian Peoples’ Liberation Army (APLA), who entered into
an agreement for temporary or permanent appointment, in accordance with
normal employment policies and terms and conditions of service.

7. Section 236(2) of the 1993 Constitution further stated that any person who was
employed by an institution (ie the SADF and the TBVC defence forces) shall continue in
such employment.

8. As indicated in Figure 10.1 (Figure 10.1: Schematic Representation of Integrated
SANDF and DoD as on 1 April 1998), selection and placement in the case of members of
the non-statutory forces (MK and APLA), has brought them into the training and
deployment phase as an integral part of the single Regular Force.

9. Adaptations were made to insignia of the old SADF, principally the introduction of a
nine point star to designate rank in the place of a castle. Members of statutory forces are


-----

permitted to wear their old ribbons and medals and a new series of ribbons and medals
have been instituted for previous MK and APLA service respectively.

10. **Population group and gender. Figure 10.2** (Figure 10.2: The SANDF Composition (including
civilians) per race and gender)) indicates population group and gender composition as on 15 February 1997
compared to the original SADF on 26 April 1994.

11. Present composition per rank, population group and gender. In Figure 10.3 (Figure 10.3: SANDF
strength per rank*~, race and gender: 1 April 1998) the present staffing of the SANDF is reflected as on 1
May 1997.

12. Former force distribution. The formal procedure whereby former non-statutory force members enter
into an agreement for service in the SANDF has now virtually drawn to a close. A few individuals who are
studying overseas may however still exercise their right to apply to enter into service at a later date. The
figures shown in Figure 10.4 (Figure 10.4: SANDF Composition by Former Force of origin, including
civilians, as on 1 April 1998) refer to members of the DoD per force of origin (civilians included), on 1
May 1997. Since the creation of the SANDF normal recruitment has continued outside the integration
process, although in a limited way and mainly in those musterings which could not be staffed adequately
through integration. Uniformed members indicated as SANDF therefore do not have a former force
connection.

13. **Placement in posts. The progress in eliminating the backlog of members involved in bridging and**
other training specifically related to integration (,integration posts’) is reflected in Figure 10.5 (Figure 10.5:
Placement of Ex Non-Statutory Forces as on 1 April 1998). Placement in an Arm of Service is followed by
bridging training and supplementary training. A career path is mapped out for each member. Members have
two chances to succeed in their designated bridging training courses: the Minister of Defence approves the
termination of service of members who do not succeed.

14. An Integration Committee (IC), on which all Arms of Service, representatives of all
former forces and functional staff divisions are represented, has met regularly since the
formation of the SANDF, to oversee the integration process on a day to day basis. The
proceedings of the IC have been characterised by a practical approach to solving the
myriad problems associated with integration.

15. A Parliamentary Integration Oversight Committee (PIOC) of the Joint Parliamentary
Standing Committee for Defence has been regularly briefed by the DoD on the
integration process and has also visited units of the SANDF to monitor progress. Special
taskings and instructions from the PIOC have received immediate attention in the
SANDF. Both the IC and the PIOC will continue to monitor the integration process for
the foreseeable future.

16. The SANDF has to become broadly representative of the population that it serves, as
soon as possible. The SANDF has introduced,fast tracking’ for those individual members
who display potential to qualify sooner than would normally be the case. This will be
achieved by the priority placement of identified members on qualifying courses in a
succession of posts in order to gain the necessary experience.

17. A team of British military officers has been assigned to assess (and then to validate)
syllabi and standards, to monitor training and selection and to advise and adjudicate in
the case of disputes between the integrating forces. The British Military Advisory and
Training Team (BMATT) is evaluating SANDF training and selection standards in terms


-----

of their experience of international military standards. As members of placement and
training boards, they also assess and validate the criteria against which individuals are
placed to undergo bridging training and evaluate the competencies and qualifications of
individuals. The commander of BMATT periodically reports to the Minister and the
Deputy Minister.

**Demobilisation**

18. In terms of Section 224(2)(c) read with 236 8 (d) of the 1993 Constitution all
members of MK and APLA whose names appear on a Certified Personnel Register or
Namelist respectively, were eligible to enter into an agreement to serve in the SANDF if
they met certain criteria. To cater for those members who were unable or unwilling to
serve in the SANDF due to advanced age, ill health or other reasons as well as those
cadres who had found alternative employment, a Demobilisation Act was approved by
Parliament and signed into law on 1 December 1996. This retrospectively authorised
previously paid demobilisation benefits. It stipulated that the demobilisation should be
concluded within one year. Figure 10.6.a. (Figure 10.6.a : Categories and Commensurate
Gratuities in respect of Demobilisation) denotes gratuities payable.

19. The statistics presented in Figure 10.6.b (Figure 10.6.b : Amounts involved and the
number of persons in the respective categories who have benefited from demobilisation)
indicate the amounts involved and the number of people in the respective categories who
had benefited from this dispensation by 1 May 1997.

###### Staffing the SANDF
**Service Systems**

20. When determining how available human resources can be utilised in the military, the
force design, structure and technological level of the force needs to be considered.

21. Drawing from the concepts in Chapters 2 and 8 of the Defence Review, the following
are human resource determinants:

21.1 Notwithstanding the imperative for high technology in certain fields as
elaborated in Chapter 3 of this review, there is a requirement for a low
technology, human resource-intensive, mobile army of regulars, capable of
safeguarding extensive terrain on a continuous basis.

21.2 The requirement for capable junior leaders who can command small groups
of military personnel effectively is clear, due to the characteristics of low intensity
operations in outlying deployments, ie border patrols.

21.3 The present low military threat in the region, coupled with the reconstruction
and development priority, restricts military expenditure.

21.4 The possibility that the security situation could change for the worse in a
relatively short time cannot be discounted. Therefore although the Regular Force
should be relatively small it should be backed up by a sufficiently large Part-Time
Concept to augment the military capability at relatively short notice.


-----

21.5 The technologically advanced nature of modern weaponry requires highly
skilled groupings in all Arms of Service. This expertise is not available and has to
be developed in a selected group of recruits. The development and retention of
this personnel component is extremely costly.

22. DoD human resource procurement policy is not based on conscription, but on
voluntary military service. Policy in this regard is based on a mixed system of career
options.

22.1 A small number of the highest ranking leader group in both the officer corps
and the other ranks, with long experience and extensive training, serve until a
retirement age.

22.2 Lower ranks have limited periods of service coupled to their rank level and
possibly also their age.

22.3 Large numbers at the lowest rank levels serve for a short, fixed, limited
period.

22.4 Recruiting for the long term and the medium term is principally (but not
exclusively) from the short term component. Recruitment directly into the
medium term is essential to attract tertiary qualified personnel for the officer
corps.

22.5 This is the staffing strategy preferred in most modern defence forces, for
example, in Australia, the UK, the USA and Canada. Countries in Europe which
are switching from a conscript system at present, eg France and Belgium, are also
contemplating a similar staffing strategy.

23. Parliament should consider imposing a liability to serve in a state of national defence.
Notwithstanding the imperative to train sufficient personnel, former specialist defence
personnel will be required to serve, by recommendation of Parliament, for a limited
period of time, also during a time of peace, in exceptonal circumstances, where the
capacity of the SANDF is insufficient.

**Staffing Flow**

24. Figure 10.7 (Figure 10.7: Staffing flow within the SANDF) below indicates how the
uniformed component of the force, both full-time and part-time, is structured in one force
and procurement, utilisation and a reserve form a coherent whole. The concepts are
explained in full below.

25. **One Force. Although members of the Part-Time Component serve on the basis of a daily pay rate,**
compared to the Full-Time Force’s monthly rate, there are no other differences in their standard of training
and equipment. The two components are trained and equipped to operate as one force. Relative strengths of
each component are reflected in Figure 10.8.

|Regular Force|Part-time Component|Reserves*|
|---|---|---|
|LTS 37 969|Conventional 8 378||
|MTS 9 801|Territorial 44 167||
|STS 25 523|||


-----

|AUX 233|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|TOTAL 73 526|52 545|363 857|


Figure 10.8: Relative Strenghts of the Uniformed Component of the SANDF

_* The subdivision as recommended in paragraph 35 below has not been made as yet._

26. Only persons who are 17 years old and who will be turning 18 in their first year of
service are allowed to enter service in uniform in the SANDF. They cannot be taken into
active combat or the front-line until they have turned 18.

27. A Grade 10 or commensurate technical qualification is considered for service in the
military but it is more cost effective to recruit for the Regular Force from the Recruits
Training Pool where Grade 12 is the minimum qualification. Minimum medical standards
with which applicants have to comply are prescribed for each mustering.

**Full-Time Force**

28. The full-time staff of the DoD consists of 77,76 per cent Regular uniformed service
personnel and 21,85 per cent civilians. (The balance of 0,39% is the remnant of the
uniformed Auxiliary Service which has been allowed to atrophy naturally.) Both these
branches serve in 128 different Personnel Administrative Standards (PAS) although 94,5
per cent of the uniformed branch serve as Military Practitioners. Each PAS has its
prescribed entry and promotion standards coupled to pay and salary gradings.

29. A South African may enter into the Full-time Force of the SANDF in any one of the
service systems through the following channels, if selected:

29.1 A recruits training pool (known as the Voluntary Military Service) for
untrained recruits without any previous military experience.

29.2 Orientation training for professionally qualified individuals in specific
occupational categories.

30. The present Flexible Service System for the Full-Time uniform component consists
of three distinct parts:

30.1 Short Term Service. The maximum term of service in this system is six years consisting of
three terms of two years each. In this way force levels can be increased or decreased swiftly to
predetermned operational requirements. The system is suitable for ranks and musterings in the
occupational class Military Practitioner. The post structure primarily makes provision for combat
services and training is focused on combat training skills. Investment per member is limited,
except for junior leaders who are earmarked to serve more than one term. Members who are
earmarked for bridging courses to attain certain enrolment standards must undergo it in this
system. This system serves as a selection medium and feeder for the Medium Term Service. It has
a high turnover to maintain youthfulness and offers only temporary career opportunities. It is
suitable for school leavers: the maximum age for enrolment is 27 years.

30.2 The large number of former non-statutory force members who were initially
placed in this system have up to now not had the benefit of a structured career
path. The migration of these members from the Short Term Service to the
Medium Term and the Long Term Service is enjoying continued attention. Figure
10.9 reflects the number of non-statutory force members who were originally


-----

appointed to the Short Term Service and are now serving in the Medium and
Long Term Service as at 01 May 97.

30.3 **Medium Term Service. The aim of this system is to procure Human Resources for the**
middle management echelon to facilitate upward mobility. With the exception of members in
specialist classifications the first term is between three and ten years, although consecutive terms
may be entered into on specific conditions, subject to a selection process. This system also
prepares a member for a permanent appointment in the long term service. The training offered is
advanced.

30.4 Long Term Service. The top echelon of the SANDF is eventually staffed from this system.

**Part-time Component**

31. The Part-time Component consists of conventionals and territorials. Entry into this
component can take place through the channels as indicated in Figure 10.7 by means of a
negotiation process between the SANDF and the individual, to determine the availability
for service for a specified period. Four categories of service are available as indicated in
Figure 10.7.

32. The Part-Time Component is staffed as follows:

32.1 Members of the Reserves who have completed their previous military
commitments, but who are willing to volunteer for further service.

32.2 Members who leave the Full-Time Component at the end of their contract
and who wish to be enlisted in the Part-Time Component through the negotiation
process.

32.3 Direct entry from outside the military environment. Modular training for new
recruits takes place on a decentralised basis.

33. Upon leaving the Part-Time Component the individual’s particulars will be
transferred to the Reserves as indicated in Figure 10.7.

**Reserves**

34. The Reserves should be divided into three groups (see figure 10.7) - regular, conscript
and voluntary.

34.1 Regular Reserves. If a member leaves the Full-Time Component and, for whatever reason,
does not enlist in the Part-Time Component, such a member’s personal particulars are placed on
the Regular Reserve. This is done for record purposes until the individual reaches the age of 65
years.

34.2 Voluntary Reserve. The Voluntary Reserve should consist of members who exit from the
Recruits’ Training Pool or the Part-time Component of the SANDF as is shown on the
accompanying diagram. Their personal particulars are placed in the envisaged Voluntary Reserve
for record purposes.

35. Reserves are only viable if accurate records are kept. It is therefore essential that the
organisation of data in these suggested manageable components be approved. It is
recommended that the SANDF maintains records of all personnel who have previously
served in whatever capacity with a view to facilitating their service in the Part-Time


-----

Component and ultimately in a voluntary reserve. If sufficient consensus can be reached
in this regard, an appropriate amendment will be included in the new draft of the Defence
Act which will be brought before Parliament for consideration in due course.

**Civilians in the DoD**

36. Civilians, who comprise nearly 23 pe cent of the personnel employed in the DoD,
serve in terms of the Public Service Act. The breakdown of civilian employees is
indicated in Figure 10.9.

**Post** **Africans** **Whites** **Coloureds** **Asians** **Total**

**Class**

**M** **F** **M** **F** **M** **F** **M** **F** **M** **F**

**Dir Gen** 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0

**Dep Dir**
2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0
**Gen**

**Chief**
0 0 5 2 0 0 1 0 6 2
**JDir**

**Dir** 3 1 18 0 0 0 1 0 22 1

**Dep Dir** 7 4 58 39 2 2 7 5 74 50

**Asst Dir** 4 4 97 108 8 1 2 2 111 115

**Lower**
**Grading** 7261 3115 857 3984 2904 1217 34 41 11056 8358
**s***

**Total** **7277** **3124** **1036** **4133** **2914** **1220** **45** **48** **11272** **8526**

Figure 10.9: Civilian Employees per post class in the DoD as on 1 April 1998.

_* Civilians in the DoD lower than Assistant Director serve in 439 differentiated post_
_classes._

37. The higher level civilian component has increased substantially since the creation of
the Defence Secretariat. The potential for a greater number of affirmative action
appointments increases as the civilian component expands, as it is expected to do. The
traditional military service staffing policy of,bottom-up’ is not necessarily applicable, as
civilian expertise can be acquired for specific appointments for specialist services eg
auditors, medical doctors, language practitioners.

38. The career opportunities for civilians in the DoD have previously been limited. There
are however many posts at base depots and headquarters where civilian appointees could
prove to be less costly and well suited to fulfil the function. The development of civilian
career possibilities within the DoD will continue to receive attention without in any way
affecting operational readiness. A Director Civilian Career Management has recently
been appointed for this purpose.

###### Future size, composition and management of the DoD
**Size and Composition**

|Post Class|Africans|Col3|Whites|Col5|Coloureds|Col7|Asians|Col9|Total|Col11|Total|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||M|F|M|F|M|F|M|F|M|F||
|Dir Gen|0|0|1|0|0|0|0|0|1|0|1|
|Dep Dir Gen|2|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|2|0|2|
|Chief JDir|0|0|5|2|0|0|1|0|6|2|8|
|Dir|3|1|18|0|0|0|1|0|22|1|23|
|Dep Dir|7|4|58|39|2|2|7|5|74|50|124|
|Asst Dir|4|4|97|108|8|1|2|2|111|115|226|
|Lower Grading s*|7261|3115|857|3984|2904|1217|34|41|11056|8358|19414|
|Total|7277|3124|1036|4133|2914|1220|45|48|11272|8526|19798|


-----

39. The appropriate number of serving members and employees of the DoD can be
calculated in terms of the following:

39.1 The force design and number of troops required to perform the designated
functions (see Chapter 8).

39.2 The organisation of the Department to achieve maximum cost efficiency yet
ensuring effectiveness. One aspect of this is the re-engineering of the SANDF
combat: support ratio to optimise the number of combat and command elements.
This is being investigated via a range of management interventions.

39.3 In 1996/97 the defence expenditure was as indicated in Figure 10.11 below:

39.4 A further determinant is what proportion of the total budget is spent on
personnel. One suggested target is that personnel, operating costs and capital
renewal could each receive approximately 40 per cent, 30 per cent and 30 per cent
of the total appropriation respectively. (See Figure 10.12.)

39.5 In terms of the present budget allocation and the average personnel cost per
individual a figure of approximately 70 000 is considered a viable Full-Time
personnel component for the DoD. A reduced support to combat ratio will have to
be achieved through transformation to sustain Force Design 2 as detailed in
Chapter 8 of this review. This would accord with the type of force design
envisaged and would allow for an appropriate distribution between personnel,
operating and capital costs. This would also be an appropriate and sustainable
benchmark, allowing for sufficient capital renewal.

**Down-Sizing**

40. As anticipated during the negotiations that led to the formation of the SANDF, the
integrated Regular Force exceeds the numbers required for the tasks which the SANDF
has to perform in a low threat scenario and is unaffordable, especially in the light of the
reconstruction and development needs of the country. It is therefore necessary that the
force is down-sized.


-----

41. When trying to determine a formula for down-sizing, it is essential to ensure that the
former statutory and non-statutory forces achieve an equitable representation. A proposed
formula for down-sizing would result in the composition reflected in Figure 10.12
(Figure 10.12: Down-sizing using Representivity by Former Force as the proposed
formula in the SANDF (not necessarily per Arm of Service)). Due regard shall, however,
be given to the maintenance of technological expertise.

42. Personnel strengths have been increasing through successive intakes of non-statutory
personnel, the negotiated intake of a planned 2 000 persons from the Kwa-Zulu SelfProtection Force, and the selection of a young leader group from the Voluntary Military
Service (recruits training pool). However normal attrition through resignation, retirement
and death has been taking place all the time.

43. Voluntary Severance. The down-sizing of the DoD has been facilitated by the Voluntary Severance
Initiative which has been available throughout the Public Service and for which uniformed members have
also been allowed to apply. This mechanism is much cheaper than forced retrenchment. The calculation of
the severance package does not make it a viable option for members and employees with limited years of
pensionable service. Figure 10.13 (Figure 10.13: Voluntary severance applications approved between 31
August 1996 and 1 April 1998) reflects the numbers of approved applications for severance (to 1 May
1997).

44. Contract expiration. As explained in the staffing concept for the Regulars, the cheapest method of
rapidly scaling down the Full-Time Component is not to re-enlist short term members when their contracts
expire. Recruits should enter the force in the knowledge that only a small percentage of the intake may be
offered the opportunity to re-enlist if they qualify. This would facilitate the scaling up and down of the
SANDF and would be a suitable way of strengthening the Part-Time Compoent and the Reserves, as well
as justifying the existence of a comparatively large training capacity.

45. At present, the Minister must approve all non-renewals of short term contracts. A
board, on which a BMATT representative also serves, makes recommendations to the
Minister according to a set of criteria. Most of the recommendations for not re-enlisting
members concern those members who have adverse disciplinary records.

46. Employer-initiated retrenchment. The Interim Constitution (1993) provided for three phases in the
process of creating the SANDF, namely integration, consolidation and rationalisation. The staggered
integration process has resulted in an overlap with the consolidation phase. During this latter phase all
members are being given the opportunity to prepare themselves for posts in the new structure. The
identification of members for retrenchment will be done in a fair and equitable manner which will satisfy
the goals of representativeness, affirmative action and equal opportunities and ensure that the SANDF is
seen to be legitimate and representative of the total South African population. Efficiency considerations, for
example scientifically based assessments of potential; rank/age appropriateness and non-transferability
(area-boundness) will also be taken into account.

47. It is envisaged that the bulk of retrenchments will take place before the year 2000.
Right-sizing processes are usually preceded by uncertainty and misconception among
personnel. Accurate and effective communication will therefore be actively pursued
throughout the DoD.

48. **Mechanisms already instituted. A Personnel Rationalisation Work Group (PRWG) has been**
established in order to oversee the rationalization process from within the DoD. The composition of the
PRWG includes all constituent forces and a representative of the Secretary for Defence and BMATT, and is
aimed at ensuring a transparent process within the framework of fair labour practices. This work group has


-----

recently instituted a sub-work group to make proposals regarding regionalised psychological and social
support to members and their families who are to be affected by the rationalisation process. A special
Consultation Forum has been established to liaise with employee organisations about civilian members who
could be affected by the rationalisation process.

49. Various procedures relating to down-sizing are already in place:

49.1 The broad process has been designed by the DoD, and was accepted by
Cabinet in 1995.

49.2 An identificationprocedure for retrenchment has been designed and
employee organisations consulted.

49.3 An intra departmental representation/appeal procedure has been designed
and employee organisations consulted.

49.4 The administrative procedure for a Special Tribunal sitting as a Labour
Appeal Court in terms of Section 237 of the Interim Constitution(1993) has been
established. The tribunal will determine any claims stemming from the
retrenchment of a member or employee.

50. **Principles governing retrenchment. The approach to down-sizing will be guided by the following**
principles:

50.1. The selection criteria, used for deciding who will be retrenched, should be
as objective as possible.

50.2 No member shall be considered for retrenchment while disciplinary action
against the member concerned is contemplated, or is in progress, or he/she is
detained pending disciplinary action, suspended from service, or is serving a
sentence of detention for a first offence.

50.3 Consistency in the application of a general SANDF policy shall be
maintained in the DoD.

50.4 Members who are still participating in bridging training, while the
retrenchment process takes place, shall not be considered for separation unless the
member is not capable of performing at the required level to meet the course
requirements.

50.5 Irrespective of his/her period of service in the SANDF, all members and
employees shall be entitled to at least one month’s notice prior to their last day of
service in the SANDF.

51. Increase of Pension Benefits. Ex-non-statutory force members who entered into an
agreement for service in the SANDF and who are either unsuccessful in meeting the
required standard of training or who wish to terminate their service for whatever reason,
or who cannot be retained in service any longer, have had very little time to accrue a
sizeable pension pay-out. Amounts similar to the demobilisation benefits of their former
comrades could be utilized to buy back pension for serving members.


-----

52. It is recommended that Parliament give serious attention to approving such an
enhancement of members’ termination of service benefit. The amount would have to be
especially appropriated outside the Defence budget.

###### Representivity

53. **Former Force. The SANDF has endeavoured to eliminate any difference in the**
standard of training and performance among its members as speedily as possible.
Cohesion is one of the principle success factors in any armed force. It is therefore
suggested that as soon as the right sizing of the force has been achieved
representativeness per former force should not be further monitored.

54. Population Group. The population group composition of the SANDF was artificially
manipulated in the past as a result of the staffing policy of the apartheid era. It is thus a
consequence of history that differentiation on the grounds of race has skewed
representativeness. The White Paper has made the specific pronouncement that the
SANDF should be broadly representative of the South African population.

55. Figure 10.14 (Figure 10.14: Present population mix of the SANDF as on 1 May 1997)
indicates the present population group mix within the DoD. In Figure 10.15 (Figure
10.15: Future population mix of the SANDF) the possible population mix which could
exist if rationalization were to follow expected guidelines.

56. In Figure 10.16 (Figure 10.16: Present population mix in the DoD ito Officers, NCOs
and Privates as on 1 April 1998) the present population group mix in the Regulars of the
SANDF is reflected. From these figures it is clear that although the integration process
has had some effect in changing the imbalances of the past, the challenge for the future
lies in implementing policies which will achieve representativeness in all ranks which
broadly reflects the demographics of the country.

57. Gender. Figure 10.17 (Figure 10.17: DoD and SANDF by gender as on 1 April 1998)
indicates the percentages of men and women in the DoD and the SANDF respectively.

58. **Non-discrimination in respect of Gender. In the former SADF women were not**
eligible to serve in all musterings or corps. This restriction has been removed and women
can now serve in all uniformed posts throughout the SANDF. The elimination of
backlogs in the training of women especially for command positions in combat related
musterings is receiving attention.

59. Problems associated with retaining the services of women to bring them in line for
senior appointments include aspects such as day-care for young children and family
disruption when both parents are serving members and have to attend long courses or be
deployed away from home. The requirement to supply pre-study material long before the
start of a course to give parents with full home care responsibilities enough time to
prepare adequately has been identified. These problems are receiving serious attention
within the DoD.


-----

60. Any unfair discriminatory practices or attitudes, past and present, involving women
employed in the DoD shall be identified and dealt with as a high priority.

61. More training facilities for women, especially at the lowest level, should be made
available to increase the number of recruits in order to compensate for the inevitable loss
rate so that the number of senior women can be increased.

**_Affirmative Action, Equal Opportunity and Management of Diversity_**

62. Affirmative action and equal opportunity are fundamental principles of public sector
transformation as reflected in the White Paper on the Transformation of the Public
Service. These principles are particularly applicable in the DoD as they are essential for
the operational readiness of the SANDF.

63. Members of the SANDF are challenged to adapt their lifestyle, attitudes and
behaviour to a specific military culture. The SANDF will have to gradually evolve an
acceptable military culture in which all members, irrespective of their own culture, can
coexist, and in which operational readiness can be assured.

64. A work group on civic education has produced six educational modules for
implementation at all levels within the DoD. One of one of these modules concerns the
management of cultural diversity (see paragraph 93).

65. The newly-established Chief Directorate Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
in the DoD will be responsible for managing Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
training, monitoring and implementation and dealing speedily and effectively with cases
of discrimination. Active and ongoing awareness training for all employees but especially
for officers commanding will be systematically introduced throughout the DoD.

66. The Department has also established a work group on Equal Opportunity and
Affirmative Action, which is in the process of formulating policy in line with the
provisions in the White Paper on Defence. In addition, training modules have been
introduced on all courses to make all DoD personnel conscious of what constitutes
discriminatory or offensive behaviour towards other members of the Department. The
DoD will not tolerate discrimination, victimisation or harassment, irrespective of the rank
or position of the perpetrator(s). The Equal Opportunity Policy shall also contain specific
prescripts concerning sexual harassment which will have to be strictly complied with by
all employees.

**Language**

67. The DoD Work Group on language is considering language policy for the
department. Such a policy will have to strike a delicate balance between the operational
requirements and the constitutional provisions on language.

68. The need for a,thread’ or,link’ language in the command and control environment
appears to be a sine qua non for operational efficiency. The following will have to feature
prominently in a projected language plan :


-----

68.1 The promotion of multilingualism in the Department, in respect of the
national and regional languages.

68.2 The training and utilization of language facilitators (interpreters, translators),
particularly in the training environment.

68.3 The provision of an adequate language service in the Department.

68.4 Continuous monitoring, review and revision of the policy in the light of
national policy and changing circumstances.

68.5 Continuous liaison with other state departments, NGOs and the Pan South
African Language Board.

69. Departmental language policy will be practical and future oriented with thorough
language planning and monitoring components. Planning to ensure maximum efficiency
in communication irrespective of the language or combination of languages being used
will be an ongoing task in the DoD. Members of the department will be sensitized to
equity and to the fact that language diversity is to be considered an advantage rather than
a disadvantage. Mechanisms will be introduced to ensure effective and clear
communication.

**Religion**

70. The Defence White Paper states: 'In accordance with the Constitution, the SANDF
shall respect the right of its members to freedom of conscience, religion, thought, belief
and opinion; it shall promote freedom of religion; and it shall cater for the different
religious views of its members on an interdenominational basis. Religious observances
shall be conducted on an equitable basis, and attendance at such observances shall be free
and voluntary. The Chaplains’ Service shall regulate religious policy and practice in
accordance with departmental policy and in consultation with the Religious Advisory
Board which represent different faiths’.

71. The Religious Advisory Boards represent various religious bodies. They advise on
religious policy and monitor the ministry to their members. Advisory Boards have been
formed for the Christian, Islamic and Hindu faiths, and the African
Independent/indigenous churches. The existing Jewish Board of Deputies represents all
Jewish interests. These Boards meet regularly. In addition each religious body (ie
denomination) is entitled to address its concerns on religious matters independently.

72. Since the large majority of defence personnel are religious and the individual has a
constitutional right to the exercise of religion, religious observance is accommodated in
the highly regulated life of military personnel and forms part of ceremonials. Such
religious observance is sensitively planned and conducted to cater for religious diversity.

73. Since all religious observance is free and voluntary, the opportunity of non
participation in religious observance is allowed and addressed. The >freedom of
religion= principle allows for a number of alternative approaches and these were
narrowed down to the following two:


-----

73.1 To have a parade with religious observance for a homogeneous religious
group.

73.2 Where religious diversity is prevalent, a minute of silence may be given for
personal prayer or meditation.

74. The equality clause of the 1996 Constitution (Section 9(3), (4)), stipulates that the
state may not discriminate against anyone, inter alia on the basis of sexual orientation.
This is reiterated in the White Paper on Defence. The Work Group on Equal Opportunity
and Affirmative Action is formulating policy proposals to enforce these provisions. Such
policy will include the following provisions:

74.1 Appointment and promotion will depend on ability, competence and
potential of individuals and will not take unrelated sexual orientation factors into
account.

74.2 Harassment on the grounds of sexual orientation will not be tolerated.
Mechanisms will be established to deal with any incidents.

74.3 Education and training programmes will ensure that all members of the
SANDF and all employees of the DoD are sensitised to issues of discrimination
and sexual orientation.

74.5 The DoD will take cognisance of any possible changes made in Public
Service benefits pertaining to same-sex partnerships, e.g. in respect of housing
loans and pension benefits. At present, specific benefits such as free medical
treatment for a same-sex partner or transfer arrangements taking same-sex couples
into consideration are not formal policy.

**_Education and Training_**

75. The White Paper on Defence has established the broad parameters within which
education and training will take place in the SANDF. Within this normative and
qualitative framework, the following guidelines apply:

75.1 Training shall be competency based as far as practicable.

75.2 Training shall be based on sound educational technology principles.

75.3 Training will be used to improve the individual=s performance and not as a
disciplinary tool.

75.4 Training in the SANDF will recognise the dignity of the individual and will be
conducted in an environment conducive to learning.


-----

75.5 Training in the SANDF shall be based on clearly identified training needs, linked to
work or international standards. The SANDF=s training course content is being
scientifically developed through course design.

75.6 All training will be reviewed periodically to make it more cost effective while
maintaining or improving standards. Options include combining of training facilities,
providing training on an agency basis or providing common training at joint schools.

76. Since April 1994 the SANDF has experienced an abnormal training load due to the
integration of the seven constituent forces, especially with regard to bridging training. As
at October 1996, over 16 800 members had completed or were engaged in bridging
training although this overload was expected to decline from 1997 onwards as integration
training was completed. Training is, however, the main focus of SANDF activities when
operational deployments are low.

77. Training is directed towards equipping its members with the necessary skills,
knowledge and attitudes for service in the SANDF. Effective force preparation is the
firstand foremost consideration when determining the content, scope and cost of training.
However provision will be made to obtain accreditation for training within the framework
of the South African Qualification Authority (SAQA), including training obtained outside
of South Africa. As the SANDF is committed to providing the individual member with
the greatest mobility in the work environment, it has established a Defence Training
Board which will be affiliated to SAQA, thereby gaining access to the National
Qualification Framework (NQF).

78. Each member of the SANDF has an equal opportunity of attending applicable
scheduled courses. Training is hierarchically structured to allow for career development.
Training shall therefore qualify an individual to rise to the highest level within his/her
ability. In order to make training accessible to those previously educationally
disadvantaged, programmes are introduced to enable those who display potential to
qualify on the applicable courses.

79. The SANDF currently presents over 2 000 formal courses per year, ranging from
military development courses to war fighting skills training, some lasting a week while
others last a year or more. In addition the SANDF also trains a large proportion of its
personnel in industry-related skills. While the starting level for most courses is at Grade
12, some senior courses are presented on the level of a post-graduate degree.

80. The question of standards within the SANDF has various meanings amongst the different
stakeholders. Training standards in the SANDF will be measured in three dimensions.

80.1 The first dimension is that derived from the competency (based on the operational
requirement) to do work, ie that which is required of a person to perform a given operational
mission.

80.2 The second dimension refers to internationally verifiable standards, which is particularly
important to ensure inter-operability, for example in peace support operations.

80.3 The final dimension refers to statutory standards, ie those that are laid down by statutory
bodies, such as medical councils, or international bodies, such as the International Civil Aviation


-----

Organisation (ICAO). Those members of the SANDF who are to be engaged in these types of
work will be trained to the standards set by those statutory or international bodies.

81. The SANDF is committed to improving the standard of training. To achieve this it will
institute specific programmes :

81.1 A possible drop in training competencies resulting from the currently unfavourable
instructor/student ratio will be overcome by utilising those members who have completed their
bridging training as instructors.

81.2 The SANDF will develop programmes aimed at retaining instructors to stem currently
unacceptably high losses.

81.3 The SANDF will endeavour to gain additional recognition for the skills and workload of
instructors. To this end the Chief of the SANDF has instructed a special work group to investigate
the role and functioning of the instructor cadre.

81.4 The SANDF is to review its instructor training programme to bring it up to date with the
latest developments in educational technology while ensuring that any instructor qualification
accords with the standards set by the National Training Board.

81.5 The SANDF will also improve the standard of training by ensuring that training courses are
scientifically developed. In this regard the SANDF will upgrade its educational technology skills
through the SANDF College for Educational Technology.

82. Control of training in the SANDF is vested in the Chief of SANDF (C SANDF) in terms of
the Constitution (1996) and the Defence Act. C SANDF determines overall defence force training
policy and may in turn delegate the execution of specific training to a combat or support arm, or
provide for joint training where such training concerns more than one arm of service.

83. The SANDF is committed to providing for the upward mobility of every individual and
recognises the need to provide basic adult education (ABET). A SANDF order has been issued to
institute adult education programmes in conjunction with the regional Departments of Education.
Each Command area is to establish, with the local education authorities, an educational centre for
the provision of ABET.

84. The SANDF also recognises that many members, by virtue of their employment, are already
functioning at the prescribed academic level required for promotion yet do not hold the
appropriate certificate. The SANDF will therefore liaise with SAQA in order to grant those
members who have already passed specific military courses, academic recognition to level two or
possibly level three.

85. The SANDF needs officers with tertiary qualifications and will therefore make it possible for
selected officers to study for a tertiary qualification during their term of service.

86. One of the tertiary education schemes is the Uniform Bursary Scheme, or the so-called
Mildent/Engineering scheme, whereby selected candidates study full time, with retention of their
salaries, for the medical or engineering profession. A variation to this scheme is that used to
qualify members of the SANDF for entry into a mustering which requires a diploma before that
member may be used within his/her chosen field of employment. In the latter case the training
takes place at a technicon.


-----

87. Tertiary qualification is also available through the Military Academy, which provides
selected candidate officers with both further military officer development and academic
training to the bachelor level soon after the commencement of the candidate=s military
career. It is also geared to those young officers who are expected to fill senior ranks.
Study at the Military Academy is full time and allows students to study in the human,
natural and management sciences, conferring on successful students the Bachelor of
Military Science degree.

88. A further method of providing for a tertiary qualification is through the part time
study bursary scheme. Members of the DoD may apply for a bursary to study part time
for both undergraduate as well as post graduate degrees or diplomas.

89. Under the civilian bursary scheme successful civilians are granted a bursary to study
for the medical profession. This scheme is similar to the Public Service bursary scheme,
and on successful completion, the graduate must render commensurate service to the
DoD.

90. To remain abreast of military developments and to improve its operational standards,
the SANDF will make

use of international training. No foreign country will provide the total requirement for
training in a particular field. The SANDF will rather make use of such training
opportunities to gain expertise in a particular field in order to introduce the newly
acquired knowledge and skills into the SANDF.

91. To improve co-operation between the Southern African countries, and to facilitate
combined peace support operations in Africa, the SANDF will make available to foreign
countries places on SANDF courses, with priority given to Southern African countries. It
will also consider seconding trainers to countries which so request.

92. To ensure that the SANDF acts at all times in a military professional manner, the
SANDF is committed, in terms of the White Paper on Defence, to the introduction of
civic education on all its development courses and appropriate operational training
courses. Training in the Law on Armed Conflict (International Humanitarian Law) has
been implemented since January 1997 with the assistance of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and other modules are being introduced during 1998.

93. The six modules of the Civic Education programme are: key features of the
democratic political process; the Constitution and the Bill of Rights; civil - military
relations; the law of armed conflict; multi - cultural diversity; and military
professionalism.

94. Since the inception of the SANDF particular attention has been given to the
psychological impact of the process of integration on all personnel. A Psychological
Integration Programme (PIP) has been run for about three years but has now been
replaced with a more structured Leadership, Command and Management Principles,
Processes, Procedures and Philosophies (LCAMPS) course.


-----

**_Labour and Service Relations_**

95. The White Paper endorses a prohibition on membership of trade unions and
participation in strikes by SANDF members, although it states that >members of the
SANDF are entitled to effective and just grievance procedures, channels of
communication, and mechanisms of ensuring that their aspirations and complaints are
heard and addressed=. Labour relations which affect civilian members of the DoD are
governed by the Public Service Act and related legislation and regulations.

96. The bases for amendments to pay and benefits are established and controlled by the
Department of Public Service and Administration and are intended to maintain parity
between SANDF personnel and public sector personnel. No mechanism however exists to
provide the SANDF with direct influence in the determination of pay and benefits. The
unique circumstances of the members of the SANDF are not always recognised and
catered for.

97. Improvement of service relations for the SANDF could involve the establishment of
an appropriate independent authority to assist in the determination of pay, benefits and
conditions of service. Cabinet has recognized that an effective mechanism to deal with
the question of SANDF pay and service benefits may have to be instituted pending the
findings of a special investigation in this regard. The findings of the investigation are
expected in due course.

98. Those placed in authority in the military accept the responsibility of resolving
grievances, providing protection against abuse of authority and acting within the
established channels of communication and formalised disciplinary principles. The ability
to maintain discipline within the SANDF depends on avoiding circumstances which
could give rise to the perpetration of peculiarly military offences such as insubordination
or mutiny.

99. Section 134 of the Military Discipline Code provides for the resolution of grievances.
This procedure enables a uniformed member to appeal through the hierarchy of service
channels up to the President. The President=s decision is final. The mechanism has led to
the equitable resolution of many diverse grievances, irregularities, abuses of power and
incorrect managerial decisions, but the procedures are time consuming. This provision
will be streamlined in new defence legislation.

100. Grievance resolution. Effective communication is ensured through procedures that
have been set up and forums established for the different rank groups at unit level. These
forums allow military personnel to communicate their needs not only to the unit
commander but also to the Chief of the Arm of Service and the Chief of the SANDF.
Feedback after a trial period has shown that this system succeeds in solving most of the
problems at unit level where such problems originate.

101. The Military Ombudsperson. The White Paper on Defence motivates for a
Military Ombudsperson _inter alia to investigate complaints against the SANDF by_
military personnel. It is envisaged that the ombudsperson will address any military
personnel matters which cannot be resolved through other existing mechanisms.


-----

**_Medical, Psycological and Social Services_**

102. The South African Military Health Service (SAMHS) provides comprehensive
medical, psychological and social services within the DoD and makes many of its
services available to the families of DoD members.

103. The Directorate of Medical Service maintains a developmental approach to facilitate
health. The ethos of the medical profession and the regulations laid down by the Medical
and Dental Council of South Africa are adhered to at all times.

104. The SAMHS provides medical services wherever possible through its own facilities
and capabilities, referring patients to provincial hospitals where it cannot render
appropriate service, or in some cases to private facilities where provincial hospitals do
not have the necessary facilities.

105. The SAMHS provides primary, secondary and tertiary health care in close cooperation with the national health system which is based on a multidisciplinary approach.
Primary health care is seen as a priority.

106. The SAMHS also provides specialist diving medicine and aviation medicine
services.

107. The Directorate Psychology provides a military psychological service that is
comprehensive and self-supporting, to provide for the psychological well-being of the
entire military community.

108. The Directorate Psychology aims to assist the SANDF in the selection, recruitment
and development of personnel. It aims to be academically and ethically accountable and
to utilise up to date technology and to maintain the highest levels of legal, ethical and
professional accountability.

109. Current priorities include operational psychology (optimal selection and utilisation
of military personnel, commander training and management of operation-related
symptomology); transformation of the SANDF; integration of component forces;
personnel selection; gender sensitivity and equal opportunities and management of the
psycho-social aspects of rationalisation and demobilisation.

110. The Social Service Directorate is an integral part of the SAMHS. It maintains a
developmental approach which facilitates human capacity and self-reliance in order to
contribute to the mission readiness of the SANDF. A needs-based people-centred
approach is maintained. The service is output orientated and service excellence is the
objective.

110.1 Operational support. The primary function of the SAMHS is to render
operational medical support to the SANDF. Support for peacekeeping and peaceenforcement operations and humanitarian and relief operations are also undertaken.


-----

110.2 Productive work force. To prevent or minimise social malfunctioning of members
and families, emphasis is placed on preventive and developmental interventions rather
than curative measures. Health promotion programmes receive high priority.

110.3 Healthy military families. The DoD accepts the importance of healthy military
families as an important prerequisite for the provision of an acceptable quality of life
within the military.

110.4 People development. Capacity-building programmes implemented by the military
social work department aim to promote the social well being of members and families in
the military community.

110.5 Team approach. Within the SANDF the social work officer functions as part of
the human resource team acting as specialist consultant/advisor to command structures
regarding social welfare issues. Social work services are decentralised to unit level to
ensure the availability and accessibility of services.

110.6 Confidentiality. In accordance with the code of conduct for social work as
stipulated by the Interim Council for Social Work, the national controlling body, no
confidential information regarding any >client= may be made public without written
permission.

111. Military Community Development Committees (MCDC=s). All Regular Force
units have a Military Community Development Committee or may, according to the size
of the unit, be grouped together with other Regular Force units for this purpose. The
purpose of this committee is to promote a healthy environment and lifestyle within the
organisation for members and their dependants.

112. Transfer policy. The changing composition of the SANDF has led to a
reassessment of the previously rigid transfer policy that laid down that members could be
transferred anywhere in the country. The adequate allocation of military housing, the
sympathetic deployment of members in the event of both parents being members of the
SANDF and the limitation of unnecessary relocation of families will receive renewed
attention. However, ineligibility for transfer is likely to reduce career opportunities.

113. Domestic violence. This term is used to refer to violence between spouses or sexual
partners or among members of one family. The prevalence in the SANDF is not clear due
to the fact that victims are not coming forward, although if the SANDF is considered to
be a microcosm of South African society, domestic violence is likely to occur. Indeed a
study conducted by POWA (People Opposing Women Abuse) has indicated that police
and military personnel are more likely to engage in partner abuse, due in part to the stress
that they experience in the workplace.

113.1 The DoD has become part of the national interdepartmental network on violence
against women to improve the social, medical and legal procedures for women affected
by violence. The Director Social Work is represented on the Interdepartmental
Networking Committee on Women Abuse, established by the Ministry of Social Welfare.


-----

113.2 In the SANDF, close networking between the legal, welfare, psychology and
nursing departments is taking place to encourage victims to come forward. User-friendly
reporting channels, supportive services and educational programmes will be introduced.

114. Day care centres. Provision is made for the founding of day care centres for preschool children of mothers and single parents who work for the State. The SANDF
recognises that such centres could enable more trained members of the force to continue
in service. Parents are responsible for the costs of day to day care as this is not considered
to be a service benefit. Presently a total of twenty-two day care centres/ playgroups exist
in the SANDF for use by working mothers and single parents.

**_Sport and Recreation_**

115. Sport is practiced in the SANDF to ensure healthy and fit members. Approved and
structured sport and recreational activities in which members take part augment force
preparation. Self-confidence and self esteem, good team spirit, the integration of cultures
and the enhancement of the SANDF=s image are achieved through participation in sport.
Physical training (PT) is an integral part of sport management.

116. International liaison is dealt with at Defence Headquarters level and there are
regional defence sport offices in each of the regional commands. A Director Sport serves
full-time on the staff of the Chief of the SANDF.

117. Facilities, eg fields, courts, changerooms and certain equipment, are provided at
state expense as well as some transport and other costs. Sport is financed by a
combination of state (budgetary) funds, sports fees deducted from members' pay, club
fees, sponsorships and grants. Civilian employees are granted permission to practice in
biokinetic centres outside normal working hours on payment of a tariff laid down by the
treasury. Full-time SANDF members may take part in sport during official working
hours.

118. The creation of a research and development capability to ensure that SANDF sport
keeps up with the technological advances in training has now become a priority. Director
Sport ensures that the standard of training, coaching and refereeing is facilitated.
Requests for the use of SANDF facilities, especially by disadvantaged communities, are
considered sympathetically.

119. The SANDF has been granted full membership of Counseil Internationale du Sport
_Militaire (CISM), the international organisation for military sport. The CISM Office for_
Africa has been transferred to Pretoria as the SANDF is seen as one of the leading
African military sporting forces and has been given special responsibilities for African
military sport development.

**_Other Related Military Organisations_**


-----

120. Although a needs analysis for military veterans still has to be conducted, a Military
Veterans= Bill which is being drawn up for presentation to Parliament could include the
following:

120.1 The State recognises the sacrifices made by the military veterans of South Africa
over many decades and acknowledges its responsibility for the care and welfare of all
those veterans and their dependants.

120.2 All military veterans= affairs will be managed holistically by a unitary
organisation.

120.3 Compensation for disablement is to be viewed as reparation and not as a welfare
matter.

120.4 The role played by military veterans in democratising South Africa will be
recognised through national commemorations.

120.5 Any structures which are devised and put into operation for veterans are to provide
for interaction and consultation between the state and the stakeholders.

120.6 Military heritage matters are viewed as a national issue and will be dealt with
holistically. War graves, cemeteries, memorials, museums and rolls of honour are to be
dealt with in an integrated way to promote our military heritage.

121. Previously the SADF gave administrative and logistic support for school cadets
training at white schools. This consisted of drill, leadership and bearing, supplemented by
target shooting and band performances.

122. Since 1993 cadet activities at schools have been optional, voluntary, extra-mural and
accessible to all scholars of all population groups. Currently 484 schools participate in
school cadet activities, involving 40 000 pupils made up of approximately 450 drill
teams, 240 brass bands and 490 target shooting teams. The figures are declining,
however, due to the absence of a clear national policy for school cadets.

123. There are differences of opinion regarding cadets in civil society. While some
individuals and organisations regard them as promoting militarism, others view them in a
positive light. The DoD will liaise with the National Youth Commission and other
stakeholders to develop a national policy.

124. The SANDF=s currently revised objectives for cadets are to instil a spirit of
adventure and enhance the development of leadership amongst the youth; present
assertiveness and leadership training and a self-disciplining activity

with an alternative form of recreation; allow the youth to make contact internationally;
and provide skills in >house and hearth= protection, first aid and fire prevention.

125. Three forms of cadet system are being investigated :

125.1 Voluntary school cadets along the lines of the previous system. If reintroduced,
this model must be extended to disadvantaged communities.


-----

125.2 Naval cadets. The existing programme of the Navy League could be encouraged
and extended as a model for the other Arms of Service, and should incorporate
disadvantaged communities.

125.3 Community cadet detachments which are not linked to schools. These run
successfully in the UK and could be applied in South Africa. They involve recruiting
youth in their mid-teens as members of local military units, and training them in order to
cultivate recruits for the regiments and units.

126. The Service Corps was launched by the Minister of Defence on 31 January 1995
after Cabinet approval was given for its establishment. Its mission is to assist with the
reintegration of ex-service members into civil society by upgrading the standard of
education, vocational and life skills to enable members to find employment or start their
own enterprise in the private sector; provide career guidance on a continuous basis and
assist with the social reintegration of members where possible. Its priority is to
reintegrate ex-service members.

127. The planning phase for the establishment is complete and implementation is now in
process. The Service Corps has received a public service dispensation to function as an
auxillary service of the SANDF. Forecasts, taking into account demobilisation and
rationalisation, indicate an increase in members who will opt to join the Service Corps.

128. Ex-service members will undergo training including literacy and numeracy training
and vocational training. Trainees will work on different projects for a period of twelve
months, e.g. RDP projects; National Public Works Programme; SANDF projects; private
sector projects.

129. The Service Corps head office is in the process of establishing a trainee support and
guidance system in close co-operation with SAMHS, Director Social Welfare.

130. The Service Corps structures make provision for the establishment of a head office,
Service Corps units in each province and a Vocational Training Centre for the training of
ex-service members in various categories of trades.

131. The first trainees to Join the Service Corps and commence their training at 1
Construction Regiment were the intakes in September 1995, January 1996 and September
1996. The numbers under training in the different provinces exceed 1 000. The Service
Corps is staffed by 137 full-timers in the different provinces.

132. The Service Corps has received the support of NGOs, businesses, churches,
community based organisations and civic organisations. For the Service Corps to achieve
its mission, it is imperative that it becomes an independent organisation in respect of
logistics and human resources, facilities, commodities, service and applicable policies
and directives.

133. Service Corps implementation costs for 1996/97 were funded from the carry through
funds of the SANDF budget. Future funding of the Service Corps will be addressed in the
normal budgetary process.


-----

**_Chapter 11_**
**_The Part-Time Component_**
**_Introduction_**

1. The part-time component (PTC) is an integral and essential part of the SANDF. During
mobilisation or times of war, it will be required to provide substantial numbers towards
the personnel component of the defence force.

2. The SANDF's core defence capability will include both the full-time component (FTC)
and the PTC which will be structured and staffed in accordance with the requirements of
the SANDF.

3. The current and future budget constraints on the DoD will continue to impact upon
both the full-time and part-time components.

4. Although the PTC system is in place and functioning, it requires revision and
refinement. Many of the recommendations contained in this chapter are already being
pursued.

5. The transformation and restructuring of the PTC has two broad goals: to ensure that the
new PTC reflects the principles of the Constitution and the policies contained in the
White Paper on Defence; and to ensure that the PTC meets the requirements of the
SANDF.

6. More specifically, the aims are to ensure that the PTC reflects the composition and
cultural diversity of South Africa; that it remains an integral part of the SANDF's force
design and structure; that it is capable of fulfilling its functions in an efficient and
effective manner; and that the service conditions of the PTC are designed to attract and
retain sufficient volunteers to meet the SANDF's force level requirements.

###### Aim and scope of this chapter

7. This Chapter considers a range of issues which are critical to the successful
functioning of the future all-volunteer PTC, regardless of its ultimate structure and size.

8. This Chapter has the following aims and covers the following topics:

8.1 To present the necessary background information and perspective on the PTC:
the history and proposed structure of the PTC; the legislative and policy

|Introduction|Col2|
|---|---|


-----

framework; the 'one force concept'; the PTC as a national asset; and a vision of
the future PTC.

8.2 To advise the Minister and Parliament on the following policy issues: roles of
the PTC; command and control; decision-making on the PTC; cultural
transformation; representativeness; recruiting and retention; voluntary military
service; community support; youth; structural transformation; territorial units;
resource allocation; service conditions and benefits; training; employer and
organised labour support; marketing; international affiliations; and military
veterans.

**_History of the PTC_**

9. The current PTC is the proud heir of an ancient South African tradition, that of the
committed and resolute citizen-soldier usually serving as a volunteer and occasionally as
a conscript. With only a few exceptions, South Africa's wars at home and abroad have
been fought by citizen-soldiers from all communities. The struggle for democracy over
the past few decades is a prime

example of this.

10. Sometimes these soldiers fought alongside each other and sometimes they fought
against one another. Yet they shared one thing through the centuries: when the war was
over they did not return to military barracks but, being volunteers, went home to their
tasks in the field, the factory and the office.

**_Proposed structure of the PTF_**

11. The PTC component of the SANDF forms an indispensable and integral part of the
SA Army, Air Force, Navy and the Military Health Services. Historically the PTC has
provided mainly the 'teeth' (combat and combat-support) elements and little of the 'tail'
(administrative and non-operational) elements of the Army.

12. The term,part-time component’ is a new and inclusive name for previously separate
part-time components, namely the citizen force (which may be tasked to operate
anywhere) and the commandos (which are usually tasked to operate on an area-bound
basis).

13. The PTC Units in the Army are currently being rationalized as a result of the
structural transformation of the SANDF and because of the budget constraints on the
DoD. The proposed structure of the PTC is described below.

**Army**

14. About 85 per cent of the PTC is part of the Army and consists of two main elements:
conventional units (citizen force); and territorial units (citizen force and commandos,
including their support elements).


-----

14.1 Conventional Units. The PTC conventional units listed below will comprise
one division consisting of three PTC brigades.

14.1.1 Towed Medium Artillery Regiments

14.1.2 Multiple Rocket Artillery Regiments

14.1.3 Self Propelled Medium Artillery Regiments

14.1.4 Towed Anti-Aircraft Regiments

14.1.5 Mobile Anti-Aircraft Regiments

14.1.6 Mechanised Infantry Regiments

14.1.7 Motorised Infantry Regiments

14.1.8 Tank Regiments

14.1.9 Armoured Car Regiments

14.1.10 Various support units (eg Engineer Regiments, Signals Units,
Logistic Units, Technical Service Units etc).

14.2 The units are trained and equipped to fight a conventional land battle, and the
required standard of technical proficiency is high. Intensive training and regular
refresher courses on highly sophisticated equipment are therefore vital.

14.3 A substantial portion of the Army’s conventional warfare capability resides
in the PTC, which consequently forms an essential part of the Republic’s fighting
force. The conventional units are also trained in secondary roles.

14.4 The Army’s parachute brigade includes a number of PTC paratroop units:

14.4.1 Light Artillery Regiment

14.4.2 Parachute Anti-Aircraft Battery

14.1.3 Parachute Battalions

14.4.4 Various support units (eg Engineers, Field Workshop and
Maintenance Units).

14.5 **Territorial Units. The Territorial Units of the Army will comprise those**
units which have a citizen force or a commando origin, both rural and urban. They
form the largest part of the operational forces of the regional commands and are
mainly light infantry elements.

14.6 The citizen force component and some elements of the commando
component operate as the regional commands’ reaction or mobile force. The
territorial units are usually tasked to secure their local or home areas. In terms of
the strategy for land battle, both components are responsible for area defence.


-----

14.7 These units are very cost effective. They are lightly armed and do not use
expensive equipment.

14.8 In peace-time the units may be tasked to perform a secondary role in cooperation with the local community, local authorities and the South African Police
Service (SAPS). They played a vital role in elections, in flood and snow relief,
and in support to the SAPS in crime prevention.

14.9 They are active on an ongoing basis in the community and their individual
service commitments are shorter but more frequent, according to local defence
and security needs.

**Air Force**

15. The PTC volunteer air squadrons in the SA Air Force are responsible for
communication and reconnaissance flights. The pilots in these squadrons must hold at
least a civilian private pilots licence with an instrument rating, and have a minimum of
500 hours flying time. They must either own an aircraft or have unrestricted access to
one. The aircrew of the squadrons are trained and tested to Air Force standards.

16. There is also a pool of specialist personnel who are used to support the FTC. These
include other PTC pilots and experts in technical and professional disciplines.

**Navy**

17. The Navy PTC structure consists of naval reserve units and a naval staff reserve.

18. Naval reserves are used in the following roles:

18.1 To reinforce and sustain the SAN at its full wartime complement.

18.2 To staff ships and submarines to full complement.

18.3 To staff Naval shore establishments to full wartime complement.

18.4 To perform tasks such as port and coastal defence, including naval control of
shipping and the staffing of harbour and coastal defence vessels.

19. All naval reserve units are involved on a daily basis in administering and training
their ships’ companies in order to fulfil their role.

**SA Military Health Service**

20. The SAMHS PTC consists of medical battalion groups which are deployed with
operational forces, both conventional and otherwise, as well as with the PTC elements of
the Special Medical Battalion.

21. At each medical command there is a PTC territorial wing which consists of
centralised and decentralised wings.

22. The SAMHS PTC provides a cost-effective and highly specialised medical, dental,
psychological, welfare and veterinary capability.


-----

###### Constitutional and Policy Framework

23. The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa (1996), read with the 1993 Constitution in
terms of Schedule 6 of the new Constitution, provides:

23.1 The security services of the Republic shall consist of a single defence force...
established in terms of the Constitution.

23.2 The Defence Force shall comprise both a permanent force and a part-time
reserve component.

23.3 The establishment, organisation, training, state of preparedness, calling up
and conditions of service of the part-time reserve component shall be as provided
for in an Act of Parliament.

24. The White Paper on Defence states that,for political, strategic and economic reasons,
the SANDF will be an all-volunteer force. It will comprise a relatively small Full-Time
Component (FTC), including a civilian component, which is backed by a sufficiently
large PTC. A basic structure of this nature is extremely cost-effective and allows for
flexibility in force levels according to the internal and external security environment'.

**_The 'One Force Concept'_**

25. The 'one force concept’ is intened to ensure that the FTC and the PTC constitute an
integrated defence force which is capable of defending South Africa. The FTC and the
PTC together provide the SANDF’s core capabilities which can be expanded if required
by calling into service additional trained part-time volunteers.

26. The 'one force concept’ provides for flexible utilisation of human resources and
reduces the necessity to maintain a large and un-affordable full-time component.

27. The essence of the concept is that all SANDF personnel enjoy fair and equitable
treatment regardless of whether they are full-time or part-time members, and that they are
all expected to render the same high standard of service notwithstanding the differences
in the dynamics, functioning and requirements of the two components.

28. The concept will enable South Africa to make best use of available defence funding
by maintaining a force in which the FTC is optimally sized and equipped, and backed up
by a PTC able to fulfil those tasks which do not require a full-time capability.

29. In order to achieve the 'one force concept’, the future SANDF should be based on the
principle of fairness and equity for all its members, whether from the full-time or parttime components, with due recognition of the different dynamics, functioning and
requirements of the two components, as well as the inherent differences of service
between the Arms of Service.

**_National Asset_**


-----

30. A substantial, representative, trained, funded and equipped PTC is a national asset
because it is a guarantee of national sovereignty, costs very little to maintain, and benefits
the country by its very existence.

**_Vision_**

31. The future PTC will be a loyal, non-partisan, disciplined and professionally
competent body of volunteers, both men and women, maintaining and upholding South
Africa’s many military traditions, representative of the population, and forming an
integral part of the SANDF.

**_Roles of the PTC_**

32. The functions of he SANDF are defined in the Constitution and White Paper on
Defence. The PTC’s primary and secondary roles derive from these sources.

**Self Defence**

33. The PTC is a vital component of the SANDF’s capability to perform its primary
function of self-defence.

**Peace Support Operations**

34. The PTC should be used in peace-support operations. Many armed forces make
extensive use of part-time members in this role. The Scandinavian countries are a prime
example. Peace-support service could be a vital training aid and an incentive to enlist in
the PTC because it would provide operational experience and the prospect of actual
rather than theoretical soldiering.

35. Because voluntary service by PTC members in peace support operations can be costeffective and a motivating factor for the PTC as a whole, these personnel should be
employed alongside FTC members in such operations whenever practicable. In the event
that long periods of service are required, volunteers who do not have time constraints
should be used.

**Co-operation with the SAPS**

36. PTC regiments, units and personnel have been used extensively in co-operation with
the SAPS. Because of their dual role as citizens and soldiers, PTC members have
displayed a high level of maturity and have been a stabilising influence in these
operations.

37. The territorial units have always played a major role in this respect. The conventional
PTC forces can also be used in this capacity, but only in their special areas of skill and
training.

**Other Secondary Functions**

38. The PTC participates in many of the SANDF’s non-military tasks. Part-time soldiers
have always come forward in times of emergency.

39. The legislative basis, policy and procedures for taking PTC members into temporary
full-time service must be made simple, expedient and accessible so as to facilitate the
utilisation of PTC members in any support role to the FTC.


-----

**_A Balanced Command Structure_**

40. In the past very few PTC members had the opportunity of rising above the rank of
lieutenant colonel or commander (ie regimental commander level) to serve in senior
SANDF command structures. There were virtually no posts for them to do so. Senior
positions for PTC members were mainly liaison rather than command posts or true staff
appointments. The PTC did not have meaningful representation at senior levels in the line
function dealing with PTC matters.

41. Officers with strong leadership ability were discouraged from staying in the PTC
because of this career ceiling, and the management and technical skills of senior PTC
officers and non-commissioned officers who left the service because of this were lost to
the SANDF.

42. The White Paper states that the SANDF will investigate on a continuous basis the
need for, and the creation of, command and other posts for PTC members in order to
provide them with greater responsibility for command and control of this component. The
SANDF has conducted such investigation in consultation with the PTC and the Part-Time
Force Council (PTFC).

43. This has led to the creation of the PTC post of a major general who, as Chief of the
Part-Time Component (CPTC), reports directly to the Chief of the SANDF on all PTC
matters and is a member of all the top departmental bodies. The CPTC will be assisted by
other senior PTC and FTC officers and warrant officers who will occupy posts which
have also been created.

44. The presence of these senior PTC members in the chain of command and in the PartTime Force Council (PTFC) structures will enhance the motivation of the PTC, raise the
standing of the PTC in the community, and help to create a climate of support for service
in the SANDF.

45. For the 'One Force Concept’ to become a reality, more PTC officers and warrant
officers should become eligible for promotion into senior command structures with status
equal to their FTC counterparts. This will demonstrate that they have a meaningful role to
play in the management of the SANDF.

46. Additional posts should be created for members of the PTC to be promoted to the
ranks of colonel and above over specified periods of time. The filling of these posts
should be a structured and planned process of career progression for PTC officers.

47. A range of further senior command and staff posts within the SANDF should
therefore be identified for officers and warrant-officers of the PTC, according to needdriven requirements and the approved operational command and support structures of the
SANDF.

**_Decision-making on PTC matters_**

48. The PTC currently has an indirect but growing influence on, and participation in,
decision-making on SANDF matters which affect it. This occurs through the Part-Time
Force Forum, the Part-Time Force Council, the Reserve Officers Association of South


-----

Africa (ROASA) and the Senior PTC Liaison Officers of the Arms of Service. The role
and functions of these bodies are being reviewed in the light of DoD re-engineering.

**Part-Time Force Forum**

49. The Forum co-ordinates PTC activities at Chief of the SANDF (C SANDF) level, and
affords PTC representatives direct access to the C SANDF.

50. The Forum provides advice and direction in respect of PTC matters within the
framework of defence policy in general and C SANDF policy in particular.

51. Under the chair of Chief of Staff Personnel, the Forum consists of the Chiefs of Staff
Personnel of the Arms of the Services, Chief Director of Corporate Communications,
Director of Human Resources Policy of the Defence Secretariat, Chair and Deputy Chair
of the PTFC and the Senior PTC Liaison Officers of the arms of the service. Co-opted
members consist of the directorates of the Personnel Division and ROASA.

52. The Forum co-ordinates and advises the CSANDF in respect of the following PTC
functions and activities:

52.1 Identifying prominent supporters of the PTC outside the SANDF.

52.2 Co-ordinating and regulating comprehensive investigations into PTC
matters.

52.3 Making recommendations in respect of PTC policy and prioritizing PTC
matters.

52.4 Ensuring that the PTC remains updated on developments in the SANDF.

**Reserve Officers Association of South Africa**

53. The main objective of ROASA, being a voluntary society not for gain, is to support
the national security policy of South Africa.

54. ROASA endeavours to establish international relations with similar organizations
such as the Inter-Allied Confederation of Reserve Officers (,COIR’) and the Inter-Allied
Confederation of Medical Reserve Officers (,CIOMR’).

55. The active members of ROASA consist of PTC serving or retired officers from the
different Arms of Service.

**Part-Time Force Council**

56. The Part-Time Force Council (PTFC) is recognised as an important mouthpiece of the
PTC. It is an elected body based on corporate rather than individual membership (ie its
members in the nine regions of the council are elected by the PTC regiments and units of
all arms of service). Former non-statutory force members participate equally on the
PTFC, in order to represent their constituents.

57. The PTFC enjoys ministerial recognition and the appointment of its chairperson was
ratified by the Minister of Defence in December 1994. The Minister has also ratified the


-----

appointment of eight former statutory force members and ten former non-statutory force
members to the PTFC National Council.

58. The constitution of the PTFC has been accepted by the Department of Defence
(DoD), including the Council on Defence (CoD) and the Defence Command Council
(DCC).

59. The PTFC has the following aims:

59.1 To secure durable collaboration with the Minister, the Defence Secretariat,
the SANDF, the Chiefs of the arms of service and command and formation
commanders on all matters affecting the PTC, and to secure a standing which is
commensurate with the role of the PTC as an important component of the
SANDF.

59.2 To help secure general and broad-based community and private sector
support for the PTC and the voluntary service system.

59.3 To help promote a,one force concept’ between the PTC and the FTC within
the SANDF.

60. The main roles and functions of the PTFC are as follows:

60.1 To advise and consult within the DoD on matters affecting the PTC, and to
contribute in an advisory capacity to the decision-making process of the DoD
regarding such matters.

60.2 To promote the development of PTC support structures involving employers
and employer organisations at national and regional levels.

60.3 To assist with the development and implementation of the PTC volunteer
system, and to actively support the SANDF in the recruitment of volunteers.

60.4 To advise and assist with marketing, advertising and publicity in relation to
the PTC.

60.5 To liaise with veterans’ and other organisations on PTC matters.

60.6 To liaise with organisations representing part-time forces internationally.

60.7 Within the ambit of the mission and aims of the PTFC, to provide guidance
and advice to the PTC or any unit thereof on any matter, and to undertake any
tasks or projects at the request of the DoD.

61. The PTFC should become a statutory body within the DoD as soon as possible in
order to give effect to its constitution, secure recognition for its office bearers, and obtain
appropriate financial and other resources.

**_Aspects of Command and Control_**

62. The PTC and the PTFC should be involved in force design and rationalisation
initiatives affecting the PTC.


-----

63. The restructuring of the command and control structures of the PTC within the
SANDF similarly requires the involvement of the PTC and the PTFC.

64. As a transitional measure, the suitability and seniority of all PTC volunteers should be
determined by a formula which includes the following criteria: age; command
experience; operational experience; on-the-job (rather than formal) training; and
specialist civilian training, experience and qualifications.

65. The ranking of PTC personnel should be investigated with the aim of placing them in
appropriate ranks, correcting inequities suffered by serving PTC personnel as a result of
deficiencies in the previous PTC’s training and career planning, and catering for former
non-statutory force leaders.

66. A programme for accelerated training and development of PTC members should be
designed and implemented.

**_Transformation_**

67. The transformation of the SANDF, including the PTC, should be addressed in respect
of cultural transformation, representativeness and recruiting and retention.

68. The main aim is to foster a common military culture amongst all members of the
SANDF, whether full-time or part-time component.

**Cultural Transformation**

69. The PTC of the future should have a broad and common military culture which is
based on the greatest degree of inclusivity.

70. In order to make the PTC fully representative of the composition of South Africa, a
cultural transformation of the PTC should be effected.

71. The regimental traditions followed by many PTC regiments, especially the traditional
regiments, should be seen as a valuable aid in this regard. Studies have shown that
soldiers’ loyalty lies with their comrades, their regiments and the state, in that order.

72. Regiments have proved time and again their unquestionable loyalty to the state,
irrespective of the government in power.

73. Transformation of the SANDF should be aimed at fostering a common military
culture amongst both full-time and part-time members.

74. There should be a cultural audit of the diverse historical and military traditions of
South Africa, including those of the existing PTC, the former non-statutory forces and the
former,homeland’ forces.

75. The future PTC’s military culture should be based on the principle of maximum
inclusivity of the customs and traditions of all the forces involved in its formation.


-----

76. It is essential to build on regimental traditions and customs and to mould them so that
all sectors of the community, irrespective of race, gender and creed, are accepted as an
integral part of the regiment.

**Representivity**

77. The PTC is in ananomalous situation regarding composition of its personnel. On the
one hand, there is a vast number of white males who were trained under the national
service system. Many of them have not volunteered for PTC service and will not respond
to any call-up because of the ministerial moratorium on prosecution for failing to comply
with a call-up. On the other hand, very few non-statutory force members have
volunteered to join the PTC. The integration process to merge the present PTC with parttime volunteers from the former non-statutory forces is not generally known and needs to
be communicated to both the PTC and the under-represented sectors of the community.

78. The Minister said the following in his budget speech in 1996: "Although all sections
of our people are joining the part-time forces, special attention will have to be given to
attracting former MK, APLA and TBVC members into the part-time regiments and areabased units. We can look forward to the day when there is a Luthuli Regiment of Soweto,
the Tambo Regiment of Kwa Mashu and the Chris Hani Regiment of Khayelitsha, and
when black, brown and white serve equally in all".

79. The SANDF should establish specific methods, plans and implementation
programmes for integration within the PTC, including an on-going recruiting campaign in
black communities.

80. As part of the attestation process, the SANDF should formulate and implement
selection procedures for the PTC similar to those in place for the FTC. The British
Military Advisory and Training Team (BMATT) should be involved in this process.

81. A programme for accelerated training and development of PTC members to achieve
pre-determined standards should be designed and implemented.

82. The Chief Directorate Equal Opportunities should be tasked to investigate and
monitor the programme if this is considered to be appropriate.

83. If feasible, the Service Corps should be tasked to identify suitable recruits for the
PTC from those who leave the SANDF through the demobilisation process.

84. A multi-pronged approach with regard to regiments and units should be adopted:

84.1 Existing regiments should be retained where feasible, albeit in a down-sized
form. Plans should be made to ensure representativeness within these units.

84.2 Where new units are required to be established or greater representativeness
needs to be achieved, such units can be established from sub-units of existing
units.


-----

84.3 PTC units should be established within budget constraints to become more
representative and to even out the demographic and geographic distribution of the
PTC.

**Recruiting and Retention**

85. Recruitment and retention of suitable personnel is the life-blood of any volunteer
part-time force. In the case of South Africa, the Minister has mandated additional
requirements, namely that recruiting must encourage nation-building and must ensure a
balanced mix of members in terms of race, ethnicity and gender.

86. Persuading the right calibre of people to volunteer and stay in uniform will be
accomplished by offering an attractive, challenging and rewarding part-time military
career.

87. It is more economical to encourage people to stay in the PTC than to find and train or
re-train replacements from scratch. It is difficult to replace lost experience which comes
from long service.

88. While the SANDF has made much progress with regard to recruiting, various issues
still have to be considered and resolved:

88.1 Many PTC units currently believe that their only means of survival is to
recruit as soon as possible. This situation will be corrected once the current
rationalisation of units has been finalised.

88.2 Recruiting should be planned, programmed and implemented in an orderly
fashion. The delineation of recruiting areas for particular units should be included
in the plan.

89. All arms of service should determine the number of recruits required for each
regiment or unit depending on its geographic location, task, training commitment etc.

90. The regional marketing forums which have been established in each command area
should be tasked to produce regional personnel marketing programmes.

91. The national advertising campaign envisaged by the SANDF at corporate level should
precede recruiting at regional level. Community awareness of the PTC needs to be
established prior to widespread recruiting.

92. Recruiting should be decentralised to the lowest practical level.

93. The proposals described above are being pursued by the SA Army.

**_Voluntary Military System_**

94. The Voluntary Military System (VMS) was originally established as a substitute for
the defunct national service system. In terms of the VMS, volunteers undergo twelve
months basic military training, followed by a further obligation of eight annual
commitments of 30 days in the PTC. The objective is to create a feeder system for the
PTC conventional forces.


-----

95. In its current form, however, the VMS does not achieve this objective. Very few PTC
units receive personnel from this source, especially in the leader-group category. If
anything, the VMS has become a feeder group for the FTC.

96. The VMS should be reviewed and adapted to achieve the aim of creating a feeder
system for the PTC.

**Ex Full-Time Component Members**

97. Active measures should be taken to recruit members leaving the FTC into the PTC.

98. The policy in terms of which FTC members who have taken a voluntary severance
package on leaving the service are entitled to join the PTC as volunteers should be
communicated to such members.

**_Community Support_**

99. Many people regard service in the Defence Force as a privilege. However, successful
recruitment of volunteers requires the support of all sections of the community.

100. Two problems in particular have to be solved in order to achieve this support:
historically, many citizens have had a negative attitude towards the SANDF; and years of
conscription have impacted on the ethos of voluntary military service. Former conscripts,
their families and their employers have a negative attitude towards military service. Such
perceptions have to be changed if the voluntary part-time service system is to be effective
and successful.

**_Youth_**

101. The new PTC will need to launch a systematic out-reach programme for youth,
including school-going youth, in order to create awareness of the PTC, cultivate future
recruits, and contribute to nation-building by offering young people the opportunity of
self-betterment, a disciplined environment, access to new experiences, comrdeship and
access to role models.

102. The DOD should act in concert with the PTC and the Commission on Youth in each
province to develop and sup-port youth programmes which have the purpose of enriching
youngsters’ lives, developing leadership qualities and skills, and teaching them
elementary military values related to future PTC service.

**_Structural Transformation_**

103. The future PTC will have to satisfy three requirements:

103.1 It must fit the eventual force design of the SANDF as a whole.

103.2 Where possible, existing units must remain in place to assist the integration
process and transfer their expertise.

103.3 New units must be established to broaden the geographic and demographic
base of the PTC.


-----

104. The disbandment of existing units is a sensitive subject which is linked to both
community sentiment and PTC transformation.

105. The existing PTC could be made to fit almost any force design without disbanding a
significant number of units, and still remain cost-effective. Various alternative procedures
have proved successful in South Africa and elsewhere in the world, and would enable the
SANDF to accommodate both existing and new units within a reasonably-sized force
design.

106. The PTFC and existing PTC units should continue to be consulted on rationalisation
and optimisation affecting the PTC.

107. Procedures for closing down, amalgamating and merging structures should continue
to be agreed on by all the PTC stakeholders before decisions are taken in respect of
particular regiments and units.

108. In any rationalisation of the PTC, consideration should be given to, inter alia, the
regiment’s current effectiveness, future force design, history, traditions, civic honours,
current location, representativeness and recruiting potential.

109. The recommendations outlined above are being incorporated into the Army’s
guidelines regarding the investigation and implementation of the restructuring of PTC
regiments and units.

**_Territorial Units_**

110. Special mention needs to be made of the commandos, which now form part of the
territorial units, in view of the sensitivity surrounding their name and perceived role. This
sensitivity derives from the perception in certain quarters that the commandos were
politicised during the apartheid era through frequent deployment in support of the police.

111. However, these community-based units proved their loyalty to the government of
the day through a strong voluntary turnout to guard polling stations and voting materials
in the 1994 national election and the 1995 and 1996 local elections. The units have also
provided valuable support to local authorities in flood and snow relief. They have cooperated on a large scale with the SAPS to fight crime.

112. In fulfilling these functions the territorial units proved that a nation-wide
community-based organisation can play an important and cost-effective role in peacetime and provide an internal security service for the defence force in times of war or
emergency.

113. The concept of territorial units is of immense importance for both the transformation
and defence needs of the Republic. They are intimately integrated into, and drawn from,
the community, and can contribute to the transformation and representivity of the PTC.
Such units, being community-based, will reflect the communities from which they are
drawn and which they serve.


-----

114. Many of these units have been racially integrated for some years, and are in the
process of extending their operational capabilities to cover all sectors and areas of the
community. For example, 12 new units have been established in the former,homelands’.

115. The transformation of the territorial units into units which are fully representative of
South Africa’s population makes them an important priority for the future PTC.

116. It is of utmost importance that the territorial unit system be extended to cover all
communities, including former disadvantaged communities, that the units be broadly
representative and integrated to perform the task of area defence, as well as cooperating
with the local community, local authorities and the SAPS; that all members adhere to the
constitutional imperative that military personnel must be politically non-partisan; and that
all members be exposed to the civic education programme on defence in a democracy.

**_Resource Allocation_**

117. Allocation of resources to the PTC is still based on the pre-1990 era which consisted
of compulsory service, operational deployment, long annual training camps and
minimum expenditure on headquarter facilities. As a result, there is insufficient emphasis
on the aspects which are essential for the success of the all-volunteer PTC. Although
many items in the SANDF budget are utilised for or in support of PTC administration,
training and infrastructure, the direct apportionment of resources to the PTC should be
improved. The current level of funding is far below the minimum level required.

118. PTC unit commanders should be involved in the structuring and management of the
budgets of their units.

119. An investigation should be undertaken to determine the capital and operating
budgets per PTC unit. Within the operating budgets of each unit there is a need to
differentiate between fixed and variable overheads. Units should have control over their
budgets and must be given the tools to manage actual expenditure against their budgets;
however, higher authority should continue to exercise control over their financial
planning and expenditure.

120. Unsuitable accommodation for PTC units should be upgraded. This is a source of
contention for some regiments and units. Volunteers are attracted to the units with which
they associate. Units require adequate accommodation to succeed with their recruiting
plans. In many countries unit headquarters are seen as a major drawcard in attracting
volunteers.

121. PTC units should have access to weapons, vehicles and equipment for training.

122. Funds for uniforms for traditional regiments should be made available and the issue
of camouflage uniforms for PTC members should be expedited.

123. Adequate funding for the Voluntary Part-time Military Service System which is
focused on the recruitment and training of PTC volunteers is essential to ensure its
success.


-----

###### Service Conditions and Benefits

124. One of the important factors which will determine the success or failure of the
voluntary PTC of the future will be the pay, allowance, benefits (including medical
benefits) and legal protection offered to its members while rendering continuous or noncontinuous military service.

125. As in the case of the FTC the conditions of service of the PTC should be adequate to
attract and retain sufficient volunteers to maintain anticipated force levels, and may
therefore need to be revised periodically.

126. The provision of adequate pay, allowances and other incentives, would facilitate the
recruitment and retention of quality people in the PTC and would encourage more
binding service contracts being instituted.

127. PTC pay should be on a par with FTC remuneration, including fringe benefits which
are appropriate to PTC service, and should take into account the member’s length of
service.

128. The establishment of a pension or a provident fund for PTC volunteers should be
addressed based on the number of PTC volunteers whose length of service indicates a
commitment to long term PTC service.

129. The volunteer service bonus system should also be revised based on the above
information. The bonus should be sufficient to allow the acquisition of a major appliance
by the recipient or contribute significantly towards an annual holiday, as originally
envisaged. The bonus should be increased substantially in the third year of service to
encourage retention. In the UK the,bounty system’ operates on this basis and personnel
turnover is reduced substantially after the third year.

130. PTC pay should be tax free or taxed at the lowest marginal rate of taxation and
should be taxed separately from the member’s civilian salary so that he/she is not pushed
into a higher tax bracket. These matters should be taken up by the DoD with the
Department of Finance.

131. Suitably qualified young people should be granted full or partial study bursaries for
university, technikon and other courses if they undertake military training for a certain
period after graduation. Britain applies this system successfully in conjunction with
Sandhurst and officer training for the Territorial Army.

132. To attract the right calibre of PTC volunteers from all communities and especially
from disadvantaged groups, the travel allowance scheme should be improved and
simplified.

133. Legal protection for volunteers should be strengthened through a moratorium on
certain debts during periods of extended call-up; protection against summary termination
of a lease by a landlord in the absence of a volunteer while on call-up; and discrimination
in the civilian work place.

**_Training_**


-----

134. The following concepts are contained in the Army’s training philosophy for the
PTC, and the implementation of several of these concepts is in an advanced planning
stage.

135. While attractive service conditions and adequate resources can do much to ensure
the maintenance of high standards and efficiency in the new PTC, the only way to attain
these standards is through proper training.

136. Training in an all-volunteer force differs vastly from that in a conscript organisation.
It has to be interesting, challenging and user-friendly. Above all, it must take account of
severe restrictions on the time of PTC personnel. It should also make provision for the
greatest degree of decentralisation.

137. The period of annual training must be balanced carefully so as to achieve the
required efficiency goals without being so onerous as to lead to a falling-off of
enthusiasm.

138. The PTC should be involved in the planning and design of training down to
regimental or unit level.

139. Negotiations should be initiated with the relevant controlling bodies to gain ciilian
recognition for the widest possible range of military skills (eg drivers, medical orderlies,
military police).

140. The PTC should be involved in planning and designing training programmes.

141. Training should be decentralised as far as possible.

142. The following training should be implemented in the long-term:

142.1 Basic training for untrained recruits, decentralised to command, formation
and unit levels.

142.2 Non-continuous training on week nights and weekends.

142.3 Continuous training of up to 14 days in the member’s local area or further
afield.

142.4 Short training courses of 7 to 14 days to instruct members in new skills or
to qualify them for promotion.

142.5 Extended training courses of 21 days in modules to qualify members for
senior promotion. General training courses and staff training for senior promotion
should be conducted in modules of short enough time periods to suit senior
civilian executives.

142.6 Distance training through correspondence to supplement the above and
reduce time scales. A practical phase is also essential.

143. The desirability and feasibility of re-establishing University/Technikon Units should
be considered as a means of attracting leaders into the PTC.


-----

144. Training schemes along the lines of the Reserve Officer Training Corps Scheme in
the USA could also be considered.

145. The necessary training facilities, equipment, instructors and funding to carry out
meaningful

PTC training will have to be provided.

**_Employer/Organised Labour Support_**

146. In a large number of cases, private and public employer attitudes towards the PTC
are negative. There are several reasons for this: insensitive handling during the national
service era; the perception that employees,waste’ their time in service; the perception
that the PTC is no longer needed; and a lack of tangible incentives for employers.

147. As a result of these negative attitudes, certain government and other public and
private institutions have restrictive human resource policies which prevent or discourage
their employees from volunteering for military service.

148. The establishment of a national employer support committee will go a long way to
changing employer attitudes to the PTC. Organised labour should become part of such a
committee and launch an initiative to support their members who volunteer for part-time
service.

149. The national employer support committee initiatives should be supported by
employers and organised labour in both the public and private sectors to encourage
employees to volunteer for PTC service thereby contributing to the establishment of a
successful and effective PTC.

150. The Minister should propose to Cabinet that an urgent audit of the human resource
policies of all government departments and state-owned corporations be undertaken in
relation to part-time military service, and that restrictive practices be eliminated.

151. Strategies should be developed in conjunction with the national employer support
committee and the PTFC to establish a feasible, affordable and easily administered
agreement regarding minimum concessions and job-protection policies for workers who
are PTC members, and incentives for employers who support voluntary part-time service.

**_Marketing_**

152. Marketing is an integral part of voluntary part-time service. The SANDF has
instituted a marketing plan under the direction of the Chief Director Corporate
Communications.

153. There should be a detailed marketing plan established at corporate level involving
the entire DoD. The plan should incorporate the following:

153.1 Co-ordination with and involvement of the PTFC.


-----

153.2 A national awareness campaign promoting the benefits of voluntary parttime service for South Africa and the reconstruction and development process.

153.3 Decentralised regional campaigns set up in conjunction with the recruiting
programmes and involving the regional marketing forums.

153.4 Co-ordination of marketing with the establishment and promotion of the
national employer support committee.

153.5 The SANDF should determine a specific budget for marketing. The amount
should be substantial, and outside agencies should be consulted.

**_International Affiliations_**

154. Up to 1961 a long-standing network of formal affiliations and alliances existed
between South African regiments and full-time as well as part-time regiments of the
British Army. These lapsed when South Africa left the Commonwealth but were
unofficially maintained in almost all cases. The SANDF has now re-instated these
affiliations.

155. However, there is not yet clear policy on new affiliations and alliances which have
arisen during the past 30 years within both the SADF and the former non-statutory forces.
These represent important relationships for the PTC and the entire SANDF.

156. Bodies within the PTC have forged links with several overseas organisations. For
example, the Reserve Officers Association of South Africa has linked up with the
International Confederation of Reserve Officers. Such contacts are extremely important
and useful for the SANDF.

157. The DoD should develop a coordinated policy with regard to international PTC
affiliations, based largely on the priorities determined by the SANDF military diplomatic
plan and its policy in respect of affiliation with foreign military units.

**_Military Veterans_**

158. Members and formers members of the PTC are members of various veterans
organisations. Although PTC veterans qualify for veteran benefits, there is no clear
definition of how or when a PTC member qualifies as a veteran (eg do all exservicepersons, irrespective of origin, qualify as veterans?)

159. There are internationally accepted definitions of veteran qualifying service.

160. Veteran programmes require support from both government and veterans
organisations.

161. The DOD, in conjunction with the Council of Military Veterans’ Organisations,
should define who qualifies as a PTC veteran and then create benefits for these people.

162. Benefits for PTC veterans should be the same as for any other military veterans, and
details of these benefits should be contained in PTC service conditions.


-----

163. Medical and social care should be provided for full-time and part-time veterans who
suffered disabilities in service (whether in action, on training or in accidents).

**_Conclusion_**

164. In an era when many nations are turning to the part-time citizen-soldier as a means
of maintaining defence capabilities in a cost-effective way, South Africa is fortunate in
having a PTC and an immense treasure of experience in maintaining and using such a
force.

165. The PTC, and especially the conventional component thereof, currently faces its
major challenge to date: to move away from a conscript-based system for white males to
a voluntary system which mirrors the,Rainbow Nation’. (The commandos have already
made substantial progress in this regard).

166. Achieving the ideal of a,Rainbow PTC’ as an integral and productive part of the
SANDF will require the co-operation and participation of a broad range of stakeholders.
These extend from the Ministry of Defence, the Joint Standing Committee on Defence,
the SANDF, the PTFC and the ROASA, to members of the community.

167. While an effective PTC can be very economical, there is a certain level of funding
below which it cannot be expected to fulfil its obligations. Whatever the level of funding
required by the PTC, it is a relatively small percentage of the overall defence budget.

168. In the final analysis, the success of the PTC will depend on its ability to recruit and
retain volunteers to fill the required number of posts within the PTC as an essential
component of the SANDF.


-----

### Chapter 12

**_Land and Environment_**
**_Overview of Department of Defence land_**

1. The Department of Defence (DoD) controls land in each of the nine provinces of South
Africa. These properties range from the larger training areas, Army bases, Air Force
bases and ammunition depots, to smaller properties such as communication sites,
shooting ranges and even remote observation posts of only a few square metres.

2. The bulk of the land currently under DoD control is classified as State Land which is
reserved for DoD purposes. This land is legally owned by the South African Government
with the Department of Defence having a reservation of use, although the deeds are held
by the Department of Public Works which is the national custodian of all state land and
facilities. Some DoD land is Defence Endowment Property received from the
Government of the United Kingdom in 1922 which is also classified as State Land. Such
property is governed by an Act of Parliament, Act no 33 of 1922 (the Defence
Endowment Property and Account Act)1.

3. The second largest category of DoD controlled land is property which is leased for use
by the DoD. These properties include shooting ranges used by local Part Time Force
members as well as many of the sites used for the countrywide communication network
which are leased from farmers in rural areas.

4. The DoD also has "rights of use" agreements with land owners that allows certain land
to be used for DoD purposes. For example in Northern Kwazulu-Natal the DoD’s right of
use on Forestry property amounts to approximately 53 000 hectares.

5. The DoD is one of the largest users of property in South Africa, holding approximately
0,4 per cent of the country’s surface for a wide range of defence-related purposes. In
comparison, the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence holds approximately 1,2 per cent
of the country’s surface and also leases a large training area in Canada. The United States
DoD controls 1,1 per cent of the country’s land, while the real estate of the French armed
forces represents 0,4 per cent of the country’s surface.

6. The property requirements of the DoD stem from its core functions and activities. The
SANDF is in a transitional phase regarding its functions, posture and force structure. The
Defence Review envisages a primarily defensive posture with new tasks such as regional
security co-operation and peace support operations being taken on. These changes will
have a significant impact on the composition and extent of the departments’ property.
The DoD’s current property portfolio mostly reflects the previous era that was
characterised in part by operations in Angola and Namibia and adversarial relations with
neighbouring countries. With the shift to a defensive posture the property portfolio is sure
to be downsized.

7. The DoD is continually striving to improve its efficiency and effectiveness, driven by
the need to fulfil its constitutional obligations to the people of South Africa, at the least


-----

possible cost. The transformation process and the introduction of new management
models in the department are likely to result in the disposal of excess facilities and
infrastructure.

8. The DoD currently has approximately 493 200 hectares of land under its control. For
easy reference, this is around a quarter the size of the Kruger National Park. This figure
excludes small pieces of military land in the former TBVC states (the exact size of these
cannot be determined, as the title deeds of state land in these areas are not available).

9. Since 1986, the DoD has returned approximately 234 000 hectares of land to the
Department of Public Works, largely as a result of urban and agricultural pressures,
internal DoD rationalisation, and restitution claims. Appendix 1 (Appendix 1: The larger
DoD terrains handed back to PWD since 1986) provides an indication of the larger
terrains that have been handed back since 1986.

10. The distribution of current defence land, as well as the land returned to the
Department of Public Works per province (excluding former TBVC states) is reflected in
Map 1(Map 1: Defence land per province). Appendix 2 (Appendix 2: Distribution of land
within the Arms of the Service) indicates the DoD land in each province which is
allocated to the different Arms of Service (excluding the Surgeon General). It also
provides a breakdown of the three main categories of DoD property (Defence
Endowment Property, lease agreements and State Land reserved for DoD purposes). Map
2 (Map 2: The large tracts of Defence land (distribution wrt size) shows the spatial
distribution of property controlled by the three Arms of Service in the various provinces.

11. The division of total defence controlled land per province is as follows: Mpumalanga
2 per cent, Gauteng 5 per cent, Western Cape 1 per cent, Eastern Cape 4 per cent, Free
State 7 per cent, Northern Province 13 per cent, Kwazulu-Natal 3 per cent, North West
Province 8 per cent and Northern Cape 48 per cent. The Northern Cape thus has almost
as much DoD land as all the other provinces combined. However, only three military
areas represent the bulk of this total area: Army Battle School at Lohathla (135 000
hectares), Vastrap Weapons Range (50 000 hectares) and Schmidtsdrift Training Area
(35 000 hectares).

12. Armscor controls four pieces of land in South Africa which are indicated in Table 1.
Since the 1980’s, Armscor has been implementing a comprehensive environmental
management plan for all its facilities in co-operation with external experts.

**NO** **LOCATION** **TERRAIN** **AREA**

1 Prieska Alkantpan 76 735 ha
2 Simon’s Town Institute for Maritime Technology 1 ha
3 Hartebeespoort Dam Gerotek Testing Range 130 ha
4 Pretoria Armscor Building, Erasmusrand 25,6 ha
5 Broederstroom Proteknik Research Laboratory 1 ha

**TOTAL** **76 892,6 ha**

Table 1: Land controlled by ARMSCOR

###### DoD land and use requirements

|NO|LOCATION|TERRAIN|AREA|
|---|---|---|---|
|1 2 3 4 5|Prieska Simon’s Town Hartebeespoort Dam Pretoria Broederstroom|Alkantpan Institute for Maritime Technology Gerotek Testing Range Armscor Building, Erasmusrand Proteknik Research Laboratory|76 735 ha 1 ha 130 ha 25,6 ha 1 ha|
|TOTAL|||76 892,6 ha|


-----

13. The DoD acquires land with a specific primary operational purpose in mind. These purposes
include the following general categories, each of which implies certain major considerations that
have to be taken into account in determining the size of properties. However, it should be noted
that more than one of these activities can take place on any portion of DoD land.

13.1 Training areas

13.1.1 Specific force design to be trained. The specific force design for which
training is required (for example deployment of mechanised or motorised infantry
in conventional, peace-keeping or area protection roles) will determine the area
of land needed to train the force. The effective use of DoD forces necessitates
competency in more than one type of deployment. This means that the area
needed for training will be determined by the force design which requires the
largest portion of land for training.

13.1.2 Type of training to be conducted. The types of training to be conducted
also have an effect on the area of land needed for training. Smaller areas are
required for dry training, field craft training and vehicle training than are required
for training with live ammunition. A variety of geographical features and veld
types should be present to simulate different scenarios within which skills are to
be acquired.

13.1.3 **Type of weapons to be used. The types of weapons and the**
combinations in which they are deployed have a profound influence on the area
of land required. The safety arc for each weapon is clearly defined and should be
strictly adhered to.

13.1.4 **Expansions in force design and development of new weapon**
**systems. Provision is made for expansions in force design and the development**
of new weapon systems although this is difficult to predict.

13.1.5 Spatial implications of safety templates. Safety templates drawn up for
specific weapons systems and ammunition form an integral part of any military
base where armed training takes place (see Appendix 4: Spatial implications of
safety templates). The size of a military base where armed training is performed
is to a large extent determined by the ammunition used in training and the linked
safety templates. The size of a military training area usually increases with the
use of higher order ammunition, which requires larger safety templates.

13.2 **Base areas, administrative areas, maintenance areas and stores depots. The**
sizes of these facilities are to a large extent determined by the amount of infrastructure
needed to perform their functions.

13.3 **Ammunition depots. Ammunition depots are used to store large quantities of**
ammunition for DoD use. Variables that have an influence on the size of these depots
include the types of munitions to be stored and the prescribed safety margins. Different
types of munitions, for instance pyrotechnics and projectiles, are stored in separate
bunkers for safety reasons. Clearly defined safety distances are maintained between
bunkers, as well as on the perimeter.

13.4 **Weapon ranges. The size of weapon ranges is determined by the maximum**
application distance and safety arcs of weapons to be employed.

13.5 **Naval bases. The size of these facilities is to a large extent determined by the**
amount of infrastructure needed to perform their function and to allow for the training of
personnel.


-----

13.6 **Air Force bases. Apart from runways and infrastructure provision, a large number**
of variables, such as restricted air space, aerial approach zones, safety areas on the
perimeter and radio frequency requirements, are taken into account in determining the
size of an air force base.

13.7 Telecommunication installations. A major consideration in determining the size of
telecommunication installations is the required presence of a magnetically clear spectrum
around the facilities.

13.8 **Rifle ranges. Rifle ranges are designed and established according to a set of**
clearly defined guidelines. Variables which might come into play include land use
activities on adjacent properties and the distance from residential infrastructure.

14. Map 3 (Map 3: Defence land allocated to the Arms of Service) shows the spatial distribution
of the larger DoD properties, and also provides an indication of their relative size. The legend to
the numbering used on this map is the same as reflected in the preceding map. Table 2 indicates
the category into which the facilities fall. This table accounts for approximately 422 000 hectares
which represents 86 per cent of the total DoD property portfolio. The remaining 14 per cent is
made up of numerous smaller properties.

**PRIMARY FUNCTION** **NUMBER ON MAP** **SIZE**

Training Areas 7, 12, 13, 15, 19, 20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 335 144 ha

31, 33, 34, 37, 39, 41, 43, 46, 47, 48, 49, 51, 53,

Military Bases 56.
Ammunition Depots 2, 3, 4, 35. 11 117 ha
Weapons Ranges 1, 16, 23, 40. 55 910 ha
Naval Bases 18, 22, 42. 1 575 ha
Air Force Bases 8, 55. 11 738 ha
Telecommunication Installations 10, 14, 44, 50. 3 085 ha
Rifle Ranges 6, 36, 38. 2 729 ha

5, 24, 45, 54.

**TOTAL** **422 220 ha**

Table 2: Distribution of primary functions of DoD terrains
**General considerations taken into account in determining the size of DoD land**

15. A number of less well-defined variables applies when determining the actual size of
land acquired for DoD purposes.

15.1 **Size of properties on offer or available. When State Land becomes**
available for DoD use, the size might exceed minimum departmental needs. The
properties constituting this land may be of such a nature that sub-divisions are
deemed detrimental to future non-DoD utilisation of the land. The same principles
come into play when land is acquired on the open market.

15.2 Sustainable area of land. The principles of sustainable use are adhered to in
determining the area of land needed for DoD purposes, for example rotational use
of different portions of the property to allow for regeneration of vegetation.
Larger portions of land are usually be required in semi-arid areas than in areas of
a higher rainfall and more vibrant vegetation in order to execute the same DoD
activities.

15.3 Maintaining the spatial integrity of land. The spatial integrity of land, with
regard to previous and current utilisation practices in the surrounding areas, must

|PRIMARY FUNCTION|NUMBER ON MAP|SIZE|
|---|---|---|
|Training Areas Military Bases Ammunition Depots Weapons Ranges Naval Bases Air Force Bases Telecommunication Installations Rifle Ranges|7, 12, 13, 15, 19, 20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34, 37, 39, 41, 43, 46, 47, 48, 49, 51, 53, 56. 2, 3, 4, 35. 1, 16, 23, 40. 18, 22, 42. 8, 55. 10, 14, 44, 50. 6, 36, 38. 5, 24, 45, 54.|335 144 ha 922 ha 11 117 ha 55 910 ha 1 575 ha 11 738 ha 3 085 ha 2 729 ha|
|TOTAL||422 220 ha|


-----

be maintained. This implies that land no longer needed for DoD purposes should
be handed back in a condition that favours previous and current utilisation
practices in the surrounding areas. In the case of agriculture, subdividing existing
economically viable properties to fit minimum DoD requirements would be
inappropriate.

15.4 **Topography. The topography of a region where a DoD facility is to be**
established has an effect on the size of the property. For example, it may be
necessary to acquire larger portions of land to obtain sufficiently large, relatively
flat areas of land when a clear line of fire is required.

**Factors which have an influence on the location of DoD properties**

16. Location has an influence on the area of land needed to execute the DoD function.
The location of DoD land is determined by a number of factors:

16.1 Command responsibility
16.2 Strategic considerations
16.3 Distance from infrastructure
16.4 Accessibility
16.5 Availability of state land
16.6 Socio-economic considerations
16.7 Regional development considerations
16.8 Climatology
16.9 Altitude
16.10 Environmental considerations

17. The approved Force Design of the transformed DoD will serve as the basis for
considering the logistic support requirements of the department. This re-definition of core
military activities and design will subsequently influence existing military land and
facilities. This may result in land and facilities that are redundant and the disposal thereof
will have a right-sizing effect on the DoD’s facility and land portfolio.

**_Disposal of DoD land and facilities_**

18. The Department of Public Works is responsible for providing and managing land and
facilities for other government departments. This entails acquisition, leasing,
administration and disposal of all State Land in South Africa. State Land which is surplus
to the requirements of other government departments is usually handed back to the
Department of Public Works.

19. As extensive rationalisation is anticipated in view of the DoD’s transformational
goals, the handing over and subsequent disposal of redundant state land will need to take
place in a coordinated manner. As discussed above, the new force design will provide the
planning framework for determining the nature and extent of rationalisation.

20. In October 1997, Cabinet approved proposals to establish two inter-departmental
committees to deal with various aspects of base closure, conversion and the disposal of


-----

redundant defence land. Further proposals will be tabled with Cabinet for its
consideration as this process develops.

**Challenges in the closure of defence facilities**

21. The closure of military bases presents both opportunities and serious challenges.
Some of the major problems associated with military base closure are the following:

21.1 The loss of employment opportunities in the military and associated
industries as well as within local supporting economies.

21.2 Some military properties are environmentally contaminated and often require
very costly clean-up operations.

21.3 Maintenance and protection of the bases before reuse or ultimate disposal
can be costly.

22. The development opportunities arising from the reuse of bases can be plentiful
depending on the geographic location and infrastructure of the base concerned.
Developmental factors will be a major consideration taken into account when evaluating
the various land use and conversion options for redundant bases.

23. Base closure is a complex issue requiring careful consideration of processes, role
players and time frames. The complexity of the issue is such that it would be premature
to try to finalise the process of disposal or give an indication of which bases are to close
within the time frame of the Defence Review. It is envisaged that the process will be
taken forward through interdepartmental committees which will:

23.1 Analyse the Defence Force’s property holdings and utilisation and align
these to the DoD’s strategic direction and rationalisation imperatives. This will be
executed within the ambit of the line function of the Department of Defence and
the oversight function of parliamentary committees.

23.2 Develop a strategic plan that will locate military base conversion within
micro and macro economic development and other policies of government.

23.3 Contextualise base reuse within the broader context of defence downsizing
and the transformation of South African society.

23.4 Assess the existing resources, opportunities and constraints presented by
individual or collective properties.

23.5 Collect and collate baseline data relating to each property’s reuse abilities
and time frames.

23.6 Compile feasibility studies pertaining to various potential uses and users.

23.7 Provide a real estate and general marketing service for base reuse.

23.8 Act as a focal point for facilitating all stakeholders interested in and affected
by base closure and reuse.


-----

23.9 Monitor and evaluate base reuse.

**Multiple use of DoD facilities**

24. The maintenance of DoD facilities is costly. There is great pressure on the department
to become more cost-effective in its facilities management, while at the same time
ensuring that it does not lose its autonomy and proficiencies. The reduced defence budget
necessitates that alternative ways of financing maintenance be explored, especially as
most facilities were developed for a higher frequency of use than is currently
experienced. In particular, the conscription of National Servicemen is no longer taking
place and the number of aircraft in the South African Air Force has almost halved.
Certain elements of the DoD (for example, hospitals, training centres, runways) have to
be strategically distributed across South Africa so that in many cases bases will be
downsized rather than closed.

25. Under-developed land and under-utilised facilities can be made available for other
uses, providing there is coherence with existing defence facilities and DoD activities are
not compromised. The principal restricting factor in this regard is security and safety. In
many cases, alternative use will require a portion of land or facilities to be isolated from
the main defence activities.

26. Several requests from the private sector for the co-use of defence facilities have been
received in recent years. The South African Air Force has approved the co-use of AFB
Hoedspruit by the private sector. The objective of these development ventures is to
minimise the cost of managing these facilities and to improve the infrastructure without
drawing on additional state funds.

27. The DoD will enter into joint ventures with developers to ensure maximum utilisation
of Defence Endowment Property. By law, both the Ministers of Defence and of Finance
have to approve all forms of re-use of endowment property.

**_Land claims and restitution_**

28. The Restitution of Land Rights Act was approved by Parliament in 1994 and the
Commission on Restitution of Land Rights was established in 1995. By the end of
January 1997, 13 520 claims had been lodged, of which 10 507 were urban ones. The
DoD is affected as certain restitution claims have been made against defence land.

29. The Government has set itself the following time limits (as set out in the White Paper
on Land): a three year period for the lodgement of claims; a five year period for the
Commission and the Court to finalise all claims; a ten-year period for the implementation
of all court orders.

30. The restitution process provides a framework and various options which can be used
to arrive at an appropriate solution through negotiation by the parties or adjudication by
the Land Claims Court. Restitution can take the following forms: restoration of the land
from which claimants were dispossessed; provision of alternative land; payment of
compensation; alternative relief including a package containing a combination of the


-----

above, sharing of the land, or special budgetary assistance such as services and
infrastructure development where claimants presently live; or priority access to state
resources in the allocation and the development of housing and land in the appropriate
development programme.

**Principles guiding the DoD**

31. The DoD has accepted the following principles to guide the resolution of restitution
claims.

31.1 The DoD reaffirms its commitment to the Constitution and the Land reform
programme of the Government.

31.2 A pro-active approach towards restitution is adopted.

31.3 Preference will be given to the restoration of land rather than other forms of
restoration.

31.4 The DoD is committed to a speedy resolution of restitution cases.

31.5 Creative alternatives need to be explored in cases where land cannot be
restored.

31.6 The DoD will not insist on alternative land being made available in cases
where defence land is handed back to claimants, but will assess its requirements
in terms of the core functions and activities of the department, i.e. no settlement
will be dependent on the automatic substitution of land for land.

31.7 The DoD is committed to transparency in this process.

31.8 The DoD is committed to the resolution of land claims through negotiations
and will only use the Land Claims Court as a last resort.

31.9 Any need for alternative land for the DoD arising from settlement transfers
will be determined consensually amongst all relevant government departments
and ministries on the basis of the line function of the DoD.

31.10 The land under claim will be made available for restitution unless the
Department of Defence deems it not feasible. This non-feasibility could be due to
the fact that :

      - It might not be financially cost- effective

      - The specific location of the facility might be unique in terms of military
requirements

      - The facility might be in the national interest from a strategic point of
view.

32. All relevant state departments involved in any particular restitution claim decide on
the state’s position with respect to the claim. The Department of Land Affairs conducts


-----

all negotiations with the Land Claims Commissioner and the claimants on behalf of the
state.

33. A summary of Department of Defence land subject to restitution claims is reflected in
Appendix 3 (Appendix 3: Restitution claims against the SANDF as at 6 May 1998).
These claims have been submitted for evaluation to the Land Claims Commissioner. The
largest area already restituted to claimants is Riemvasmaak, measuring approximately
70,000 hectares. The DoD has also decided, in principle, to vacate the Schmidtsdrift and
Mosita areas. The vacating of Schmidtsdrift is dependent on resolving the acquisition of
alternative land between the Departments of Land Affairs and Public Works.

**_Environmental management_**

34. The DoD’s Environmental Services function, which was established in 1977, aims to
ensure the environmentally sustainable management of military activities and facilities.
An early emphasis on conservation of military training areas has expanded into a more
advanced and comprehensive approach of military integrated environmental
management. This means that the planning and execution of military activities takes into
account the impact it will have on the environment.

35. The department is currently in the process of formally implementing military
integrated environmental management over the whole spectrum of military activities at
all military training areas to ensure that these activities do not jeopardise the long-term
potential of land and other natural resources. One way of doing so is by formulating and
implementing an environmental management plan for each training area in which training
activities, environmental constraints and environmental management are integrated.

**Clean-up of training areas**

36. Military training activities have a variety of environmental impacts on land, water or
air. One of these impacts is the contamination of training land with unexploded ordnance
(UXO), shrapnel, targets and remains, as well as general waste. UXO can pose direct
health risks to personnel as well as civilians entering contaminated land, while all forms
of waste or pollution threaten the integrity of the physical environment and natural
resources. Such contamination may restrict current military utilisation of the land, as well
as sustained future military use and current or future non-military utilisation.

37. Current ad hoc instructions and procedures, mainly based on safety considerations,
make provision for the regular clearing of training areas immediately after training
exercises, as well as on an annual basis. This entails the clearing of all UXO and other
debris which is detected visually. The DoD is currently in the process of drawing up more
comprehensive corporate policy and guidelines to include underlying principles,
environmental considerations, the standardisation of cleanup practices, the formulation
and execution of waste management plans, the establishment of liaison forums, the
introduction of community education programs, and the issuing of a Land Environmental
Quality Statement when properties are disposed of.

**Graves and burial sites**

38. Some of the areas under military control contain burial sites. Relatives and
descendants are allowed to visit these graves when training activities permit and with due


-----

regard to their safety. The DoD has always been very sensitive in this regard and this
practice will continue. An inventory of all graves on military controlled areas is being
compiled. Standardised procedures regarding access to such burial sites on military
properties are currently being drafted.

**External environmental expertise**

39. The DoD has been participating in external environmental forums since the 1970’s.
This ensures that the department’s environmental policy and activities are consistent with
national environmental policy, and promotes co-operation with environmental bodies.

40. Since 1993 the DoD has initiated Military Environmental Advisory Forums to enlist
the support of external experts in the management of military properties. In some areas
these forums are well established, and it is the department’s intention to extend this
initiative to cover all military properties.

**_Conclusion_**

41. By effectively integrating environmental considerations into the planning and execution of all
military activities, the DoD can minimise the adverse effects of its activities as well as make a
substantial contribution towards the conservation and sustainable utilisation of environmental
resources in South Africa.


-----

# Chapter 13

**South African Defence Review 1998**

#### The Acquisition Management Process
###### Introduction

1. The White Paper on Defence forms the basis for the Defence Review.

2. The White Paper on Defence, as approved by Parliament on 14 May 1996, states that
the SANDF will be a balanced, modern, affordable and technologically advanced military
force, cpable of executing its tasks effectively and efficiently (Chapter 2: para 11.7). It
further states that:

2.1 The government will not endanger the lives of military personnel through the
provision of inadequate or inferior weapons and equipment (Chapter 3: para
43.6).

2.2 The SANDF has to maintain a core defence capability because of the inherent
unpredict-ability of the future. Such capability cannot be created from scratch if
the need suddenly arises. The maintenance and development of weapons systems
is necessarily a long-term endeavour (Chapter 4: para 6.2).

2.3 Deterrence requires the existence of a defence capability which is sufficiently
credible to inhibit potential aggressors. Although South Africa is not confronted
by any foreseeable external military threat, this capability cannot be turned on and
off like a tap. It is therefore necessary to maintain a core defence capability
(Chapter 5: para 7). A core defence capability includes a balanced and sustainable
nucleus with, amongst other features, the maintenance and, where necessary, the
adequate and appropriate upgrading or replacement of equipment and weaponry
(Chapter 5: para 8).

2.4 The services of an efficient defence industry are required to maintain, upgrade
and, where necessary, replace weapons and equipment of the SANDF. The
industry will permit the cost-effective purchase of certain products and systems,
ensure life-cycle maintenance and support of such systems, and perform
refurbishment and upgrades of existing equipment (Chapter 8: para 3). However,
the defence equipment required by the SANDF cannot and should not be procured
exclusively from the local industry. Many complex systems cannot be produced
domestically and will have to be imported. Management expertise for the
specialised procurement functions is located within the DoD (Chapter 8: para 5).

3. The Defence Review will also address the strategic and technical implications of the
constitutional provision that the SANDF will be "primarily defensive in the exercise or
performance of its powers and functions" (Chapter 5, para 11).

4. For a more detailed reference guide to aspects addressed in the White Paper, referring
to the industry, see Appendix A.


-----

5. The White Paper on Science and Technology, Preparing for the 21st Century, states
that the essence of the new strategy of the SANDF is to convert the current force into a
small, but technologically more capable one. Refer to Appendix A for a more detailed
extract from the White Paper, referring to defence technology.

**_Defining the Defence Industry_**

6. For the purpose of the Defence Review, the South African defence industry is defined
as those sectors of organisations in the public and private sector, commercial companies
and business units of such companies, mainly involved in the electronic, mechanical,
aerospace, maritime and chemical sectors of the manufacturing industry, which are,
directly or indirectly, active in research, design, development, production, assembly, test,
evaluation, upgrading, procurement, export, import, maintenance, logistic support, human
support and project management, of goods and services for security forces, local and
overseas.

**_Department of Defence Requirements_**
**Core Defence Capabilities**

7. Defence contingencies, posture and finally the characteristics required in the core
defence capability of the SANDF, eventually lead to those specific capabilities which
should be provided for in such a force. These capabilities are:

7.1 Intelligence is an overarching capability required by the SANDF (both
strategic and tactical).

7.2 Landward defence capabilities to counter attacks from over land. These forces
should be mobile and largely self-contained.

7.3 Air defence capabilities to counter air attacks, including both fighter-based
capabilities, as well as localised anti-aircraft defence capabilities.

7.4 Maritime defence capabilities to counter attack from seaward and attacks on
seaward trade, including mine clearance capabilities and capabilities to act against
air, surface and submarine attacks.

7.5 Defence against chemical and biological warfare (CBW) with the emphasis on
detection of CBW agents and the protection and decontamination of forces and
equipment.

7.6 Once operations have begun, the SANDF should have an interdict capability
for interdiction on the battlefield.

7.7 On halting enemy aggression, the SANDF must have a counter- attack
capability to drive the enemy from own or friendly territory.

8. Command and Control (C & C) is critical to the effective execution of the self- defence
function at all levels. This is required at individual Arms of Service as well as joint C &
C. Emphasis should be placed on electronic warfare and command information systems.


-----

9. The SANDF must maintain an effective supporting capability which includes
operational medical support, operational logistics support, land, air and sea transport and
operational personnel services to ensure the high morale of soldiers engaged in
operations.

**Categories of Local Support Required**

10. A local industry capability to support the SANDF, can be divided into three
categories.

10.1 **Strategically Essential. Technological capabilities can be classified**
strategically essential if they potentially satisfy a unique environment-dependent
need which cannot be satisfied through procurement of standard equipment,
provide an operational winning edge, or ensure self-sufficiency in technologies
for which high-priority operational requirements exist, but which are effectively
unavailable to the RSA due to political, economic and other considerations.

10.2 **Cost-Effective Local Sourcing and Export. Due to already established**
local capability, where the RSA has a global competitive edge, certain niche
systems are more cost-effective, over the life cycle of the system, to source
locally than to buy them from foreign suppliers. These capabilities can ensure
faster turn-round times for the servicing or upgrading of systems, battle damage
repair, lead to import replacement (i.e. foreign exchange savings and local
employment) and to export opportunities.

10.3 **Non-Strategic Capabilities. Some components, sub-systems and systems**
are neither strategically essential nor economically viable to source locally. In
these cases, the local capability should be to understand and support these systems
in order to enable informed specification and selection, and to maintain and
upgrade them locally with support from the overseas supplier.

11. Within the context of the above categories, the SANDF’s requirements for
technological support capabilities are described hereunder.

**SANDF Requirements for Local Industry Support Capabilities**
**_Strategically Essential Capabilities._**

12. Capabilities that will provide the SANDF with a distinct combat advantage: The latest
generation equipment is often not available from foreign suppliers, or where available,
their combat effectiveness is reduced through the common knowledge of their
performance characteristics and counter-measure susceptibility. Examples of strategic
systems requiring self-sufficiency in local design, development and production
capabilities are:

12.1 Command and control systems.

12.2 Secure communications systems.

12.3 Electronic warfare systems.

12.4 Fusing systems for missiles, bombs, projectiles.


-----

12.5 Sea mines.

13. Capabilities to ensure the survival of combat platforms. Battle tanks, fighter aircraft,
attack helicopters, combat vessels, etc. need a self protection capability to survive enemy
attack. Examples of such requirements are:

13.1 Surveillance and threat detection systems.

13.2 Short-range air-to-air missiles.

13.3 Point defence surface-to-air missiles for naval vessels.

13.4 Ground-based air-defence systems.

13.5 Minor calibre guns.

13.6 Armour protection capabilities.

13.7 Camouflage and other signature control capabilities to reduce platform
observability.

13.8 Electronic counter-measures (ECM).

13.9 IFF (Identification of Friend or Foe) systems.

14. Capabilities to satisfy unique, environment-dependent needs: Equipment available
from foreign suppliers is often not optimized for local use due to our different climatic
conditions (hot, dry, dusty), terrain features, existing equipment, human factors or
operational doctrines. The ability to develop equipment or to adapt bought-out equipment
to suit the SANDF’s requirements locally is therefore essential. Such capabilities include:

14.1 Ergonomic design, i.e. the design of man-machine interfaces such as driver
cabins, cockpits, gun control mechanisms, etc. to suit future SANDF operators.

14.2 Engine performance enhancement, i.e. the ability to develop or adapt engine
sub-systems, such as cooling systems, dust filters and air conditioning to fit local
climatic conditions.

14.3 Vehicle mobility upgrades - local terrain characteristics demand the use of
wheeled (rather than tracked) combat vehicles, requiring specific attention to
tyres, suspension and drive train performance.

14.4 The integration of new or improved weapons, sensors or other systems on
SAAF aircraft requires specialised aerodynamic, electromagnetic interference and
structural dynamics expertise in order to qualify the combined systems and
release them to service. Similar expertise is required for the integration of any
new systems on vessels, tanks, command and control systems, etc.

14.5 The development or adaptation of medical equipment to suit local conditions
and SANDF operational requirements as well as for support of peacekeeping or
peace support operations or disaster relief.


-----

15. Capabilities to detect and counter rapidly emerging threats require a flexible
engineering capability to develop a variety of systems and counter-measures to fit an
evolving force design and threat assessment. Systems with such capabilities include:

15.1 Reconnaissance and surveillance systems, including unmanned aircraft.

15.2 Air space control systems which include advanced radar systems and sensor
fusion technologies.

15.3 Multi-purpose stand-off weapons.

15.4 Chemical and biological defence, including the ability to detect and identify
hazardous agents, to protect soldiers against, and to decontaminate equipment of
such agents.

16. Capabilities to maintain and upgrade equipment currently in service with the SANDF.
The maintenance of existing equipment in a serviceable state, or the upgrading of
equipment in order to extend the useable life-time, requires specialised technological
capabilities in industry. Major systems for which long-term maintenance support
capabilities are required include the following:

16.1 All aircraft and helicopters.

16.2 All combat vehicles.

16.3 155mm Gun systems and Multiple Rocket Launchers (MRL), including
upgrades to their ballistic characteristics.

16.4 Tanks and armoured cars.

16.5 All command, control and communications systems, including radars,
computers, etc.

16.6 All guided weapons systems.

16.7 Combat vessels.

16.8 The ability to upgrade or alter specific sub-systems and components in
selected areas (e.g. the implementation of repairs to jet engines outside the
original engine manufacturer’s (OEM) specifications).

16.9 The ability to repair battle damage to a wide variety of weapon systems.

17. Requirement for a technology and knowledge base in the defence industry: The cost
and complexity of most modern military equipment demand a sound technology base in
industry to support the SANDF to operate and deploy such equipment in the most
effective way. Capabilities required include:

17.1 Systems engineering capability for a broad range of weapon systems. (i.e. a
thorough scientific understanding of the functional characteristics of all the sub

-----

systems and their complex interactions, which make up the characteristics of the
overall system.)

17.2 Modelling and simulation capabilities, which are indispensable tools for the
analysis and design of complex systems.

17.3 The capability to test and evaluate at various levels of systems complexity is
essential for all new or improved equipment in order to verify performance to
specification, irrespective of whether such equipment originated from local or
foreign sources. This requires specialist expertise and test facilities.

17.4 The capability to specify equipment requirements. In order to ensure that the
DoD will remain an intelligent buyer of military equipment from foreign and local
sources, the aforementioned capabilities - to analyse the needs, to specify the right
equipment and to verify conformance to requirements - are all essential. The
purchase of systems as complex and as expensive as modern combat vessels,
fighter aircraft or battle tanks cannot be done solely on the basis of marketing
information.

**_Cost-Effective Local Sourcing of Non-Strategic Equipment_**

18. System requirements for which local capabilities exist and for which local sourcing
will be considered on a life-cycle cost basis, include:

18.1 Electronic and electrical components and subsystems, including computers.

18.2 Electro-optical equipment such as night vision systems.

18.3 Ammunition for selected weapons; bombs, mortars, etc.

18.4 Small arms.

18.5 Vehicles.

18.6 Small boats.

18.7 Diving support equipment.

18.8 Navigation systems.

18.9 Military engineering equipment.

**_Non-Strategic Capabilities_**

19. Some systems are neither strategically critical nor economically viable to source
locally. In these cases, the local capability should be to understand and support these
systems in order to enable informed specification and selection, and to maintain and
upgrade them locally with the support of an overseas supplier, e.g.:

19.1 Hulls and propulsion machinery for naval vessels

19.2 Medium and large calibre naval gun systems


-----

19.3 Complete airframes and engines for fighter aircraft

19.4 Hulls and propulsion systems for battle tanks

19.5 Specialized ground support equipment for aircraft.

**_DoD policy for the Defence industry_**

20. The SANDF requires the services of an efficient defence industry to address the
needs of the SANDF for maintenance, upgrading and where necessary, the replacement
of its weapons and equipment. The industry will ensure the cost-effective purchase of
certain products and systems, ensure the life-cycle maintenance and support of such
systems, and perform refurbishment and upgrades of existing equipment.

21. The DoD is by far the largest, and in many cases, the only client of the defence
industry. Most of the products produced by the industry are also developed to the specific
requirements of the SANDF. The SANDF funds a large portion (approximately 50%) of
research and development spending in the industry and therefore owns much of the
immaterial rights of the products manufactured in the industry. The SANDF also
contracts a large portion of the logistic and operational support of its equipment to the
industry. The technology and know-how and capacity for the maintenance of the weapon
systems and supply of services such as informatics, command and control, etc., resides
within the industry. This makes the industry part of the SANDF’s logistic and operational
capability and capacity, during peace and war.

22. The industry is also controlled by Government in terms of conventional arms control
measures and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, i.e. national policy.

23. The defence industry is also part of the larger industrial base of the RSA and as such,
participates and is guided by national industrial policy.

24. The defence industry is, however, part of the SANDF’s logistic and operational
capability. The DoD, in its strategic planning, has the responsibility to determine and
ensure the required technology, services and industrial capacity and capability it requires
from industry, i.e. departmental policy.

25. The defence industry is therefore regulated and supported by both national and
departmental strategy and policy. Most of these strategies, guidelines and policy already
exist (refer to the Policy Environment section of this chapter). These policies, however,
need to be placed in context, coordinated and support each other.

26. Policy is dynamic. There is at present a policy environment regulating and guiding
the SANDF and the industry in place. Policy is also in the process of development.

27. This document takes all present DoD strategies, guidelines and policies into
consideration.

28. A White Paper on the SA Defence Industry is currently being drafted and will be
submitted to Parliament for acceptance and approval during 1998.


-----

**_DoD acquisition policy_**
**Acquisition Management Policy**

29. The Joint Standing Committee on Defence makes recommendations on the defence
budget, functioning, organisation, armaments, policy, morale and state of preparedness of
the SANDF and performs other functions related to parliamentary supervision of the
defence force.

30. For the SANDF to carry out its primary role, the availability of armaments is
essential. Optimal modern armaments for the SANDF are obtained through a process of
armament acquisition. This section describes the approach to be followed by members of
the DoD and Armscor in the acquisition of armaments.

31. This entails the management of the total spectrum of activities to be carried out by the
participating organisations within the defence family to meet the armament requirements
that will ensure that the SANDF has the necessary user systems for maintaining a
combat-ready capability. The four role players involved in armaments acquisition are the
Minister of Defence, the Secretary for Defence, the Chief of the National Defence Force,
and the Chairman of Armscor. They are partners and decision-making at all levels allows
for the viewpoints of the four partners. Armscor will be the acquisition agency of the
DoD. Control bodies in the process allow for participation by nominated members of the
partnership.

**The Role of the MoD and the DoD HQ**

32. The ultimate political authority and responsibility for theacquisition function rests
with the Minister of Defence. The Minister of Defence is responsible for the defence
function of Government and is accountable to the President, the Cabinet and Parliament
for the management and execution of this function. The Arms of Service Chiefs are
responsible for stating the armaments requirements of the Defence Force which are
approved by the Minister. These stated requirements are satisfied through the acquisition
of optimised user systems and final acceptance of these systems against the stated needs
in a procurement plan.

33. The Chief of the SANDF states and specifies the equipment and services it requires to
fulfil its specified obligations, roles, functions and tasks. The arms of service participate
in the various acquisition planning and approval forums as the users of the equipment and
services.

34. The Secretary for Defence is responsible for ensuring that all acquisition activities are
executed within national objectives, policies and constraints. The Secretary is
furthermore primarily responsible for high level programming and budgeting and in-year
control and auditing of defence expenditure, and also for inter-departmental and political
and industrial co-ordination. The Secretary is the Accounting Officer of the DoD. The
Secretary will perform such duties and functions as may be necessary for civil control of
the defence acquisition function and to enhance parliamentary and ministerial control
over SANDF acquisition programmes.

35. The Departmental Acquisition and Procurement Division (DAPD), consists of an HQ
division, responsible for specialist acquisition/procurement, to ensure the acquisition of


-----

equipment and services on behalf of the DoD. The chief of DAPD and his support staff
are responsible for directing and co-ordinating all acquisition and procurement activities
between the Arms of Service and Armscor. DAPD serves as a single nodal point between
DoD and Armscor. Chief of DAPD is the process leader for acquisition and procurement
of Category 1 and Category 2 items within the DoD. The Chief of Acquisition is also the
chief policy adviser to the Head of the DoD on acquisition matters and reports to the
Secretary for Defence.

36. Armscor is the acquisition agency of the DoD, responsible for professional
programme management and the drafting of tender documentation for the contracting of
industry on behalf of DAPD during the execution of armament acquisition programmes.
This is in order to ensure that technical, financial and legal integrity in contract
management is in accordance with DAPD requirements. The DoD and Armscor will
jointly oversee industrial development of the industry in order to support DoD acquisition
programmes.

**Acquisition Management**

37. Within the framework of defence management, the acquisition function satisfies the
need to provide armaments to the SANDF. Defence management seeks the optimum
combinations of personnel and equipment which will provide the maximum defence
capability for available funds. A structured decision-making and authorisation process for
the acquisition of armaments by means of baseline management and consequent phased
contracting is followed, resulting in transparency and accountability. The armament
acquisition process is fundamentally a systems engineering process, requiring good
programme management.

38. Program management requires the management of many logistic, technical, financial
and legal disciplines such as engineering, resource management, contracting, quality
assurance and design assurance. To cope with the many acquisition functions, project
teams will, where appropriate, consist of members from Armscor, the SANDF, and the
Defence Secretary (DoD Acquisition Division). The appointed project officer will be the
project team leader. The project teams shall consist of members from the arms of service
and Armscor allocated to DAPD and shall preferably be collocated under DAPD.

**Requirements Planning**

39. The Defence Budget is a result of a sequence of events. The Defence Policy is
described in the White Paper on Defence. The Defence Review was compiled from the
White paper on Defence. This Defence Review spells out what tasks the SANDF is
required to execute, what course(s) of action and with what force structure and force
support the SANDF can afford to execute these tasks. These planned activities will be
converted into programmes to ensure that personnel and equipment are maintained in an
orderly and economical fashion. Finally, annual budgets will be developed in such a
manner as to be able to manage the allocated finances in an audit-able and efficient
manner. The process of requirements planning therefore consists of three distinct actions,
planning, programming and budgeting, which are executed through an iterative process.

**Inter-relationships**


-----

40. Through acquisition management, a balance is maintained between technology
development, design development, industrial development and international marketing.
The process is guided by departmental policies, procedures and practices. To achieve the
lowest cost of acquisition and to maintain production technology, it is essential to
increase production quantities (economies of scale). Since the quantities required by the
SANDF are generally small, increases in quantities can only be achieved by international
marketing and export. Government and the defence family have a direct interest in the
successful export of armaments.

**Acquisition Management Process**

41. Technology development and industrial development are closely related to armament
acquisition and are therefore part of the overall acquisition process. The model used for
structuring the armament acquisition management process allows for sequential and
parallel phases separated by formalised baselines. Underlying the above phased approach
is the systems engineering process. This process systematically translates functional
needs stated by the operational user into technical design and manufacturing parameters.
It also ensures that, parallel to the functional process, all other stakeholders and interest
groups are kept involved. This process is managed by appointed project teams,
representing all members of the DoD and Armscor. A project team is responsible for the
execution of a project and for the submission of project milestone documents, as
prescribed, to the approval committees and boards for acquisition programmes.

42. The approval structure for project submissions consists of three levels. The highest
level of approval for acquisition is the Armament Acquisition Council (AAC) (chaired by
the Minister of Defence). The final selection of the equipment and supplier, as well as
monetary commitments for Cardinal Projects, is undertaken at this level (Cardinal
Projects are defined as those worth R80 million or more, as well as projects with political
implications). The AAC will identify major armaments procurement projects that will be
presented to Parliament for appoval. The second level of approval for acquisition is the
Armament Acquisition Steering Board (AASB) (chaired by the Secretary for Defence).
This board approves non-Cardinal projects and screens Cardinal projects. The selection
of the successful contractor and monetary commitments for non-Cardinal projects and the
screening of the successful contractor and monetary commitments for Cardinal projects is
undertaken at this level. The Armament Acquisition Control Board (AACB) (chaired by
the Chief of Acquisition), is the third level of control and screens all projects and all other
routine programmes in terms of requirements and amendments. The present constitutions
of the above forums will have to change to reflect the new participants of the newlystructured MoD and DoD HQ.

43. The Armscor Board serves as a decision-making board for tender adjudication and
ensures that all contractual obligations of project management are in accordance with
national procurement legislation, and that these decisions are made in the best interests of
the state.

44. No approval of any project may be given unless monies have been budgeted for by
the DoD. No placing of contracts may be undertaken unless approved by DAPD.


-----

45. Once projects have been approved by the AAC, AASB and AACB, contracts are
placed on industry for project execution. All such contracts have to then be authorised by
formal Contracts Authorisation Committees with respect to legal, financial and technical
integrity. The composition of these Authorisation Committees must reflect adequate and
appropriate representation of all relevant stakeholders in the acquisition programs and
must include members from Armscor, the SANDF, the Secretary for Defence (MoD
Acquisition Division), and other relevant divisions of the MoD.

46. Organised defence industry should be involved timeously in the acquisition process in
order to ensure local defence industry participation and industrial cost-effective solutions
for the DoD’s requirements.

47. All technical review teams will include, where appropriate, members from Armscor,
DAPD, and the SANDF.

48. All other routine acquisition projects (capital provisioning of spares etc) or
programmes dealing with weapon systems and/or equipment which do not serve before
the AAC, AASB, AACB or DRDB, must obtain Secretary for Defence (DoD Acquisition
Division) approval and support before contracts can be awarded to successful suppliers
by Armscor. The principle of single nodal point between Armscor and DoD through
DAPD must be ad-hered to for all acquisition related activities.

49. The DoD transformation programmes may make further recommendations to the
DoD for the adjustment or changing of the present acquisition approval process as
indicated in the MODAC studies. The MODAC studies must be reviewed to make
recommendations on the roles and functions of the members of the Joint Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Defence in the acquisition approval process. The proposed draft
Green Paper on the State Tender Board Procurement System may necessitate changes to
the process followed thus far by the DoD in its acquisition management process. On
acceptance by Parliament of the proposals of this Green Paper and the final reengineering of the DoD acquisition function, the relevant Armscor Acts must be
reviewed to reflect the new functions and authority of the Armscor Board and the powers
of the corporation.

**Limited Self-Sufficiency in Arms Development**

50. South Africa should not strive for self-sufficiency in arms development, but only
limited self-sufficiency in key areas, as determined during the Defence Review and the
subsequent DoD strategic planning process. Defence industry studies to indicate
development, purchase or partnership options will be executed from time to time.

51. DoD acquisition guidelines will form the basis for defence industry planning.
Technology development will be targeted primarily at those areas where self-sufficiency
is to be maintained. The acquisition guidelines will guide acquisition decisions and will
therefore be included in the value systems for tender evaluation.

**Long-Term Requirements Statement**

52. The DoD may publish an annual Acquisition Master-Plan to indicate all new
acquisition projects required for political approval from the Minister and to inform the


-----

Joint Standing Committee on Defence and Parliament. The Department of Defence will
publish a medium-to long-term Defence Requirements Statement (LTDRS) to guide
long-term technology and industrial planning.

**Domestic Procurement**

53. It could be more cost-effective and operationally expedient to have the technology
and capability to manufacture (if economies of scale can be achieved), upgrade and
maintain equipment locally. Local manufacture allows understanding of the technology
and processes, which again allows modifications to be made to improve serviceability,
turn-round times and operational capability through upgrades, etc. It also has the
advantage of stimulating the local economy through investment and savings on foreign
exchange and in some instances, earn foreign exchange through exports. It also ensures
independence from possible foreign coercion in times of tension. In certain strategic
areas, such as electronic warfare, secure communications, equipment developed
specifically for local conditions, etc., systems and services are not available on the
international market.

54. Preference may therefore be given to the procurement of defence products and
services from local suppliers, providing such procurement represents good value for
money.

**Competitive Procurement**
**_Open Competition_**

55. Fair and open competition will be used as far as is practicable in the procurement of
armaments. This will include the invitation of foreign tenders.

**_Tender Adjudication_**

56. Adjudication of tenders will not necessarily be based on the lowest price, but on value
for money and industrial development goals. Life-cycle costs, DoD requirements, local
industrial development goals, social responsibility (economic empowerment of
previously disadvantaged persons), and subcontracting will be taken into consideration in
the awarding of contracts. The DoD affirmative procurement policy will be administered
by the Secretary for Defence and will be considered during contract negotiations.

57. Where practical and not contrary to commercial confidentiality or security interests,
companies who lost in the tender process should be informed of the reasons.

**_Competition on Sub-Contracts_**

58. Suppliers of major systems or items will be required to allow the maximum amount
of competition on the sub-system and parts level in an offer (i.e. reduce vertical
integration).

**_Bench-marking_**

59. In the adjudication of single source offers, Abench-marking@ against comparable
foreign systems or products should be employed to ensure value for money. The basis for
single-source offers should not include intellectual abilities, technical performance,
previous work performance, additional work requirements, etc. Single-source offers


-----

should only be considered when no other suppliers respond to tender invitations or when
there is a single supplier of specified equipment.

**_Contracts Bulletin and Accredited Suppliers_**

60. Requirements and tenders will be announced for a minimum of 21 days in a monthly
contract bulletin published by Armscor. These bulletins will consist of both electronic
and printed media. The ability of suppliers to meet the technical, schedule, financial and
other contractual requirements of armament acquisition projects will be carefully
evaluated before they are contracted. Rather than repeating the complete evaluation for
every contract, companies that meet the basic requirements will be accredited as defence
suppliers for a five-year period. This procedure will substantially improve the efficiency
of supplier evaluation during the tendering process. All local and foreign companies that
meet the basic requirements, including companies owned and managed by members of
previously-disadvantaged communities, are eligible for accreditation. The accreditation
of companies will be administered by Armscor and jointly approved by the Secretary for
Defence and Armscor. Only companies registered as accredited defence suppliers will be
allowed to compete for defence contracts.

**_Assistance to New Entrants_**

61. Armscor will assist new companies, including companies owned or managed by
members of previously-disadvantaged communities, in planning the development of their
competence to meet the criteria for accreditation. The Secretary for Defence will be
responsible for monitoring and guiding this process to ensure that adequate representation
in the defence industry is achieved.

**_No Preference to Public Sector Suppliers_**

62. There will be no preference for the public sector industry versus the private sector
industry in the allocation of tenders.

**Foreign Procurement**
**_Logistic Support_**

63. Foreign procurement will be considered when a requirement for a new product or
system is at issue or when follow-up requirements for commodities can be satisfied from
abroad. This would require the foreign commodity to be fully interchangeable with the
local equivalent, e.g. ammunition. The logistic support implications of acquiring
imported equipment will be considered in detail.

**_Industrial Participation_**

64. In the case of the import of defence equipment and related items, all contracts with a
value of greater than US$2m and less than US$10m will be subject to a counter-trade
requirement of at least 50%. This counter- trade obligation will be jointly monitored and
implemented by Armscor and the Secretary for Defence (MoD Acquisition Division). All
contracts with a value of greater than $10m will be subject to National Industrial
Participation Policy, which is administered jointly by the Department of Trade and
Industry and the Department of Defence. There is a DoD Industrial Participation policy
(DIP) and a national Industrial Participation policy (IP) that will affect foreign
procurement greater than $10 million. The IP programme will be managed and


-----

administered by the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), while the DIP obligations
will be jointly managed and administered by Armscor and the MoD Acquisition Division.

65. Government has drawn up a national industrial participation policy, while the DoD,
with the DTI, has established a DoD policy.

66. Offshore companies supplying armaments to the SANDF will be encouraged, through
a Local Industrial Participation Programme (counter-trade/offset), to involve local
industry, thereby ensuring maximum local content and support of the Government’s
macro economic growth plan.

**Procurement Programmes**

67. The Joint Standing Committee on Defence will have an oversight function to assist
the DoD in its acquisition programmes. This oversight function will include guidance to
the Department of Defence with respect to timing of tenders, submission of Requests for
Proposals (RFP), counter-trade obligations, value-system, affirmative procurement,
acquisition prioritisation, and the acquisition master-plan. The DoD will submit bi-annual
and ad-hoc reports to the JPSCD on all acquisition activities. The DoD will keep the
JSCD abreast of developments in all its Cardinal acquisition programmes, and will
inform the JSCD at all relevant stages of such acquisition.

**Confidentiality Requirements**

68. The primary sources of reference for determining a transparency policy in respect of
acquisition programmes and exports of armaments are the 1996 Constitution, the
proposed Open Democracy Bill and the White Paper on Defence. A balanced approach
between the right of access to information versus the limitation of rights must be
respected. The Open Democracy Act makes provision for grounds for refusing access to a
record or information in the following circumstances:

68.1 The protection of third party commercial information.

68.2 Defence and security of the Republic.

68.3 Harm to South Africa’s ability to conduct international relations.

68.4 Protection of the economic interests of the Republic and commercial
activities of government bodies.

69. The Constitutional obligation with regard to the right of access to information will be
enforced via the Secretary for Defence.

**Contracting**

70. Contracting will take place at the highest level in the system hierarchy, not excluding
the possibility that contracting can be conducted on lower systems level, thus allowing
for the promotion of previously-disadvantaged contractors. System suppliers will be
contracted for the development, production and maintenance of defence systems. This
will not, however, prevent Armscor and the DoD from contracting suppliers of subsystems, components or materials directly if this proves to be more cost-effective. The


-----

same applies to commercially available equipment, spares and consumable items.
Contracting will always ensure that the best value for money is obtained.

**Tender Adjudication**
**_Value Analysis_**

71. All tender adjudication for armaments will be based on a value analysis methodology
and procedures. This value analysis methodology and procedures will be formulated
jointly by the members of the DoD (DoD Acquisition Division), including Armscor and
organised industry. The value analysis system per project must be approved and
supported by the Secretary for Defence (DAPD). The value analysis system should not be
used to exclude previously-disadvantaged contractors and should not limit national
strategic considerations which can override technical performance parameters. This value
analysis system must be above reproach and should not be a subjective analysis.

**Acquisition Support**

72. On request of the Minister of Defence, Armscor will assist other Government
Departments, the Reconstruction and Development Programme, the United Nations
Organisation, or any other public body, in the acquisition of equipment.

**_Defence technology development policy_**
**The Defence Industry**
**_Process to Determine the Required Industrial Capability_**

73. Local industry development will be promoted where practical and economically
justifiable. Where required by strategic considerations (technical, economic, political),
special organisational solutions will be pursued. It is neither affordable nor necessary to
strive for complete self-sufficiency in armaments production. In certain areas the policy
is to procure overseas, in other areas it is to procure on a competitive basis, while in
certain strategic areas limited self sufficiency is maintained.

**_Needs Analysis_**

74. The need for retaining the appropriate capabilities at the appropriate level to support
the above-mentioned policy is justified from the vantage points described below.

75. Military-strategic importance. From a military-strategic point of view, the defence
industry is a strategic asset. The aim of the defence industry is to ensure the supply of
armaments and services to the SANDF.

76. Military-operational importance. From a military-operational point of view, a local
defence industry has important operational advantages for the SANDF. These fall into
three categories:

76.1 **Technological advantages.** Having access to a local capability, which is
able to implement unique solutions, ensures that a winning edge over adversaries
is possible.


-----

76.2 **Tailor-made equipment.** The RSA has unique climatic, geographic,
demographic and doctrinal circumstances, requiring tailor-made equipment to
operate in this unique environment.

76.3 **Logistic support.** All armaments, whether procured overseas or locally,
require cost-effective logistic support throughout their operational life. A local
capability is the only guarantee that this support will be available as required.

77. **Socio-economic importance. From a** _socio-economic point of view, the defence_
industry contributes significantly to the general standard of technical sophistication of the
local industry and therefore its ability to produce high value-added goods and services.

78. The above aspects are taken into consideration by the DoD and Armscor during the
formal analysi process which determines the required industrial capabilities. The primary
role-players in the process are the SANDF, the Secretary for Defence (DoD Acquisition
Division) and Armscor within the DRDB and AASB structures. As circumstances
change, this analysis is updated.

**Defence Research**
**_The Nature of Defence R&D_**

79. The high risk, advanced technology nature of defence equipment development
programmes, coupled with the current world-wide decline in the production demand for
such equipment, often results in very high development cost to production cost ratios,
making such programmes unattractive for private funding by industry. As a consequence,
the funding of defence research and development programmes by governments is a
world-wide phenomenon.

80. The SANDF currently spends approximately 15 percent of its capital acquisition
budget on local research and development programmes. A comparable figure for the UK
(1994) is 28 percent.

81. Development times for major weapon systems are typically from four to eight years,
after which follows production and commissioning for an operational life of a further 15
to 20 years, before replacement is required. Barring one or two mid-life upgrades, the
supply of spare parts and scheduled maintenance support, the original supplier of the
equipment might therefore have to wait 15 years or more for a major replacement
contract (unless the supplier is able to provide other products or services in the
meantime.)

82. These inherently long time-scales shape the long- term relationship between the DoD,
Armscor and industry. On the one hand, the department must have the assurance that it
can depend on the support of a mature and experienced indstry throughout its product
life-cycle, while on the other hand, industry must have enough insight into and
confidence in the long term plans of the department for it to commit the necessary
resources and to co-invest in such future plans.

83. The DoD and Armscor’s commitment to industry is furthermore based on the
realisation that just as capital assets depreciate, skills and technology also age and
become obsolete (often at a much faster rate than the wear and tear on machines), unless


-----

they are continuously and consciously renewed through specific technology development
efforts. A co-operative effort between the department on the one hand, identifying future
needs for technology (requirement pull) and industry on the other hand, identifying the
future capabilities and opportunities (technology push) could satisfy the anticipated
requirements. As a by-product, such technology development programmes should also
enable industry to field technologically competitive products for export.

**_Core Programmes_**

84. The DoD and Armscor will support, direct and contract the defence industry to run a
limited number of long-term core programmes to enable it to maintain the necessary
width and depth of engineering and production skill to provide support and produce
products for local use and export.

**_Technology Demonstrators_**

85. In selected areas, key technologies will be maintained at an advanced level through
the concept of advanced concept technology demonstrators.

86. The concept requires the almost continuous development and upgrading of prototypes
of new weapons systems with state-of-the-art technology, without necessarily going into
full-scale development or production, unless there is a need for the replacement of
equipment due to age or obsolescence, or for force expansion. This strategy has become
one of the cornerstones of the strategies of major arms producing countries such as the
UK and the USA and has been employed to good effect by South Africa, e.g. the
Rooivalk helicopter, the Tank Technology Demonstrator and Advanced Artillery
Demonstrator.

**_Defence Technology Acquisition Management_**

87. The aim of defence technology acquisition management is to identify technologies on
a long-term prediction basis that will support the future needs of the SANDF and take
into account South Africa’s Foresight Initiatives for advanced technology equipment and
services. This management system will take into account threat analyses and required
operational capabilities arising from the force structure plan and will develop, obtain,
establish and maintain technologies according to certain priorities, for employment
during the acquisition and operation of user systems. Technology management is
regarded as the activity of planning, approval, execution and assurance of technology
establishment projects and plans.

88. The DoD remains committed to the development of new technology in South Africa
and more specifically, to the application of science and technology in industry. The
department is thought to be the largest source of state funding for R&D in the private
sector.

89. To meet the standards of a technologically capable military force, funds need to be
allocated for defence research and development programmes.

90. These programmes will be selected and managed so that a technology base is
sustained within the armaments industry in areas that are of strategic and/or economic
importance to South Africa and that will support the SANDF in:


-----

90.1 The development of new equipment with superior performance.

90.2 Upgrades and life extension programmes for existing equipment.

90.3 Operational problem solving.

90.4 Specification, test and evaluation of sophisticated procured equipment.

90.5 Trend and impact analyses of technology development.

**Management Structures for Technology Development**

91. As regards equipment acquisition programmes, the highest level of approval for
armaments technology acquisition is the AAC, chaired by the Minister of Defence.
Cardinal technology programmes and long-term plans are approved at this level. At the
next level, the Secretary for Defence (as chairperson of the AASB) is responsible for
implementing national technology requirements, for political control over all projects,
and for ensuring that spending in the R&D environment is in keeping with all
Government policies.

92. The structure for the approval of technology development programmes is multilayered (AAC, AASB, DRDB). The Defence Research and Development Board (DRDB)
(chaired by the Chief of Acquisition) and the Armament Technology Acquisition
Secretariat (ATAS) represent the operational level of management, providing detail
structure to all plans and budgets, as well as the management of the execution of
technology development projects. Further organisational structures are deployed by
ATAS to ensure involvement of SANDF user groups, as well as specialist representatives
from industry in the identification and planning phases of programmes.

**_Technology Project Approval_**

93. The DRDB will provide an annual technology acquisition master plan to the
Armaments Acquisition Steering Board (AASB) for approval and recommendation.

94. The Armaments Technology Acquisition Secretariat (ATAS) will screen all
technology project proposals and make recommendations to the Defence Research and
Development Board (DRDB). All policy, financial implications, and control will be
factored into the decision at the ATAS meeting for project funding approval. The
Secretary for Defence DoD Acquisition Division) is responsible for implementing
national technology requirements and for political control over all projects.

95. Contract management and authorisation for contracting of technology development
projects are exactly the same as for equipment acquisition projects.

96. The DoD and Armscor have a well-established structure and system for managing
technology development programmes in accordance with current legislation:

96.1 The system focuses on addressing the future needs of the SANDF.

96.2 It endeavours to involve major R&D contractors in the planning process to
ensure utilisation of expert knowledge.


-----

96.3 It is managed on a payment-for-progress basis, ensuring focus on the end
result, as well as continuous interaction between developer and user.

**Technology Policy Considerations**
**_National Technology Programmes_**

97. The DoD is committed to full co-operation with other Government structures for
science and technology and to provide transparency of its technology development
programmes within the bounds of military security.

98. The National Technology Foresight Initiative should be taken into account by
Department of Defence technology planners when embarking on annual budgeting of
projects. The National Technology Foresight indicators may influence technology drivers
and technology funding to achieve national technology objectives. This exercise may
necessitate mechanisms whereby greater technology spin-offs from the defence
establishment to other Foresight sectors are achieved. Such initiatives are to be directed
and coordinated by the Secretary for Defence.

99. The DoD and Armscor undertake to promote greater collaboration between members
of the DoD and South African universities. Universities, technikons and other previouslydisadvantaged R&D institutions will also be allowed to submit project proposals to
ATAS for work to be contracted directly.

100. The national technology drivers which require the maximisation of spin-off
technologies and greater university involvement in defence technologies spheres, will be
taken into consideration at the annual defence technology planning sessions.

**_Strategic Capabilities_**

101. Technology development in the armaments industry tends to be driven by military
considerations rather than profit motives, with the result that the maintenance of certain
key capabilities becomes a financial burden to private companies. Such capabilities
(which may include specialised test and evaluation facilities such as wind tunnels and
chemical defence evaluation laboratories), which are of strategic importance to the
SANDF and the defence industry, will be grouped in non-profit defence institute(s)
funded by the DoD.

**_Centres of Expertise_**

102. The management of long-term strategic interests such as national defence
technology development programmes, requires the selection of Apreferred suppliers@
and Acentres of expertise@ to achieve the necessary long-term commitment from both
the state and industry to build up and maintain certain levels of expertise. This
commitment will also be evident in the minimum level of funding that is made available
for R&D to maintain the required levels of competence.

**_Annual Reviews_**

103. The Core Defence Technology Programmes will be reviewed annually by the
Armaments Acquisition Council (AAC) under the chairmanship of the Minister of
Defence.

**_Multi-year Budgets_**


-----

104. Defence programmes will be budgeted for on a multi-year basis to ensure continuity
and proper industrial development.

**_Research, Development, Test and Evaluation (RDTE) Facilities_**

105. Strategic non-profitable facilities with limited commercial application could be
retained in the public sector. These include facilities such as specialised defence research
and development facilities, test ranges and test laboratories.

**Immaterial Rights**
**_Ownership_**

106. The state will retain the immaterial rights to state-funded technology and will make
such technology available to any of ts contractors in either the public or private sector, or
sell it to foreign institutions at its discretion.

107. The sale of South African defence industries to foreign industries will require the
approval of the Minister of Defence where such sales will result in the transfer of stateowned technology from the South African industry to the foreign purchaser.

**_Royalties_**

108. The state may invoke its rights to a certain percentage of the value of the contracts
for the export of products or technology where the state paid for the technology or
product development. This decision to invoke a royalty claim rests with the Secretary for
Defence and the members of the AASB. In cases where companies contributed own
funds to R&D projects, the Intellectual Property Rights should be shared between the
company and the State in a pro rata ratio of their respective contributions. In the case of
multi-purpose technology, the company may be required to pay royalties to the state if
the technology is used in commercial applications.

**International Alliances and Partnerships**
**_Government Support_**

109. The Government will enter into agreements with other governments to enable the
industries to co-operate and each government will financially support and maintain its
own industry to enable it to participate in the partnership.

**_Foreign Participation Through Partnerships_**

110. Foreign companies wishing to enter the market will be encouraged to form
partnerships or enter into joint ventures with local companies. Foreign companies are
encouraged to engage with previously-disadvantaged communities or companies to
ensure that all sectors of the community are empowered. The defence industry will form
more alliances with local and foeign businesses to transfer technology and to market
products. DoD consent must be obtained before companies, which have developed and/or
possess technologies funded by SANDF research or development programmes, enter into
any international alliance, partnership or change in ownership.

**_Social responcibility of the industry[1]_**

111. Affirmative Action is defined and used in the context of a deliberate and sustainable
anti-discrimination strategy that owes its existence to the principle of compensatory


-----

justice, equity and fairness in order to redress inequalities and imbalances within the
defence industry beyond simple moral considerations to the realm of reconstruction.

**Economic Empowerment in the Defence Industry**

112. DoD policy will give preference to those companies that have a strong element of
progressive empowerment policies and practices within themselves.

113. Support should be given to capacity-building measures in disadvantaged
communities by the defence-related industries.

114. The defence industry should be committed to affirmative action and in a broader
context, to economic empowermentof previously-disadvantaged groups. This
encompasses redressing the imbalances created by previous practices arising from all
forms of discrimination to include race, gender and disability.

115. The industry should be committed to redressing previously-created imbalances in
the working population of South Africa.

116. The industry should support Government initiatives to encourage previouslydisadvantaged persons as entrepreneurs, owners and managers of productive assets and
wealth.

117. For an affirmative action programme to succeed, an organisational climate
conducive to effectively managing diversity must be created within the defence industry.

118. This affirmative procurement exercise will be guided, monitored and controlled by
the Secretary for Defence (DoD Acquisition Division).

**Environmental Conservation**

119. Before any military industrial facilities for the manufacturing, demolition, test and
evaluation of armaments are established, operated or closed down, a comprehensive
environment management plan will be drawn up and published for public scrutiny.
Companies will be obliged to take all necessary action, at own cost, to conserve the
environment and control pollution of all kinds, inluding noise pollution, to comply with
national legislation.

**_Arms trade_**

120. The South African Government of National Unity has, since its inauguration in May
1994, committed itself to a policy of arms trade and transfer control which would
reinforce and promote South Africa as a responsible producer, possessor and trader in this
field.

121. South Africa is convinced that effective and responsible arms trade and transfer
control practices will contribute to bringing about international peace and security,
particularly for the states of the sub-region and the continent of Africa.

122. Conventional arms trade and transfer and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, control principles and criteria have consequently been established to ensure
that South Africa’s policy on this issue conforms to internationally accepted norms and


-----

practices. (Guide to the Terms of reference of Conventional Arms Control, dated 1 May
1996 and the Non- Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction Act No 87 of 1993)

123. South Africa is committed to a policy of responsibility and accountability in the
trade and transfer of all arms. This policy on transparency in armaments exports reflects,
in particular, South Africa’s commitment to promoting international peace and security,
its adherence to international arms control and disarmament agreements and respect for
fundamental human rights and freedoms.

124. Arms trade and transfer will be governed by foreign policy and national security
interests, a system of permit adjudication, arms classification, and a specific code of
conduct relating to the criteria applied when considering trade with and transfer to
countries in this respect.

125. As South Africa is a signatory to various international arms control and nonproliferation agreements, it exercises a dual process for the purposes of control of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and of other arms and related dual-use
capabilities that could be used in the development and production of weapons of mass
destruction and/or conventional arms. This will require that in some cases, application
will have to be made, by the industry, for a dual permit to be issued by the specific
appointed authorities.

**_Appendix A_**
**_The national policy issues_**
**_The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa_**

1. The Constitution requires that when organs of state contract for goods or services, they
must do so in accordance with national or provincial legislation that establishes a system
which is fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost-effective. This does not prevent
the implementation of a procurement policy by organs of state providing for categories of
preference in the allocation of contracts, and the protection or advancement of persons, or
cateories of persons, disadvantaged by unfair discrimination. National legislation must
prescribe a framework within which this policy may be implemented (Section 217).

**_The White Paper on Defence[2]_**

**A Technologically Advanced National Defence Force**

2. The White Paper on Defence, as approved by Parliament on 14 May 1996, states that
the SANDF will be a balanced, modern, affordable and technologically advanced military
force, capable of executing its tasks effectively and efficiently (Chapter 2: para 11.7). It
further states that the government will not endanger the lives of military personnel
through the provision of inadequate or inferior weapons and equipment (Chapter 3: para
_43.6)._

**Core Defence Capability**

3. The White Paper states that the SANDF has to maintain a core defence capability
because of the inherent unpredictability of the future. Such a capability cannot be created
from scratch should the need suddenly arise. The maintenance and development of
weapons systems is a long-term endeavour (Chapter 4: para 6.2).


-----

4. The White Paper notes that deterrence requires the existence of a defence capability
which is sufficiently credible to inhibit potential aggressors. Although South Africa is not
confronted by any foreseeable external military threat, this capability cannot be turned on
and off "like a tap". It is therefore necessary to maintain a core defence capability
_(Chapter 5: para 7). A core defence capability includes a balanced and sustainable_
nucleus with, amongst other features, the maintenance and, where necessary, the
adequate and appropriate upgrading or replacement of equipment and weaponry (Chapter
_5: para 8)._

5. The White Paper states that the services of an efficient defence industry are required to
address the need for maintenance, upgrading and, where necessary, the replacement of
weapons and equipment of the SANDF.

6. The industry will permit the cost-effective purchase of certain products and systems,
ensure the life-cycle maintenance and support of such systems, and perform
refurbishment and upgrades of existing equipment _(Chapter 8: para 3). The defence_
equipment required by the SANDF, however, cannot and should not be procured
exclusively from the local industry. Many complex systems cannot be produced
domestically and will have to be imported. Management expertise for the specialised
procurement functions is located within the DoD (Chapter 8: para 5).

**Regional Co-operation**

7. The White Paper recognises that the government might be called upon by neighbouring
countries to play a number of supportive roles. The SANDF could, for example, provide
assistance as regards the maintenance and upgrading of weaponry and equipment
_(Chapter 4: para 20)._

**Equipment for Peace Support Operations**

8. The White Paper indicates that South Africa’s consideration of involvement in specific
peace support operations will not be limited to the possible deployment of troops. The
involvement could also take the form of providing equipment, logistical support,
engineering services, communications systems and medical personnel facilities (Chapter
_5: para 25). The acquisition and maintenance of military equipment will take account of_
the particular requirements of peace support operations (Chapter 5: para 26).

**Approval of Major Procurement Projects**

9. The White Paper states that the approval of major weapons procurement projects is the
prerogative of Parliament on an annual and long-term basis (Chapter 7: para 5).

**Budgetary Forecasts**

10. The White Paper requires the Defence Review to present, for the consideration of
Parliament and the public, detailed and well-motivated budgetary forecasts and
proposals; specific policies regarding the provisioning of logistic resources; and the
identification of appropriate technology to optimise the cost-effectiveness of the core
force (Chapter 7: para 6).

**Foreign Procurement**


-----

11. It is stated that within budgetary constraints, the DoD will engage in co-operative
ventures with its counterparts throughout the world in such fields as training and
education, defence planning, exchange visits, combined exercises and procurement of
arms and equipment (Chapter 4: para 6.3).

**Conversion of the Defence Industry**

12. The White Paper states that in circumstances of diminishing domestic defence
expenditure and falling global arms sales, the industry will be encouraged to convert
production capability to civilian manufacture without losing key technology capabilities
needed for military production. Policies will be formulated to establish the specific and
limited conditions under which the defence industry will be subsidised (Chapter 8: para
_6 and 7)._

**Arms Exports**

13. The White Paper states explicitly that the defence industry must have access to
international markets in order to facilitate cost-effective performance and reduce the unit
costs of producing items for the SANDF (Chapter 8: para 4). The government will
support the export initiatives of the defence industry by permitting it to contract and
honour obligations which have been duly approved (Chapter 8: para 11). It is vital that
there be transparency in decision-making in this regard (See 1.2.11).

**Arms Control**

14. Chapter 8 of the White Paper deals specifically with arms control. On 30 August
1995, Cabinet approved new interim policy on arms control. Chapter 8 of the White
Paper is based largely on that policy, as contained in the Cabinet Memorandum on the
"Rationale and Proposed Principles Governing Conventional Arms Control" (Chapter 8:
_para 1)._

**Arms Trade Principles and Guidelines**

15. The White Paper establishes a number of principles and guidelines governing
conventional arms trade. In essence, these require that:

15.1 The import and export of conventional arms, and the transit of arms through
South Africa, will be subject to a control process and permit system under the
auspices of a cabinet committee, the National Conventional Arms Control
Committee (NCACC); and will be subject to oversight by the relevant
parliamentary committees (Chapter 8: para 9).

15.2 The principle of openness and transparency relating to arms trade will apply.
This will be limited only by national security interests consistent with the need for
confidentialty (Chapter 8: para 12).

15.3 New arms control measures are based on the principles of the United Nations
Charter, international law, recognised international arms control systems, and a
balance of economic, ethical, military and security considerations (Chapter 8:
_para 13)._

15.4 South Africa will promote and exercise due restraint in the transfer of
conventional arms and related technologies by taking into account factors such as


-----

respect for human rights, the international security situation, and the degree to
which arms sales are supportive of South Africa’s national and foreign interests
(Chapter 8: para 15).

15.5 South Africa will avoid transfers and trade which would be likely to be used
for purposes other than the legitimate defence and security needs of the recipient
country (Chapter 8: para 17).

**Arms Control Processes and Structures**

16. The White Paper established certain arms control processes and structures.
Conventional armaments and related technology may not be imported, transferred
through South Africa, or marketed or exported abroad without a duly approved permit.
The applications will be subject to a multi-departmental review process. The newlyestablished NCACC will serve as the ministerial control, policy and decision-making
authority. An independent Inspectorate will be established to ensure that all levels of the
process are subject to scrutiny and oversight (Chapter 8: para 18-27).

**International Arms Control Regimesand Treaties**

17. As regards international arms control regimes and treaties, the White Paper states that
South Africa is committed to the international cause of non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (i.e. nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and related technology,
as well as advanced missile systems and missiles as defined by the Missile Technology
Control Regime) (Chapter 8: para 28-38).

**_White Paper on Science and Technology_**
**The Defence Industry**

18. The White Paper on Science and Technology deals with defence research. It notes
that although our industries are spending financial resources on Research and
Development (R&D), our balance of trade in medium and high technologies remains
negative (Section 8.2.5). A notable exception is the armaments industry, which currently
has a positive annual balance of trade.

**Technologically Advanced Core Force**

19. The White Paper on Science and Technology states that the essence of the new
strategyof the SANDF is to convert the current force into a small, but technologically
more capable one. The reliance on quality intelligence will be high to allow for the
timeous scaling-up of the force to meet potential threats, as will be dependence on a
broad technology base.

20. Insurance against threats will take the form of maintaining small, but sophisticated
forces which can be mobilised quickly and which rely on technology to increase the
flexibility and responsiveness of a smaller military establishment.

**Defence Technology Base**

21. The White Paper on Science and Technology notes that the maintenance of a strong
technology base is therefore a prerequisite of the new SANDF strategy and must serve a
number of purposes, namely:

21.1 Maintaining the capability to detect threats.


-----

21.2 Being aware of trends in military technology and their implications for the
SANDF.

21.3 Being capable of producing technology demonstrators that can rapidly be
turned into military technology if necessary.

21.4 Being capable of providing expert advice for procurement purposes.

21.5 Providing test and evaluation services.

21.6 Supporting upgrade and maintenance activities.

22. The White Paper on Science and Technology states that the future of the South
African defence industry cannot be seen as distinct from that of its civilian manufacturing
counterpart and that dual concepts should be understood and applied. The view that
defence technology should be phased out in favour of civilian technology, or converted
into it, is not tenable. Instead, the defence industry must make special efforts to leverage
spin-offs in the civilian sector and to develop relationships with civilian institutions in the
National Science Initiative (NSI) to promote spin-on’s.

23. The White Paper on Science and Technology states that the Department of Defence,
Department of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology, and the Department of Trade and
Industry should co-operate closely to develop a strategy for optimal promotion of the
local defence industry.

24. The Defence Research and Development Board budget should be displayed in the
government SET (Science, Engineering and Technology) budget, as well as in the
Department of Defence budget. This would give government and the public the
opportunity to evaluate the entire SET expenditure programme in an unfragmented way.

**_Appendix A_**
**_The national policy issues_**
**_The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa_**

1. The Constitution requires that when organs of state contract for goods or services, they
must do so in accordance with national or provincial legislation that establishes a system
which is fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost-effective. This does not prevent
the implementation of a procurement policy by organs of state providing for categories of
preference in the allocation of contracts, and the protection or advancement of persons, or
cateories of persons, disadvantaged by unfair discrimination. National legislation must
prescribe a framework within which this policy may be implemented (Section 217).

**_The White Paper on Defence[2]_**

**A Technologically Advanced National Defence Force**

2. The White Paper on Defence, as approved by Parliament on 14 May 1996, states that
the SANDF will be a balanced, modern, affordable and technologically advanced military


-----

force, capable of executing its tasks effectively and efficiently (Chapter 2: para 11.7). It
further states that the government will not endanger the lives of military personnel
through the provision of inadequate or inferior weapons and equipment (Chapter 3: para
_43.6)._

**Core Defence Capability**

3. The White Paper states that the SANDF has to maintain a core defence capability
because of the inherent unpredictability of the future. Such a capability cannot be created
from scratch should the need suddenly arise. The maintenance and development of
weapons systems is a long-term endeavour (Chapter 4: para 6.2).

4. The White Paper notes that deterrence requires the existence of a defence capability
which is sufficiently credible to inhibit potential aggressors. Although South Africa is not
confronted by any foreseeable external military threat, this capability cannot be turned on
and off "like a tap". It is therefore necessary to maintain a core defence capability
_(Chapter 5: para 7). A core defence capability includes a balanced and sustainable_
nucleus with, amongst other features, the maintenance and, where necessary, the
adequate and appropriate upgrading or replacement of equipment and weaponry (Chapter
_5: para 8)._

5. The White Paper states that the services of an efficient defence industry are required to
address the need for maintenance, upgrading and, where necessary, the replacement of
weapons and equipment of the SANDF.

6. The industry will permit the cost-effective purchase of certain products and systems,
ensure the life-cycle maintenance and support of such systems, and perform
refurbishment and upgrades of existing equipment _(Chapter 8: para 3). The defence_
equipment required by the SANDF, however, cannot and should not be procured
exclusively from the local industry. Many complex systems cannot be produced
domestically and will have to be imported. Management expertise for the specialised
procurement functions is located within the DoD (Chapter 8: para 5).

**Regional Co-operation**

7. The White Paper recognises that the government might be called upon by neighbouring
countries to play a number of supportive roles. The SANDF could, for example, provide
assistance as regards the maintenance and upgrading of weaponry and equipment
_(Chapter 4: para 20)._

**Equipment for Peace Support Operations**

8. The White Paper indicates that South Africa’s consideration of involvement in specific
peace support operations will not be limited to the possible deployment of troops. The
involvement could also take the form of providing equipment, logistical support,
engineering services, communications systems and medical personnel facilities (Chapter
_5: para 25). The acquisition and maintenance of military equipment will take account of_
the particular requirements of peace support operations (Chapter 5: para 26).

**Approval of Major Procurement Projects**


-----

9. The White Paper states that the approval of major weapons procurement projects is the
prerogative of Parliament on an annual and long-term basis (Chapter 7: para 5).

**Budgetary Forecasts**

10. The White Paper requires the Defence Review to present, for the consideration of
Parliament and the public, detailed and well-motivated budgetary forecasts and
proposals; specific policies regarding the provisioning of logistic resources; and the
identification of appropriate technology to optimise the cost-effectiveness of the core
force (Chapter 7: para 6).

**Foreign Procurement**

11. It is stated that within budgetary constraints, the DoD will engage in co-operative
ventures with its counterparts throughout the world in such fields as training and
education, defence planning, exchange visits, combined exercises and procurement of
arms and equipment (Chapter 4: para 6.3).

**Conversion of the Defence Industry**

12. The White Paper states that in circumstances of diminishing domestic defence
expenditure and falling global arms sales, the industry will be encouraged to convert
production capability to civilian manufacture without losing key technology capabilities
needed for military production. Policies will be formulated to establish the specific and
limited conditions under which the defence industry will be subsidised (Chapter 8: para
_6 and 7)._

**Arms Exports**

13. The White Paper states explicitly that the defence industry must have access to
international markets in order to facilitate cost-effective performance and reduce the unit
costs of producing items for the SANDF (Chapter 8: para 4). The government will
support the export initiatives of the defence industry by permitting it to contract and
honour obligations which have been duly approved (Chapter 8: para 11). It is vital that
there be transparency in decision-making in this regard (See 1.2.11).

**Arms Control**

14. Chapter 8 of the White Paper deals specifically with arms control. On 30 August
1995, Cabinet approved new interim policy on arms control. Chapter 8 of the White
Paper is based largely on that policy, as contained in the Cabinet Memorandum on the
"Rationale and Proposed Principles Governing Conventional Arms Control" (Chapter 8:
_para 1)._

**Arms Trade Principles and Guidelines**

15. The White Paper establishes a number of principles and guidelines governing
conventional arms trade. In essence, these require that:

15.1 The import and export of conventional arms, and the transit of arms through
South Africa, will be subject to a control process and permit system under the
auspices of a cabinet committee, the National Conventional Arms Control
Committee (NCACC); and will be subject to oversight by the relevant
parliamentary committees (Chapter 8: para 9).


-----

15.2 The principle of openness and transparency relating to arms trade will apply.
This will be limited only by national security interests consistent with the need for
confidentialty (Chapter 8: para 12).

15.3 New arms control measures are based on the principles of the United Nations
Charter, international law, recognised international arms control systems, and a
balance of economic, ethical, military and security considerations (Chapter 8:
_para 13)._

15.4 South Africa will promote and exercise due restraint in the transfer of
conventional arms and related technologies by taking into account factors such as
respect for human rights, the international security situation, and the degree to
which arms sales are supportive of South Africa’s national and foreign interests
(Chapter 8: para 15).

15.5 South Africa will avoid transfers and trade which would be likely to be used
for purposes other than the legitimate defence and security needs of the recipient
country (Chapter 8: para 17).

**Arms Control Processes and Structures**

16. The White Paper established certain arms control processes and structures.
Conventional armaments and related technology may not be imported, transferred
through South Africa, or marketed or exported abroad without a duly approved permit.
The applications will be subject to a multi-departmental review process. The newlyestablished NCACC will serve as the ministerial control, policy and decision-making
authority. An independent Inspectorate will be established to ensure that all levels of the
process are subject to scrutiny and oversight (Chapter 8: para 18-27).

**International Arms Control Regimesand Treaties**

17. As regards international arms control regimes and treaties, the White Paper states that
South Africa is committed to the international cause of non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (i.e. nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and related technology,
as well as advanced missile systems and missiles as defined by the Missile Technology
Control Regime) (Chapter 8: para 28-38).

**_White Paper on Science and Technology_**
**The Defence Industry**

18. The White Paper on Science and Technology deals with defence research. It notes
that although our industries are spending financial resources on Research and
Development (R&D), our balance of trade in medium and high technologies remains
negative (Section 8.2.5). A notable exception is the armaments industry, which currently
has a positive annual balance of trade.

**Technologically Advanced Core Force**

19. The White Paper on Science and Technology states that the essence of the new
strategyof the SANDF is to convert the current force into a small, but technologically
more capable one. The reliance on quality intelligence will be high to allow for the


-----

timeous scaling-up of the force to meet potential threats, as will be dependence on a
broad technology base.

20. Insurance against threats will take the form of maintaining small, but sophisticated
forces which can be mobilised quickly and which rely on technology to increase the
flexibility and responsiveness of a smaller military establishment.

**Defence Technology Base**

21. The White Paper on Science and Technology notes that the maintenance of a strong
technology base is therefore a prerequisite of the new SANDF strategy and must serve a
number of purposes, namely:

21.1 Maintaining the capability to detect threats.

21.2 Being aware of trends in military technology and their implications for the
SANDF.

21.3 Being capable of producing technology demonstrators that can rapidly be
turned into military technology if necessary.

21.4 Being capable of providing expert advice for procurement purposes.

21.5 Providing test and evaluation services.

21.6 Supporting upgrade and maintenance activities.

22. The White Paper on Science and Technology states that the future of the South
African defence industry cannot be seen as distinct from that of its civilian manufacturing
counterpart and that dual concepts should be understood and applied. The view that
defence technology should be phased out in favour of civilian technology, or converted
into it, is not tenable. Instead, the defence industry must make special efforts to leverage
spin-offs in the civilian sector and to develop relationships with civilian institutions in the
National Science Initiative (NSI) to promote spin-on’s.

23. The White Paper on Science and Technology states that the Department of Defence,
Department of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology, and the Department of Trade and
Industry should co-operate closely to develop a strategy for optimal promotion of the
local defence industry.

24. The Defence Research and Development Board budget should be displayed in the
government SET (Science, Engineering and Technology) budget, as well as in the
Department of Defence budget. This would give government and the public the
opportunity to evaluate the entire SET expenditure programme in an unfragmented way.

**_Chapter 15_**

**South African Defence Review 1998**

**_Conclusion_**
**_The Defence Review as a policy process_**


-----

1. The White Paper on Defence, as approved by Parliament in May 1996 set the stage for
further defence transformation by establishing a policy framework for defence in a new
South Africa founded on the principles of democratic governance. The White Paper also
lay the basis for a more detailed Defence Review. The review was conducted in stages
and each component was comprehensively debated with the Joint Standing Committee on
Defence and presented to Cabinet and Parliament for final approval. This process has
culminated in this document which was similarly approved by Parliament.

2. Defence Transformation has, in South Africa, been a comprehensive and dynamic
process that has led to a clear formulation of defence policy and the establishment of
comprehensive Parliamentary oversight on defence matters. This has been coupled to
reductions in defence expenditure and a review of defence business processes, force
design and force structure.

3. When embarking on the Defence Review process, the Department of Defence set out
to design a consultative process that would both inform the people of South Africa of
current defence thinking, and would also allow the Department to glean an understanding
of what South Africans expect of their defence force. By so doing, the Department of
Defence sought to migrate to a position where a common understanding could be
achieved on the roles and function of the SANDF, its future size and shape. The primary
objective was therefore to develop and establish a national consensus on defence issues.

4. During the Defence Review process, the Department of Defence sought to gain an
understanding of the expectations and vision for defence from all South African people
and to successfully translate that into defence policy, including force structure and force
design. Thus, in keeping with South Africa’s emergent civil-military relations tradition,
Parliament and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence were extensively consulted.
Consultation, however took place far more extensively, extending into the provinces of
South Africa where church leaders, non-governmental organisations, academics, labour,
business and community leaders were consulted, thus bench marking the Defence Review
as an example of true government consultation.

5. The Defence Review has been a significant defence policy process in that it expresses
a holistic understanding of defence policy in a synchronised and integrated manner.
Defence policy has traditionally been fragmented with little harmonisation across policy
boundaries. The Defence Review has, for the first time, expressed broad defence policy
in a manner which demonstrates a progression of thought and logic transcending sectoral
focuses.

6. Operational policy, force design and force structure, human resource and par-time
component policy, land and environmental policy and acquisition policy is presented in a
manner that expresses a South African vision for defence into the new millennium.
Similarly, the Defence Review expresses defence policy that is congruent with the
democratic traditions that are being established post-1994.

7. The Defence Review also has successfully attempted to describe and address the
challenges of an African country that seeks to position defence, and the roles and
functions of a defence force, in a post-Cold War environment where there is no longer


-----

polarisation of society around East/West traditions. This environment poses new
challenges for all defence forces, including the SANDF. The Defence Review thus
presents not just an examination of the primary functions and tasks of the SANDF, but
also presents an amelioration of South Africa’s expectations of the SANDF in other roles.
This is in keeping with the White Paper on Defence, which elucidates a broad concept of
security, encompassing all aspects of human security, stating unambiguously that the
greatest threats to the South African people are non-military.

**_The Defence Review as a model for civil-military relations_**

8. The eight constituent forces of the SANDF all entered into the SANDF with different
traditions and understandings of civil-military relations. One of the challenges facing the
Department of Defence has been to agree on and establish a uniquely South African civilmilitary relations tradition. While embracing the principles of civil-military relations in
western societies, the South African Department of Defence has been seeking to establish
a model of civil-military relations that has a distinctly African character.

9. The Defence Review has provided the opportunity for the Department of Defence to
implement facets of civil-military relations as yet unexplored in South Africa. In terms of
process, the Defence Review was not only extremely consultative, but also made
extensive use of skills outside of the Department such as academia and NGOs. This is
significant in that it expresses an acknowledgement by the Department of Defence of two
critical factors:

9.1 Firstly, it acknowledges that the Department is not the sole repository of skills
on defence issues and acknowledges that the defence debate can be strengthened
by outside consultation and involvement.

9.2 Secondly, it acknowledges for the first time that, in a democracy, defence
cannot be a closed shop arrangement, but by definition must take cognisance of
the many and diverse opinions that exist outside of the Department.

10. The Defence Review has been instrumental in shaping the way that civil-military
relations will unfold in South Africa, contributing both to a common understanding of
defence and to the development of a model for future South African civil-military
relations. Extensive consultation with Parliament and with broader civil-society in the
form of business, labour, clergy, non-governmental organisations and community
leadership took place. By so doing, the Defence Review benchmarked the concept of
responsible and accountable governance by the Department of Defence and has formed a
framework for transparent defence in a democracy.

11. In terms of the relationship between the Department of Defence and Parliament, the
Defence Review process established the basis for a collaborative partnership on defence
management between elected oversight authority and the Department. The Defence
Review underscored the nature of the Department of Defence’s responsibilities to
Parliament in the minds of both soldiers and civilians alike.

**_The medium term expenditure framework_**


-----

12. The first report of the Defence Review (chapters one to eight of this document)
elaborated on the Constitutional imperative that the SANDF will have a primarily
defensive posture and orientation, as well as elaborating on the constitutionally derived
functions and roles of the SANDF. The Defence Review has as a result developed new
defence doctrinal and design criteria.

13. The determination the SANDF’s size and shape is guided by South African defence
and other national policy. The tasks of the defence force relating to self-defence are
categorized under four broad headings:

13.1 Defence against external military threats.

13.2 Defence against internal threats to the constitutional order.

13.3 The promotion of regional security.

13.4 The promotion of international security, including participation in PSO’s and
military co-operation in support of foreign policy.

14. Chapter Eight presents options for the future design of the SANDF and recommended
a design that was approved by Parliament on 20 August 1997. This force design is based
on the concept of a peace-time force containing those elements required to serve as the
core for future expansion, should this be required, and those elements required for
ongoing peace-time tasks.

15. It is essential for the core force approach to rely on the expansion capability inherent
in a part-time component which is extremely cost-effective and allows for flexibility in
force levels. Part-time units are to be transformed to be fully representative of South
Africa’s demography.

16. Throughout the Force Design Chapter, a needs driven, but cost constrained, approach
was used as the underlying principle for design.

17. Both the Force Design Chapter and the Force Structure Chapter of the Defence
Review express a policy vision for defence. Although force design and structure should
be based on real defence needs, in reality these are constrained by costs and monies
available to meet these visions. The force design and force structure of the Defence
Review thus reflect a vision for defence, but in reality, this vision must be tempered with
the financial constraints placed on the defence budget.

18. Towards the latter stages of the Defence Review, government expressed a vision of
future government spending and how the allocation of public monies to Departments will
take place. This Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) of multi-year spending
(three year period), outlined the base-line funding that Departments can expect from
central government.

19. Government identified the following six prioritised areas of focus for the Department
of Defence in the MTEF.

19.1 Border protection and border control.


-----

19.2 Support to the SAPS in terms of the National Crime Prevention Strategy,
including Area Protection.

19.3 VIP flights

19.4 Search and Rescue.

19.5 Maintenance of essential services.

19.6 Essential force preparation.

20. Initial indications are that the allocation to the Department of Defence will be in the
order of 1.5% of GDP. (This translates into Rm 9 201 in 1997 rand-value and Rm 9 721
in 1998 rand-value.) Government is however aware that although the establishment of a
base-line percentage of GDP does assist the Department of Defence with its long-term
plannin, this allocation may fluctuate as specific defence programmes require attention.

21. Since the completion and approval by Parliament of the vision force design, it has
become apparent that national priorities and budgetary restrictions place constraints on
defence expenditure. This means that the achievement of a sustainable force design of the
magnitude envisaged in the Defence Review will not be possible in the short to medium
term. The Department of Defence will maintain the Defence Review force design as its
vision to be pursued, but will make the necessary short-term adaptations to ensure the
maintenance of the required capabilities and expertise within the financial allocation to
defence.

22. This will be managed within the MTEF vision for the Department of Defence and the
Minister of Defence will regularly report to Parliament and Cabinet on the status of
defence capabilities in relation to the Defence Review requirements.

23. In the light of national priorities and budgetary constraints, the Department of
Defence will be testing, and where necessary, adapting its force design according to
these. Defence scenarios will also be undergoing revision in the light of changing
international trends.

24. The Defence Review visualises a 40:30:30 ratio for defence spending on personnel,
operating and capital costs after the transformation process is completed. The question of
the correct balance between maritime, air and landward defence, based on the strategic
realities of South Africa, is still bein studied. Should defence spending remain at
approximately 1,5% of GDP, or Rm 9 721 in 1998 Rand-value, the allocation of the
defence budget at a 40:30:30 ratio should be in the order of:

a. Rm 3 889 for personnel expenditure,

b. Rm 2916 for operating expenditure and

c. Rm 2 916 for capital expenditure.

This ratio will remain the Department of Defence’s vision once transformation is
completed. Table 1 and Figure 1 describe this ratio.


-----

|Col1|1997/98 Rm|1998/99 Rm|1999/00 Rm|2000/01 Rm|2001/02 Rm|2002/03 Rm|2003/04 Rm|2004/05 Rm|2005/06 Rm|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Personne l|50334|5477|5155|4478|4190|4050|3889|3889|3889|
|Operating|3169|3311|3049|2954|2917|2917|2916|2916|2916|
|Capital|1076|808|1227|2173|2489|2754|2916|2916|2916|
|Rationali sation|125|290|125|125||||||
|Total|54704|9886|9556|9730|9596|9721|9721|9721|9721|


**Table 1: Department of Defence visio for spending on personnel, capital**
**and operating.**

**_Future Defence policy initiatives that arise from the Defence Review_**

25. The Defence Review initiated a number of ancillary and corollary defence policy
processes within the Department of Defence. These are described hereunder.

**White Paper on Peace Missions**

26. The White Paper on Defence’s analysis of the strategic environment indicates that
there is no apparent or foreseen conventional threat against South Africa. Instability and
inter-state conflict originating in socio-economic factors, however, pose a considerable
immediate and long-term threat to the region. While the deployment of the military does
not provide a solution to these threats, their deployment is nevertheless often essential to
create or maintain conditions in which solutions can be sought by other means.


-----

27. The post-1994 era in South Africa has seen an increase in pressure for South Africa to
become involved in United Nations driven conflict prevention initiatives in Africa. The
Great Lakes conflict, the Zaire (DRC) conflict and the Congo Brazzaville conflict
demonstrated that the international community expects South Africa to become involved
in multi-national forces constituted under a UN mandate. This involvement may range
from support services (medical, military engineering, air transport, communications etc)
to placing combat troops on the ground.

28. To this end, the Departments of Defence and Foreign Affairs have been developing a
White Paper on Peace Missions which seeks to guide future South African involvement
in peace missions.

29. Conflict on the African continent, rooted in non-military, socio-economic factors, has
shown itself in the recent past to be primarily intra-state, although inter-state conflict of a
limited scale and intensity is also a possibility, but potentially less so. Recent continental
conflict has manifested itself mainly as civil unrest, domestic insurgencies and civil war.
Such conflicts are extremely destructive and are characterised by large numbers of
displaced people and refugees.

30. The changing security environment has not however eradicated conflict and violence.
These continue to manifest themselves in a variety of different forms and pose profound
challenges for the manner in which international security is managed and maintained.

31. There is an increased deployment of civilian, military and NGO personnel in a wide
spectrum of operations ranging from peace-building and peace-making to humanitarian
relief and peace-enforcement operations. Traditional peace missions have moved from
being relatively homogenous exercises - observer missions and peace-keeping missions
for instance - into being complex and multi-functional missions spanning the entire
globe. In the process, the diplomatic and political components of peace missions have
assumed an increasing importance as against the more military emphasis of traditional
"peace operations".

32. It is therefore important for South Africans to determine the political, normative,
military and resource implications of involving ourselves in peace support operations in
the future, and the White Paper on Peace Missions seeks to establish the framework of
such an understanding.

33. Critical capabilities relevant to working in an African environment would include:

33.1 Comprehensive land, air and maritime capabilities that address the functions
of mobility, surveillance and firepower.

33.2 The focus of peace support operations should be on land, with naval and air
support.

33.3 The emphasis should be on light, mobile forces. Air mobility and sea-lift
would be essential.

33.4 Air defence that provide efficient defence against a limited air threat.


-----

33.5 The ability to maintain long external lines of logistic support is essential.

33.6 The ability to operate away from main bases and maintain equipment far
from support infrastructure is vital.

33.7 Logistics, medical support and engineering services assume an even more
prominent position.

33.8 A vital maritime defence component is required to protect marine resources.

33.9 The ability to independently (remotely) sense the movement and intent of
belligerent parties in an unfamiliar setting, far away from own fixed
infrastructure, is very important. From this data, information must be extracted,
distributed, processed and used in an efficient command and control system.

**Defence Industry Green Paper**

34. The Department of Defence is, together with input from other role-playing
Departments, producing a Green Paper on the South African Defence Industry for the
National Conventional Arms Control Committee. This initiative has its genesis in a
Cabinet Decision in 1996 to produce a White Paper on the Defence Industry.

35. The Green Paper will be significant, in that it will not only give a descriptive
overview of the Defence Industry and those policies which govern it, but will be a
seminal document that, for the first time, captures a holistic understanding of the Defence
Industry. The Defence Industry in South Africa has historically been shrouded in secrecy
and the Green Paper will aim to provide the first comprehensive analysis of the business
processes that take place within the industry.

36. The Green Paper will form the basis of a White Paper that will aim to provide cogent
and integrated policies for the Defence Industry. This is an important development in that
fragmented policy and legislation will be identified and harmonised, so that a coherent
expression of Government’s approach to the industry will exist. It is envisaged that a
number of legislative, management process and policy amendments will arise as a result
of the White Paper.

37. The Green Paper, will seek to position the Defence Industry within a South African
normative and policy framework, expressing both mechanisms for Government control of
the industry and mechanisms for supporting a legitimate and transparent Defence
Industry. The Green Paper will also provide a strategic analysis of future defence
requirements and as such, will articulate how the industry should position itself to meet
South Africa’s future defence needs, providing a vision for the industry within the South
African macro-industrial base.

**Defence Conversion Within A National Conversion Framework**

38. The Department of Defence, in its transformation process, identified a number of key
strategic issues which face the Department. One of these was a meaningful way of
expressing the Department’s support of the Reconstruction and Development
Programme.


-----

39. Apart from the more obvious contributions of the SANDF to the National Crime
Prevention Strategy and the conducting of Border Control, the conversion of defence
assets to civilian assets and capabilities is the most significant measure by which the
Department can support the RDP.

40. Although it is necessary to establish a National Conversion Framework, the elements
of future Defence Conversion can be articulaed as the following:

40.1 **Base Conversion, this being the return of bases earmarked for closure**
during the transformation process to civilian or government use. This process
includes not only the closure of bases but the environmental clean up of terrains
which have been contaminated or soiled by military use.

40.2 **Human Resource Conversion, this being the process of addressing the**
reintegration of rationalised soldiers back into civil society through a number of
programmes which would typically include en-skilling of those soldiers that
facilitates their re-entry into economic society.

40.3 Community Economic Adjustment, this being the process of economically
adjusting communities adjacent to military facilities earmarked for closure, who
have traditionally been reliant on the presence of the SANDF for their survival or
prosperity.

40.4 **Inventory Clean-up, this being the consolidation and disposal of the**
SANDF’s capital inventories in alignment with the accepted force design and
current and future defence realities. Remarkable progress has already been made
in this arena with the clean-up of the SANDF’s anti-personnel landmine
inventory, resulting in the destruction of these weapons. This positioned South
Africa as a world leader in this arena. Equally pressing on the international
agenda is the initiation of measures to prevent the non-proliferation of small arms.
The SANDF is similarly consolidating its inventory of arms and ammunition and
will initiate disposal, even destruction, of these weapons in accordance with South
African Foreign Policy and a number of Cabinet decisions that exist in this regard.

41. Once clarity has been achieved in the transformation process with regard to the
SANDF’s future land, facilities and armaments requirements, an integrated strategy for
Defence Conversion can be developed and articulated. It is important that this not be
done in isolation, but take place in a deliberate, responsible and coordinated manner
within the context of a National Conversion Strategy. The Department of Defence has
already entered into discussions with other role playing departments, such as Public
Works in this regard.


-----

###### Glossary of Military Ranks with Corresponding Civilian Appointments

|Ranks as used in SA Army, SA Air Force and SA Military Health Service|RANKS AS USED IN SA Navy|Corresponding Civilian Appointments|
|---|---|---|
|General Lieutenant-General Major-General Brigadier-General Colonel Lieutenant-Colonel Major Captain Lieutenant Second-Lieutenant Candidate Officer Chaplain Warrant Officer Class 1 Warrant Officer Class 2 Staff Sergeant (Army, SAMHS) Flight Sergeant (Air Force) Sergeant Corporal Lance Corporal Private (Army, SAMHS) Airman (Air Force)|Admiral Vice-Admiral Rear-Admiral Rear-Admiral (Junior Grade) Captain Commander Lieutenant-Commander Lieutenant Sub-Lieutenant Ensign Midshipman Chaplain Warrant Officer Class 1 Warrant Officer Class 2 Chief Petty Officer Petty Officer Leading Seaman Able Seaman Seaman|Director General Deputy Director General Chief Director Director Deputy Director Assistant Director Civilians Lower than Assistant Director serve in 439 Differentiated Post Classes|


-----

-----

-----

