22 Itaewon-ro (1 Youngsan-dong 3-ga), Youngsan-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea

**Telephone: 82-2-748-1111 Help desk: 82-2-748-6891 Fax: 82-2-748-6895**

www.mnd.go.kr


-----

11-1290000-000446-11


### 2016 Defense
##### White Paper


-----

-----

2016 **Defense**
White Paper


-----

**Message from the Minister of National Defense**

Today, the Republic of Korea (ROK) Armed Forces face a security situation unprecedented in its complexity and
severity.
North Korea’s Kim Jong-un regime conducted two nuclear tests and several test-launches of Musudan and Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missile (SLBM) in 2016 alone, and continues to carry out provocations through various methods
such as cyber-attacks.
Amid the anticipation of sweeping changes in the global economy and the security order, as a result of the new U.S.
administration taking office, Northeast Asian countries continue to oscillate between cooperation and competition
according to their national interests.
Faced with numerous domestic challenges, the Korean people are particularly attentive to the role of the military as the
‘guardian of national security.’ For the ROK military, it is also an important juncture in the timeline of internal defense
reforms to make meaningful progress in tasks such as fostering a modern barracks culture, and improving defense acquisition programs.
In order to effectively meet these various challenges ahead, we have strived to strengthen the fundamentals by maintaining our firm readiness posture and introducing a new barracks culture which combines respect for human rights and
rigorous discipline, and at the same time actively engaging in efforts to prepare for the future by building independent
defense capabilities and further cementing and expanding the bilateral military alliance between the ROK and the U.S.
The ROK military enjoys the confidence of the ROK public, gained by deterring North Korean aggression by responding firmly and in a principled manner to incidents, such as the planting of landmines in the DMZ and firing of artillery
across the border, while eradicating illegal fishing by Chinese fishermen near the mouth of the Han River through the
deployment of the civil military police.
In the face of gradually increasing nuclear and missile threats from North Korea, the ROK military is strengthening
its deterrence and response capabilities. A three-axis system composed of the Kill Chain, Korea Air and Missile Defense
(KAMD) and the Korea Massive Punishment and Retaliation (KMPR) strategy is being put in place. In tandem, the
‘Extended Deterrence Strategy Consultation Group (EDSCG)’ was established to bolster the execution capability of the
ROK-U.S. bilateral Tailored Deterrence Strategy.
We have stepped up the mental training of our troops, who are the very sources of our combat power, and introduced
a new military ethos that is centered on combat duties through tactics-focused unit training and scientific training.
Moreover, by appropriately updating the legal and institutional framework, modernizing installation facilities, and
improving the military health care system, we have laid the groundwork for a new barracks culture that can be appreciated
by our servicemembers and approved by the ROK people. This was coupled with defense regulatory reforms to lift or ease
access restrictions to safety zones around military installations to reduce the public’s inconveniences.
Notwithstanding, more fundamental reforms are still needed in many areas. Going forward, our goal is to resolutely do


-----

away with bureaucratic mentality and mannerism to clear the path toward building strong elite forces that garner the trust
of the ROK people and instill fear in our enemies.
In order to provide support in the form of military strength to the government’s denuclearization efforts such as
sanctions and pressure against the North, in the face of intensifying nuclear and missile threats from North Korea, we are
endeavoring to further develop the independent capabilities of our armed forces as a starting point. We will thoroughly
prepare for the various types of North Korean aggression, including cyber-attacks.
Moreover, we will expand the ROK-U.S. Alliance beyond its military origin to a comprehensive partnership that
encompasses economic and cultural spheres, and develop it into a peace-building alliance contributing to the stability
not just of the Korean Peninsula, but also of Northeast Asia and the world as a whole. Meanwhile, we will ensure that the
‘conditions-based operational control transition’ takes place according to the terms agreed upon by the ROK and the U.S.
at an appropriate time and in a stable manner, thereby allowing the ROK military to take initiative in defending the ROK.
Furthermore, we will instill a new barracks culture by transforming the mindset of our servicemembers, creating a
transparent and efficient environment for defense acquisition programs, and implement a low-cost, high-efficiency
defense management system through logistics reform. We will thus transform our armed forces into an ‘advanced elite
military,’ respectful of the public welfare and trusted by the people of our nation.
Our armed forces have been a sturdy pillar and a reassuring presence for the nation and its people, unshaken and
undaunted by challenges in difficult times. In the face of a complex and unstable security situation, the ROK military
pledges to remain resolute and unwavering to steadfastly fulfill its duties and maintain a firm readiness posture capable of
deterring North Korean aggression and carrying out a swift and forceful retaliation in the event of an aggression.
The purpose of the ‘2016 Defense White Paper’ is to inform the Korean public about these efforts. This publication
details changes in military threats from North Korea, including nuclear and missile threats, significant achievements
made in national defense over the past four years, and future policy directions. The Appendix contains various defense-related data which can be helpful for an in-depth understanding of national security and defense and research into this field.
It is our hope that the ‘2016 Defense White Paper’ will contribute to enhancing the public understanding and appreciation of the ROK Armed Forces.

December 31, 2016December 31, 2016

Han Min-koo
Minister of National Defense, Republic of Korea


-----

**Contents**

Chapter 1 Changes and Challenges in the Security Environment

Section 1 Global Security Environment

Section 2 Security Environment of Northeast Asia

Section 3 North Korean Situation and Military Threats

Chapter 2 National Security Strategy and Defense Policy

Section 1 National Security Strategy

Section 2 National Defense Policy

Chapter 3 Establishing a Robust Defense Posture

Section 1 Military Organization and Forces

Section 2 Maintaining a Readiness Posture against Local Provocations

Section 3 Maintaining a Readiness Posture against Aggression
Section 4 Establishing an Integrated Civilian-Government-Military-Police Defense Posture
Section 5 Reinforcing Response Capabilities against North Korean Nuclear and WMD Threats
Section 6 Establishing a Response System against Transnational and Non-military Threats
Section 7 Reinforcing Realistic Training and Moral Education

Chapter 4 Strengthening Future-Oriented National Defense Capabilities

Section 1 Refinement and Development of Defense Reform

Section 2 Force Enhancement based on Jointness

Section 3 Defense R&D and Promotion of the Defense Industry

Section 4 ‌Securing an Adequate Defense Budget and Enhancing the Efficiency of Defense Budget
Management

Section 5 Development of Defense Informatization

Section 6 Promoting Defense Logistics Innovation

Chapter 5 ‌Development of the ROK-U.S. Alliance and Reinforcement of Defense
Exchanges and Cooperation

Section 1 Development of a Future-Oriented ROK-U.S. Alliance

Section 2 ‌Expansion of Defense Exchanges and Cooperation

Section 3 Overseas Deployments and Peace Keeping Operations (PKOs)

Chapter 6 ‌Military Measures in Accordance with Changing Inter-Korean Relations

Section 1 ‌Promoting Military Confidence-building Considering Advancements in Inter-Korean

Relations

Section 2 ‌Ensuring Inter-Korean Exchanges and Cooperation, and Providing Humanitarian

Assistance


13
21

38
41

48
54
59
64
67
76
84

100
110
117

125
134
137

148
155
170

184

189


-----

Chapter 7 ‌Creating a Proud and Rewarding Environment for Military Service

Section 1 Barracks Culture Innovation

Section 2 Improvement of Welfare for Servicemembers

Section 3 Development of the Defense Medical System

Section 4 Expansion of Support for Retiring Servicemembers

Section 5 Improvement of Benefits for the Public

**Appendix**

**Special Appendices**

1. ‌Interdiction of Illegal Fishing by Chinese Boats in the Hangang River Estuary

2. ‌ North Korean Landmine and Artillery Provocations and the ROK Military’s Response

3. ‌Adjustment to the Korea Air Defense Identification Zone (KADIZ) and Follow-up Measures

4. USFK THAAD Deployment

5. ROK-Japan General Security of Military Information Agreement (GSOMIA)

6. Mungyeong Korea 2015 6[th] CISM World Games

**Appendices**

1. Military Power of Neighboring Countries

2. Comparing Defense Budgets around the World

3. Yearly Defense Budget Comparison

4. Comparing Military Strengths of the Two Koreas

5. ‌Comparing the Economic Indicators of the Two Koreas

6. Discussions on the North Korean Nuclear Issue

7. ‌Progress in North Korea’s Ballistic Missile Development and Specifications

8. ‌United Nations Security Council (UNSC) Resolutions on Sanctions against North Korea

9. Chronicle of Inter-Korean Military Relations

10. ‌North Korea’s Infiltrations and Local Provocations against the ROK

11. Combined and Joint Exercise and Training

12. ‌International Defense Industrial Cooperation Agreements

13. ‌Joint Communiqué of the 47[th] ROK–U.S. Security Consultative Meeting

14. ‌Joint Communiqué of the 48[th] ROK–U.S. Security Consultative Meeting

15. Defense Cooperation Agreements with Other Countries

16. ‌International Disarmament, Non-proliferation Agreements, and Organizations

17. ROK Overseas Deployments

18. Changes in Enlisted Servicemembers Salaries

19. Alternatives to Military Service by Type

20. Defense Organization Chart

21. ‌Modifications of Laws and Regulations under the Jurisdiction of the Ministry of National Defense

22. ‌Composition and Major Activities of the National Defense Committee of the National Assembly


196
202
211
217
223

238
242
248
251
255
259

264
266
267
268
269
270
271
272
273
288
290
291
292
296
300
301
303
304
305
306
308
324


-----

###### Chapter
# 1

Changes and Challenges in the Security
Environment


-----

Section 1 Global Security Environment 8

Section 2 Security Environment of Northeast Asia 13

Section 3 North Korean Situation and Military Threats 21


-----

**section 1 Global security environment**

the uncertainty in security is continuing to increase as transnational and non-military threats proliferate

on top of the ever existing possibility of regional disputes triggered by traditional conflict factors. Countries

around the world are strengthening cooperative international efforts in order to contribute to regional

stability and global peace by jointly responding to various security threats, such as nuclear and missile

threats, terrorism, cyber-attacks and infectious diseases.

**1. Possibility of Regional Disputes Triggered by Traditional Conflict factors**

Traditional conflict factors such as territorial claims and religious and ethnic variances are

presenting a continuous threat to security worldwide.

In East Asia where the ‘Asia-Pacific Rebalance Strategy’ by the U.S. and China’s ‘New

Type of Major Power Relations’[1)] are in conflict, maritime jurisdiction disputes including the

South China Sea dispute are ongoing. While China is continuing its efforts to strengthen its

maritime jurisdictional status by taking actions such as constructing artificial islands in the

South China Sea, the U.S. is strengthening military cooperation with its allies in the region,

calling for freedom of navigation. Even after the ruling in July 2016 by the Permanent Court of

Arbitration (PCA) at The Hague that Beijing has no legal basis to claim historical rights in the

South China Sea, disputes between the parties, including the Philippines, China and the U.S.,

have not abated.

Nuclear and missile provocations by North Korea is a major factor of disrupting security

in the region. In 2016, North Korea carried out two nuclear tests and a string of missile tests

including long-range ballistic missiles and submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBM),

escalating security concerns in the region.

In Europe, the refugee crisis has emerged as a major problem. With thousands of refugees

from Syria and North Africa pouring into Europe without receiving the proper refugee

status, the fundamental principle of integration pursued by the EU based on the Schengen

Agreement[2)] is facing a serious challenge.

In September 2015, the EU announced measures to respond to the refugee crisis, including

**1) a doctrine proposed by Chinese President Xi Jinping during the U.S.-China bilateral summit held in June 2013, which calls for mutual**
respect when dealing with issues touching the core national interests of the two countries or important strategic issues.

**2) an agreement guaranteeing the free movement of persons between eU member states, signed in 1985, near the town of Schengen,**
Luxemburg, by five countries – Germany, France, Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands-. the agreement was partially amended
in 1990 and was enacted in 1995.


-----

the distribution of 120,000 refugees to twenty-eight countries. During the European Council

meeting in October 2016, EU heads of state agreed to provide economic and development aid

to Libya, Egypt and other North African nations that are the main countries of provenance for

refugees, in a continuing effort to resolve the crisis.

However, following the recent terrorist attacks in France, Belgium and Turkey, the possi
bility of terrorists entering EU countries disguised as refugees became a reality, forcing

even those member states that are willing to take in refugees to tighten border controls. With

terrorist threats aggravating the refugee problem, Europe is currently faced with a serious

security crisis.

In eastern Ukraine, despite Minsk II,[3)] the second ceasefire agreement reached in February

2015, military tensions are undiminished, with sporadic skirmishes between government

forces and separatist forces still taking place. In September 2016, the ‘Trilateral Contact

Group,’ a group of representatives of Ukraine’s government forces, separatist forces and the

Russian Federation, convened, and the parties agreed on setting up three ‘pilot areas of disen
gagement’ as part of an ongoing effort to alleviate tensions in eastern Ukraine.

In the Middle East, unrest persists due to a combination of factors including the ascendancy

of violent extremist groups, sectarian strife and the vacuum of state power and control. In

Syria, civil war is ongoing between the Assad regime and the rebel forces. In Iraq, military

clashes are continuously occurring between government forces and ISIL[4)] in Mosul and

other northern Iraqi cities. As for Iran, after signing the nuclear deal with the five permanent

members of the UN Security Council **<Chart 1-1> Major Regions of Conflict**

and Germany (P5+1[5)]), the country is

seeking to improve its relations with

western nations. In the Middle East, on

the other hand, Iran has had sectarian or Asia

political conflicts with some of the Gulf Middle East

nations. Concerning the Israeli-Pales- Africa

tinian conflict, no visible progress has

been achieved in the way of resolving **somalia**

the deep-seated tensions between the two

countries.

**<Chart 1-1> Major Regions of Conflict**

Europe **Iraq**

**Afghanistan**

Asia

Middle East

**Yemen**

Africa

**south sudan**

**somalia**


**3) Peace agreements entered into between Ukraine, russia, representatives of the separatist forces and the OSCe (Organization for**
Security and Cooperation in europe) in Minsk, Belarus, successively in September 2014 and in February 2015, to halt the war in the
Donbass region of Ukraine.

**4) islamic State of iraq and the Levant.**

**5) P5+1, abbreviation for the Permanent 5+1, refers to the five permanent members of the UN Security Council (U.S., U.K., France, China**
and russia) and Germany.


-----

Political and economic unrest also remains unabated in Africa where countries are rocked

by the power struggle between political factions, ethnic tension and terrorism by violent

extremist groups. In South Sudan, the clash between federal government forces and opposition

forces in July 2016 ended in bloodshed, causing as many as 150 casualties. In countries like

Nigeria, Somalia and Mali, acts of terrorism by violent extremist groups such as Boko Haram

and Al-Shabaab are recurrent.

**2. Transnational and non-military Threats Compound security Uncertainties**

Terrorist acts by ISIL and other violent extremist groups are spreading fear in the inter
national community. ISIL carried out terrorist attacks in Paris, France, in November 2015,

in Jakarta, Indonesia, in January 2016, in Brussel, Belgium, in March 2016 and in Istanbul,

Turkey, in June 2016, causing the loss of hundreds of innocent lives. ISIL is recruiting foreign

combatants and is expanding its influence beyond the Middle East to Europe, Southeast Asia

and Africa through active propaganda.

Rising cyber-attacks constitute another serious type of transnational threat. There have been

various cases where computing systems of not only private-sector firms but also government

institutions are infiltrated causing serious system failure or system collapse. The hacking of

Sony Pictures by North Korea in November 2014 and the Bangladesh Bank cyber-heist in

February 2016 are two major examples that alerted the global community to the dangers of

cyber-threats. Accelerated efforts are currently underway in countries around the world to

develop a response strategy to cyber-threats.

The spread of new types of infectious diseases has emerged as a cause of acute concern to

the global community. The Ebola virus epidemic in 2013 was followed in 2015 by the outbreak

of MERS which rapidly spread to twenty-six countries, with cases of infection found in seven
ty-one countries according to the latest report. The UN Security Council and the wider inter
national community have recognized infectious diseases as a major security threat[6)] and are

working toward building response capabilities to this new threat.

Global warming and other climate change effects are causing natural disasters and calami
ties around the globe. The April 2015 Nepal earthquake, April 2016 earthquake in Japan and

Hurricane Matthew that struck Haiti in October 2016 clearly show that there is a limitation in

the capabilities of the afflicted nations to carry out swift and effective recovery efforts.

**6) in UN Security Council resolution 2177, adopted on September 18, 2014, it is stated that “the unprecedented extent of the ebola**
outbreak in africa constitutes a threat to international peace and security.’


-----

**3.  Bolstering Cooperation with the International Community to Respond to se-**
**curity Threats**

The need for closer international cooperation is being emphasized in order to respond to

security threats that are difficult to counter through efforts at the level of individual countries.

Efforts are ongoing in the international community to expand the non-proliferation system,

among others, through the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). In July

2015, the five permanent members of the UN Security Council and Germany (P5+1) agreed to

the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) which put a halt on Iran’s nuclear program.

In March 2016, the UN Security Council unanimously adopted Resolution 2270,[7)] which

condemned the fourth nuclear test and the test-launch of a long-range ballistic missile by North

Korea, and imposed fresh sanctions on the country. The fifth nuclear test was met by the

adoption of Resolution 2321[8)] in November 2016, imposing stronger sanctions, which demon
strated and reaffirmed the resolve and unity of the international community concerning the

North Korean nuclear issue.

Efforts toward international cooperation in counter-terrorism are also ongoing in response to

ISIL and other violent extremist groups. In November 2015, the UN Security Council unani
mously adopted Resolution 2249 condemning terrorist attacks by ISIL and calling upon the

member states to take all necessary measures to prevent the extremist group from recruiting

foreign combatants and stop the flow of terrorist funds. Governments around the world

actively responded to this call. The Global Coalition to Counter ISIL,[9)] founded in 2014, on the

initiative of the U.S., has engaged in various activities against ISIL from air strikes in territo
ries occupied by the terrorist organization to relief efforts for refugees in Iraq and Syria.

Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia and its regional neighbors formed, in 2015, the ‘Islamic Military

Alliance to Combat Terrorism.’[10)]

International cooperation efforts to respond to cyber-threats are also gaining momentum. In


**7) tough sanctions were imposed by this resolution in which the human rights issue in North Korea was mentioned for the first time,**
including the prohibition of providing nuclear weapon or missile development-related instruction or training to North Korean nationals,
blocking the transfer of items, materials and equipment related to the development of weapons of mass destruction, prohibition of
trade of items and goods that may be used for production of weapons, mandatory inspection of all cargos destined for or originating
from North Korea and the prohibition of public and private financial transactions with North Korea.

**8) the new resolution contains significantly fewer escape clauses than the previous resolution, hence eliminating many of the loopholes,**
and has reduced the permitted scope of trade in coal and other goods for livelihood purposes, while also reducing the number of staff
at North Korean diplomatic missions and restricting bank accounts held by North Korean nationals to be able to effectively control the
flow of foreign funds into the country. along with resolution 2270, this resolution imposes the most robust and comprehensive set of
non-military sanctions in the history of the UN.

**9) as of 2016, the Global Coalition to Counter iSiL counts sixty-two member countries and international organizations (military operation**
partners: Saudi arabia, U.S., France, etc. / armament support providers: Germany, italy, etc. / humanitarian assistance providers: the
rOK, Japan, etc.).

**10) among its thirty-four signatories are fourteen Middle eastern countries including Saudi arabia and the Uae, sixteen african**
countries including egypt and Morocco and four asian countries including Malaysia and Bangladesh.


-----

2016, during the fifth meeting of the UN GGE (Group of Governmental Experts) on Informa
tion Security, its members analyzed cyber-threats and discussed rules of international law and

norms that are applicable to cyber-space. FIRST,[11)] a private-sector consultative group, is also

working to strengthen international cooperation in internet security.

In September 2015, during the second Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA) Senior

Officials Meeting, representatives of member states reaffirmed the shared perception that the

spread of infectious diseases such as MERS or the Zika virus presents a political, economic,

social and security threat to the global community and agreed to carry out government-level

cooperation. Efforts are also intensifying to expand international cooperation in disaster relief

to ensure swift rescue and recovery operations in the aftermath of large-scale natural disasters.

Currently, through the UN Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System (GDACS),

real-time information on disasters occurring around the globe and the status of relief opera
tions and relief plans are made available worldwide. Regional multilateral security consultative

bodies such as the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and the ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meet
ing-Plus (ADMM-Plus) are also exploring disaster relief methods and conducting drills.

**11) Forum for incident response and Security teams.**


-----

**section 2 security environment of**
**northeast Asia**

the ‘asia’s Paradox’ phenomenon, in which the deepening economic interdependence is not matched by

a commensurate level of cooperation in the security field, still lingers in Northeast asia. Northeast asian

countries are building up their military strength in an attempt to achieve military superiority and increase

their clout in the region while expanding bilateral and multilateral cooperation with neighbors sharing

common interests.


**1. The structure of Cooperation and Conflict among nations in the Region Per-**
**sists**

Against the backdrop of the U.S.-China relationship resting upon a dual structure of strategic

cooperation and competition, Japan and Russia are also bolstering their militaries to increase

their clout in the region while the level of instability and uncertainty continues to grow as the

alliances and the cooperation and conflict dynamic among the regional nations persist.

To maintain its influence in Northeast Asia in a stable manner, the U.S. has expanded

its military presence in the region based on its ‘Asia-Pacific Rebalance Strategy,’ and has

tightened cooperation with its allies and partners, while actively participating in regional mul
tilateral consultative bodies.

Despite the reductions in the defense budget, the U.S. is shifting 60% of its naval fleet

to the Asia-Pacific and increasing its investment in cutting-edge defense technologies. The

U.S.’s stance is to prevent war on the Korean peninsula and maintain peace and stability in the

region, based on the ROK-U.S. Alliance and U.S.-Japan Alliance.

China, based on its enhanced national power, has demanded a ‘new type of major power

relations’ to the U.S., and in an effort to further lift its status and influence in the region,

it is modernizing its military and pursuing a proactive foreign policy. To ensure continuous

economic growth and national development, China is likely to seek peace and stability on the

Korean peninsula as well as in Northeast Asia, while aggressively responding to issues that are

related to its core national interests.


-----

In the case of Japan, proclaiming a ‘proactive pacifism’[12)] based on the U.S.-Japan Alliance,

its government is moving toward a more proactive defense policy. In April 2014, Japan set

out the ‘Three Principles of Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology’ which drasti
cally alleviated the restrictions on exporting weapons and military equipment. Also, by rein
terpreting the post-war pacifist constitution to allow engagement in collective self-defense, the

role of the Self-Defense Forces is expanding beyond the region and towards the international

community.

Russia is focusing on restoring its influence in the former Soviet region through such moves

as the establishment of the Eurasia Economic Union (EEU) and integration of the Crimean

peninsula, while actively intervening in international issues like the Syrian crisis and Iranian

nuclear program.

Given how Russia is expanding its Eastern Military District and the Pacific Fleet and

showing active interest in international cooperation in the development of Russia’s Far East,

the country’s influence in the region is likely to continue to increase going forward.

As the ‘Asia’s paradox’ is expected to linger on in Northeast Asia at least for the foreseeable

future, how U.S.-China relations develop in the near future may be the determining factor for

the security order and stability in the region. The U.S. and China are likely to share benefits

from regional stability and peace, while maintaining a relationship of cooperation or compe
tition depending on the issues at stake. However, when their core national interests clash, this

could exacerbate the discord between the two countries, affecting the security environment in

the region.

**2. expanding Influence of Countries surrounding the Korean Peninsula and**
**Military Modernization**

While the U.S. maintains its military superiority, China, Japan and Russia are vying to

build up their own military strength, spurring an arms race especially in naval and air forces.

<Chart 1-2> below summarizes the military strength of the four countries surrounding the

Korean peninsula:

**12) the expression was first used by Japanese Premier Shinzo abe, during his speech to the UN General assembly in September 2013,**
to convey Japan’s desire to make the Self-Defense Forces an active participant of UN peacekeeping operations (PKO) and contribute
to global peace and stability.


-----

**<Chart 1-2> Military strengths of the four Major Powers surrounding the Korean Peninsula**

**Russia** Defense Budget USD51.6Bn

No. of Troops 798,000

*[ Nuclear capability ]
enhancement, Fighter 1,011Fighters
development of stealth
fighters and new
missiles, strengthening Aircraft Carrier 1aircraft Carrier
of artic Ocean and
space capabilities Submarine 62Submarines

**Japan** Defense Budget USD41Bn

**China** Defense Budget USD145.8Bn No. of Troops 247,000

No. of Troops 2,333,000 Fighter 348Fighters

*[ introduction of ]

*[ reinforcement of ] Fighter 1,588Fighters additional F-35s, new early warning aircraft, Aegis Ship 6aegis Ships
military power Global hawk, aegis
projection capabilities Aircraft Carrier 1aircraft Carrier ships and submarines Submarine 18Submarines
and strategic deterrent
capabilities Submarine 65Submarines

**U.s.** Defense Budget USD597.5Bn

No. of Troops 1,381,000

*[ Pursue deployment of ] Fighter 2,047Fighters
60% of its naval and air
forces in asia Pacific,
strengthening of missile Aircraft Carrier 10aircraft Carrier
defense system within
the region Submarine 71Submarines


*[ Sources: ][The Military Balance 2016][ (international institute for Strategic Studies, Feb. 2016.), ][Defense of Japan 2016][, etc. ]


**| U.s. | In the 2015 National Security Strategy (NSS)[13)] and National Military Strategy,[14)]**

the U.S. underlined the need to maintain its military superiority in order to enhance the

security of its people, allies and partners around the world, stimulate the U.S. economy, protect

democracy and other universal values, and safeguard the international order in the face of

global challenges.

The U.S. considers Russia’s high-handed foreign policy, China’s aggressive posturing, North

Korea’s nuclear and missile provocations, Iran’s actions fomenting tensions and crises in the

Middle East and ISIL and other terrorist organizations as the five major threats. In order to

respond to these security threats, the U.S. is providing strong and consistent leadership, while

establishing a framework of cooperation with its allies and partners.

To maintain a stable security order in the Asia-Pacific region, the U.S. is strengthening

military cooperation not just with its regional allies such as the ROK, Japan and Australia, but

also with countries like the Philippines, India, Singapore and Vietnam.

**13) the highest-level national security document submitted to the Congress by the executive branch of the U.S. government.**

**14) a top-level document prepared by the Chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff outlining the strategic aims of the armed services.**


-----

By amending the ‘Guidelines for U.S.-Japan Defense Cooperation’ in April 2015, the

U.S. has made it possible for Japan to expand the role of the Japanese Self-Defense Forces.

Meanwhile, the U.S. is moving toward closer cooperation with Australia in an effort to counter

ISIL in Iraq and Syria. Furthermore, in April 2014, the U.S. and the Philippines signed the

Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement (EDCA), granting the U.S. armed forces the

right to access and use military bases and installations in the Philippines. The U.S. is also

widening the scope of security cooperation with India. They released a ‘Joint Strategic Vision’

statement in January 2015 and signed an acquisition and cross-servicing agreement in June

2015, during the U.S.-India summit meeting. In December 2015, by amending the ‘Agreement

on Defense Cooperation,’ the U.S. and Singapore agreed to cooperate in the fields of military,

policy, strategy and technology, and to jointly respond to non-traditional threats. In May 2016,

the U.S. fully lifted the ban on arms sales to Vietnam during President Obama’s visit to the

country.

While strengthening its bilateral ties with its allies and partners, the U.S. is also managing

its foreign policy in an aggressive manner through the security networking of its allies and

partners into trilateral or multilateral structures such as the ROK-U.S.-Japan relationship, the

U.S.-Japan-Australia relationship, and the U.S.-Japan-India trilateral relationship.

On the military front, the U.S. is developing a joint warfare concept, as exemplified by the

Joint Concept for Access and Maneuver in the Global Commons (JAM-GC), which reflects

new operational requirements, and is deploying cutting-edge sea and air-based war-fight
ing capabilities to the Asia-Pacific, including stealth fighters like the F-22 and the F-35, the

maritime patrol and reconnaissance aircraft P-8 Poseidon, Virginia-class nuclear submarines,

unmanned undersea vehicles, and strategic bombers.

The Army plans to reduce the size of its troops from the current 500,000 to 460,000 by

September 2017, while the Navy is planning to deploy 60% of its forces to the Asia-Pacific

region by increasing the number of vessels operating in the region as it continues to expand its

fleet size until 2020.

The Air Force is also set to procure next-generation fighter aircrafts, aerial refueling tankers,

transport aircraft and long-range stealth bombers. It is also improving the ground attack and

electronic combat capabilities of the F-22 and is developing the LRS-B[15)] which will replace

the B-2 and B-52.

The U.S. military is also bolstering efforts to strengthen its cyber-security posture. In

December 2014, the U.S. Congress passed the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act, and in 2016,

the CTIIC[16)] was established.

**15) Long range Strike Bomber.**

**16) Cyber threat intelligence integration Center**


-----

The CNAP,[17)] unveiled in February 2016, stresses the need for cooperation in the cybersecu
rity field with allies and partners, including the ROK and Japan, calling cyber-threats serious

threats to national security.

Although there may be changes in the U.S. foreign policy and military strategy under the

new Trump administration, set to take office in January 2017, the importance of Asia, as part

of the country’s global strategy, including the ROK-U.S. Alliance and the U.S.-Japan Alliance,

is expected to remain undiminished.

**| Japan | In July 2014, under the mantra of ‘proactive pacifism,’ Japan changed its constitu-**

tional interpretation of the use of the right to collective self-defense and is expanding the role

of the Self-Defense Forces. By revising the ‘Guidelines for U.S.-Japan Defense Cooperation’

in April 2015 and amending national security laws and regulations in September of the same

year, Japan created a legal basis to be able to use force by activating the right to collective

self-defense even when it is determined that there is a threat to the existence of Japan even

if there is no direct attack on Japan. When a situation is deemed to importantly affect Japan,

it is now possible for Japan to provide rear-area support such as fueling aircraft preparing to

take off, without geographical limitations, and supplying ammunition to not only U.S. forces

but forces of any other nation. The range of activities permitted to the Self-Defense Forces has

been extended to include rescue operations for Japanese nationals residing overseas, protection

of U.S. troops and other foreign troops in action with the JSDF, and escort missions in the

context of peacekeeping operations (PKO).

Under the new concept of a ‘Dynamic Joint Defense Force’ adopted in the 2013 by ‘Defense

Program Outline’ and ‘Mid-term Defense Program,’ Japan is expanding the fighting capabili
ties of the ground, air and maritime Self-Defense Forces.

The Japan Ground Self-Defense Force (JGSDF) deployed a coast observation unit near the

Senkaku/Diaoyudao Islands for the surveillance of this area and is currently preparing to

create an amphibious rapid deployment brigade to carry out amphibious operations. A cen
tralized ground command[18)] is set to be established for the rapid and flexible deployment of

divisions and brigades. To swiftly respond to new developments in its territorial islands, some

of the divisions and brigades are scheduled to be converted to mobile divisions and brigades.

The Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force (JMSDF) is planning to expand its fleets of destroy
ers including Izumo-class helicopter destroyers and submarines by 2023. Meanwhile, to

enhance Japan’s defense capabilities against ballistic missiles, the number of AEGIS destroy
ers will be increased from the current six to eight.


**17) Cybersecurity National action Plan**

**18) an operation command unit equivalent to the rOK’s Ground Operation Command.**


-----

In April 2014, the Japan Air Self-Defense Force (JASDF) set up the Airborne Early Warning

Group, equipped with the E-2C, in Okinawa to strengthen the surveillance of Japan’s territo
rial islands. In January 2016, the 9[th] Air Wing was established by adding an additional F-15

fighter squadron. The JASDF is currently integrating the latest airborne early warning and

control systems, long-endurance unmanned air vehicles (UAVs), vertical takeoff and landing

aircraft, aerial refueling tankers and transport aircraft into force structures.

To prepare for cyber warfare, the Cyber Defense Unit, integrating the cyber warfare

functions of all three branches of Self-Defense Forces, including ground, air and maritime

forces, was created in March 2014, within the Ministry of Defense. This was followed by the

establishment of the Cybersecurity Strategy Headquarters and the National Center for Incident

Readiness and Strategy for Cybersecurity in January 2015. Japan is also enhancing its capacity

for monitoring ballistic missiles, using the reconnaissance satellite, and is improving its space

surveillance system for stable use of the space.

Moreover, the Japan Self-Defense Forces are participating in counter-piracy and inter
national emergency relief efforts. They have dispatched two destroyers, two P-3C units and

support troops to Somalia and the Gulf of Aden. Navy ships, transport aircraft and disaster

relief medical teams were also dispatched in December 2014 to support the search for the

missing Indonesian plane, and in April 2015 to assist the recovery effort in the aftermath of the

Nepal earthquake.

**| China | China has set the goal of creating a ‘moderately prosperous society’ (xiaokang-**

_shehui)[19)] by 2020, the 100[th] anniversary of the founding of the Chinese Community Party,_

and becoming a prosperous, democratic, harmonious and strong socialist country by 2049, the

100[th] anniversary of the People’s Republic of China.

In the 2015 Chinese defense white paper, ‘China’s Military Strategy,’ it emphasized that

“China’s dream is that of a strong nation, and the military’s dream is that of a strong military,”

and made clear its resolve for a China-led regionalism in East Asia by declaring a new security

concept whereby ‘the people of Asia uphold the security of Asia.’[20)] Under the slogan of

‘winning local wars under the conditions of informatization,’ China is innovating its military

strategy and optimizing its military structure. Following the announcement by President Xi

Jinping during the 2015 Victory Day parade, commemorating the 70[th] anniversary of the end

of World War II, to reduce the manpower of the People’s Liberation Army by 300,000 troops,

**19) ‘‘Xiaokangshehui’ is a stage of social development in China that is supposed to follow the stage of ‘wenbao,’ meaning warmness and**
fullness. While ‘wenbao’ is about meeting the basic needs of citizens, ‘xiaokangsheshui’ refers to a middle-class society in which its
members are able to enjoy culture and leisure.

**20) this concept was proposed by Chinese President Xi Jinping during his keynote speech at the fourth Conference on interaction and**
Confidence-building Measures in asia (CiCa) Summit in May 2014.


-----

a sweeping military reshuffle occurred, with an anti-corruption campaign currently underway

to restore discipline in the ranks.

The People’s Liberation Army Ground Force (PLAGF) set up a Ground Forces Command in

2015 to enhance capabilities in precision operations, multi-dimensional operations, full-spec
trum operations, multi-function operations and sustainment operations.

The People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) has shifted its operational mode to maritime

operations that combine the defense of coastal waters and guarding offshore areas, and is

working to improve its capabilities for strategic deterrence, counterattacks, maritime mobile

operations, joint maritime operations and integrated defense operations. The Chinese Navy is

deploying four nuclear ballistic missile submarines loaded with JL missiles[21)] with a minimum

range of 8,000 km and 870 surface and underwater vessels. It also has field deployed the

Liaoning, an aircraft carrier with a flight deck capable of carrying some twenty J-15 fighter

jets, and is currently developing several aircraft carriers.

The People’s Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF) is building an aerospace defense force

system in an effort to take its attack, defense, air, and aerospace capabilities to a new level,

with a particular focus on strengthening its capacity for strategic early warning, air strikes, air

and missile defense, air transportation operations, strategic lifting and integrated support. The

PLAAF currently possesses close to 3,000 military aircraft, with Y-20 strategic lifters opera
tionally fielded. After the recent test flight of the J-20 prototype the J-20, the actual J-31 was

also unveiled.

The Rocket Force, formerly the Second Artillery Corps (strategic missile unit), is deploying

some 500 ballistic missiles, including the DF-31A with a maximum range of 8,000km and the

DF-5B with a range of 15,000km. Moreover, the DF-41, a new intercontinental ballistic missile
(ICBM), is said to be under development.

China is also heavily investing in satellite communications, intelligence, surveillance and

reconnaissance, satellite-based navigation, meteorology, and space exploration in pursuit of

becoming a space powerhouse. In 2016, China successfully completed the launches of the

carrier rockets, Long March/Changzheng 7 and 5. The launch of the Chang’e 4, the lunar

exploration spacecraft, is scheduled for 2018.

**| Russia | According to the fourth 2014 ‘Military Doctrine’ and the revised 2015 ‘National**

Security Strategy,’ Russia’s current strategy is centered on ‘proactive defense through strong

military power,’ and is executing a bold defense reform initiative focused on reorganizing

the military structure and capacity, raising the salaries of servicemen, and overhauling the

military housing system.


**21) Ju Lang.**


-----

The Russian Army disbanded division-size units and partially staffed units and established

eighty-five brigades. In the western region, three new divisions were set up to prepare for the

increasing threat posed by NATO[22)] forces deployed along the western border area.

In 2014, the Russian Navy established the Arctic Joint Strategic Command with the Russian

Northern Fleet at its core. In 2015, the Navy conducted an amphibious exercise in the Arctic

islands for the first time, as Russia seeks to strengthen the effective control of the Arctic

region.

The Russian Aerospace Forces were founded in 2015 by merging the Air Force and the

Space Force to swiftly and effectively respond to potential aerospace attacks.

In 2016, the Strategic Missile Troops conducted sixteen rounds of ICBM test fire exercises

to enhance its combat readiness posture and field adaptability capabilities. Also, Russia is

currently developing a ‘railway-based combat rocket system’ with the goal of completing the

project by 2020.

In December 2015, the Eastern Military District located in Khabarovsk fielded advanced

SU-35 fighters for the first time. Weapons modernization is also in progress with the field

deployment of the Alexander Nevsky, the nuclear ballistic missile submarine, the Iskander-M

ballistic missile system, and the S-400 surface-to-air missile system.

**22) North atlantic treaty Organization.**


-----

**section 3 north Korean situation and**
**Military Threats**

Since Kim Jong-un’s assumption of power, North Korea has focused on consolidating the new leader’s

monolithic rule and stabilizing the regime. the era of Kim Jong-un was officially proclaimed at the Seventh

Congress of the Workers’ Party of Korea. to gain the upper hand in inter-Korean relations, North Korea has

resorted to dual-track tactics of provocation and dialogue, while engaging in diplomacy in an attempt to

avoid sanctions and reduce its isolation from the international community. the continuing provocations by

the North, in the form of developing WMDs such as nuclear capabilities and ballistic missiles, expanding

its conventional forces, carrying out armed provocations in contact areas, conducting cyber-attacks, and

small-sized drone infiltrations, are serious threats to regional stability in Northeast asia as well as global

peace.


**1. north Korean situation**

**| Internal situation | In April 2012, after the completion of power transfer, Kim Jong-un**

consolidated his rule through a vast reshuffle of the party, state, and military leadership. By

purging, demoting, or rehabilitating the senior-level party, state, and military officials, he

sought to stabilize his regime and strengthen his one-man rule.

The Seventh Congress of the Workers’ Party of Korea

held in May 2016 marked the official beginning of the Kim

Jong-un era and made clear its intention not to abandon

the nuclear program. The ruling party was reorganized

around Kim Jong-un, and members of his close entourage

were appointed to key positions to cement his mono
lithic rule and strengthen the cohesion of the regime. Kim

Jong-un received the title of “Chairman of the Workers’

party”, a new top leadership position, and the Secretariat

was dissolved to be replaced by a new organization called

the Executive Policy Bureau, with Park Bong-ju and Choi

7[th] Congress of the Workers’ Party of Korea

Ryong-hae added as new standing members of the bureau. (May2016)

During the Fourth Plenary Session of the 13[th] Supreme People’s Assembly, the State Affairs

Commission was newly established to replace the National Defense Commission with Kim

Jong-un appointed as its first Chairman, in another move to consolidate his one-man rule.


-----

In 2016, promoting its status as a nuclear state, North Korea continued with its provocations

by conducting the fourth nuclear test, which was followed by test launches of a long-range

missile, submarine-launched ballistic missile, and short and medium-range missiles. Just eight

months after the fourth nuclear test in September of the same year, on the anniversary of the

founding of the communist regime, North Korea pushed ahead with the fifth nuclear test.

North Korea is bolstering its combat readiness posture by expanding its arsenal of 300mm

multiple rocket launchers and anti-tank guided weapons while also continuing with test flights

of drones, GPS signal jamming, and cyber-attacks.

To steer out of its chronic economic crises, North Korea has been implementing the so-called

“New Economic Management Improvement Measures”[23)] since Kim Jong-un’s assumption of

power. While the stated goal is to improve the living standards of North Korean people under

the policy of combining economic growth with the development of nuclear weapons and the

“People First” policy, no real progress has been seen in this area as vast financial resources

were expended in large-scale projects such as the nuclear program and the Masik Pass Ski

Resort that are aimed at the self-aggrandizement of the Kim Jong-un regime. The living con
ditions of the North Korean people have in fact worsened due to the frequent labor mobiliza
tion for campaigns like the “70-day battle and the 200-day battle.”[24)] Amid the heightening

sanctions and pressure from the international community, defection of senior-level officials

has increased since the mass-defection of China-based North Korean restaurant workers in

April 2016. In an attempt to stymie the wave of defection, North Korea is currently taking

measures to strengthen the internal cohesion of the regime by stepping up the ideological

education and surveillance by public security forces.

**| Inter-Korean Policy | To gain the upper hand in inter-Korean relations and force changes**

to the ROK government’s North Korea policy, North Korea is employing the dual-track tactics

of provocation and dialogue.

On February 12, 2013, North Korea carried out its third nuclear test and on April 8 tempo
rarily suspended the operation of the Kaesong Industrial Complex. However, observing how

the hard-line approach failed to yield the expected benefits due to the widespread anti-North

Korea sentiment in the international community and Seoul’s consistent North Korea policy,

North Korea agreed to resume the operation of the Kaesong Complex on August 14, after

seven rounds of working-level talks. On August 23, during an inter-Korean working-level Red

Cross meeting, the North agreed to reunions of the separated families. However, on September

**23) a new economic policy implemented since 2012, whose core concept is to increase the autonomy and incentives of individual**
economic actors such as cooperative farms and cooperative factories.

**24) a speed-battle slogan used as a rallying cry for the mobilization of civilian labor.**


-----

21, just four days before the scheduled date of the reunion, North Korea abruptly cancelled

the event through a statement by the Committee for Peaceful Reunification of the Fatherland,

citing political reasons.

The dual-track tactics of provocation and dialogue continued in 2014. In his New Year’s

Address, Kim Jong-un spoke of the need to create the mood for improving inter-Korean

relations, and the National Defense Commission released a “Critical Proposal to the South,”[25)]

in an all-out peace offensive. However, during the family reunions at Geumgangsan Mountain

between February 20 and February 25, North Korea fired rockets and ballistic missiles. In

March and April, remains of small UAVs, presumed to have been made in North Korea, were

discovered in Paju, Gyeonggi-do, Paengnyeongdo Island, and Samcheok, Gangwon-do. On

March 31 and April 29, North Korea fired massive artillery rounds near the Northern Limit

Line (NLL)[26)] and on May 22, fired at the ROK navy vessels on patrol in the West Sea. On

October 4, Hwang Pyong-so, the chief of the General Political Bureau, Choi Ryong-hae, and

Kim Yang-gon, three top leaders of the North Korean regime attended the closing ceremony

of the Asian Games in Incheon and agreed to resume high-level meetings between the two

Koreas. However, on October 7, only three days after this agreement, the North initiated a

skirmish near the NLL in the West Sea, and on October 10, the North Korean military fired

at the balloons launched by a ROK civilian organization. Using this incident as a pretext,

Pyongyang requested an emergency meeting, and an inter-Korean meeting between the

military authorities was held on October 15.

North Korea raised issues such as the prevention of maritime conflicts in the West Sea and

the launching of propaganda leaflet balloons by civilian groups. The ROK officials demanded

that the North respect the NLL and acknowledge its responsibility in the sinking of the ROKS

Cheonan and the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo Island while proposing to set up a hotline between

the two militaries. The meeting ended without result, with the North Korean side claiming that

Seoul rejected its proposals.

In 2015, North Korea continued its provocations all the while engaging in a deceptive charm

offensive by professing the desire to improve inter-Korean relations in its New Year’s Address

and in a statement by the National Defense Commission. Starting in February, North Korea

launched short-range missiles and in May, conducted an SLBM ejection test. On August

4, North Korea’s provocation using a wooden-box land mine broke out in the DMZ,[27)] and

on August 20, the North Korean military carried out artillery provocations, ratcheting up

**25) the proposal includes suspension of mutual criticism and hostile military actions, and denuclearization.**

**26) the Northern Limit Line is the de facto maritime border between the two Koreas, which has been in effect since its establishment on**
august 30, 1953. the waters south of the NLL are under the rOK jurisdiction.

**27) Demilitarized Zone.**


-----

tensions. Later, with the “August 25 Agreement,”[28)] reached through high-level meetings

between the two Koreas to de-escalate the tensions, there were some signs of a positive shift

in inter-Korean relations. However, the high-level talks concluded without any breakthroughs

due to North Korea’s strong insistence on the resumption of the suspended Geumgangsan

Mountain tour.

On January 6, 2016, when North Korea

conducted the fourth nuclear test, the ROK gov
ernment responded by expressing its resolve to

impose tough sanctions on North Korea and by

resuming loudspeaker propaganda broadcasts

towards the North. North Korea responded

in kind by broadcasting propaganda towards

the South via loudspeakers and by dropping a long-range missile launch (December 2016)

leaflets. As a result, inter-Korean relations

were further aggravated. On February 7, even as discussions on North Korean sanctions were

underway in the international community, North Korea launched a long-range missile.

On February 10, the ROK government announced the complete suspension of operations at

the Kaesong Industrial Complex, and the North Korean authorities closed down the complex

on the following day, exacerbating the tension.

Incensed by the unilateral announcement of North Korean sanctions by the ROK govern
ment as well as the Key Resolve (KR) exercise[29)]/Foal Eagle (FE) training,[30)] North Korea

threatened to attack the Blue House and government organizations of the South through a

“critical statement” on February 23 by the Supreme Command of the Korean People’s Army

and a “critical report” on March 23 by the Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of the

Fatherland. Pyongyang escalated tensions by releasing images of a nuclear warhead[31)] and

a KN-08 intercontinental ballistic missile and showed off its various delivery vehicles by

test-launching an SLBM and short and medium-range missiles.

While continuing its deceptive offensive for dialogue such as proposing inter-Korean

military talks during the Seventh Congress of the Workers’ Party of Korea, North Korea

**28) On august 20, 2015, in the wake of the wooden-box mine provocation in the DMZ of august, 4, North Korea shelled across the**
border two separate times, to which the rOK military returned fire. the two countries then held a 43-hour marathon talks in a bid to
end the standoff and reached a six-point agreement on easing military tensions, resuming separated family reunions, and interKorean dialogue and future talks, whose details were made known through a joint press release on august 25.

**29) Key resolve is a rOK-U.S. combined military exercise conducted annually to practice procedures for rapid, safe deployment of US**
augmentation forces during contingency on the Korean Peninsula.

**30) Foal eagle is a combined field training annually conducted by the rOK armed forces and the U.S. Forces, Korea to prepare for a rear**
infiltration by the enemy.

**31) the so-called “nuclear warhead” shown in the photos released by North Korea appears to be a standard implosive fission device.**
however, limited information is available to determine whether it is a mockup or an actual warhead.


-----

attempted to divide the ROK public opinion using its dual-track tactics of provocation and

dialogue, carrying out rhetorical threats on the decision by the ROK government to deploy

the THAAD system on one hand and showing off its missile strike capabilities on the other.

Starting in late October, North Korea engaged in a war of public opinion and cyber-psycholog
ical warfare as part of its scheme to instigate social unrest in the South.

Moving forward, North Korea is likely to continue with its rhetorical threats and escalation

of military tensions while shifting the blame for the worsening of inter-Korean relations to the

South. At the same time, North Korea will attempt to resume civilian exchanges and coopera
tion with ROK, strengthening its unified front tactics.

**| foreign Policy | Despite criticism and sanctions from the international community, Kim**

Jong-un is intent on ensuring the survival of his regime by further developing North Korea’s

nuclear capabilities and gaining recognition as a nuclear state.

The UN Security Council adopted Resolutions 2087[32)] and 2094[33)] against North Korea

following its long-range missile launch in December 2012 and the third nuclear test in February

2013, respectively. After the fourth nuclear test conducted in January 2016, the UN Security

Council unanimously adopted Resolution 2270 which contains significantly “‘tougher and

more effective’” measures against North Korea. Following the fifth nuclear test in September

2016, the UN Security Council further strengthened the sanctions against the North Korean

regime through Resolution 2321, which, among others, placed a cap on coal exports and added

new items to the list of banned export items.

After the U.S.-North Korea “Lead Day Deal”[34)] of 2012 was breached, all official channels

of dialogue were cut off between the two countries.

Without responding to the U.S.’ call for dialogue on denuclearization and an improvement

of its human rights situation, North Korea carried out nuclear tests and missile test launches in

2013 and 2016. In 2016, while issuing threats of preemptive attack and churning out diatribes

against the U.S., the Kim Jong-un regime demanded that Washington end the hostile policy

against North Korea. Since July 2016, North Korea has been pushing for a structure where

ROK, U.S., and Japan on one side are in conflict with North Korea, China, and Russia on the

other side by bandwagoning on the opposition by China and Russia to the USFK decision to


**32) the resolution condemns the launch of a long-range missile by North Korea, strengthens the North Korean sanctions and warns**
of further significant measures (per the trigger clause) in the event of a future provocation, while also expanding the scope of the
existing sanctions.

**33) the resolution, expressing grave concerns on North Korea’s nuclear tests, bans the import and export of materials deemed for use**
in the development of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles and places restrictions on the movement of financial assets.

**34) During the third high-level talks held in Beijing between February 23 and 24, 2010, North Korea agreed to a series of**
denuclearization measures, including a moratorium on nuclear and missile tests, suspension of its Yongbyon Nuclear Complex and
the return of iaea (international atomic energy agency) inspectors, in exchange for 240,000 tons of “nutritional assistance” from
the U.S.


-----

deploy THAAD. North Korea also launched a Rodong missile into Japan’s exclusive economic

zone (EEZ), while pinning the blame for the heightened tensions on the Korean Peninsula on

the U.S.

North Korea-China relations that took a turn for the worse following the third nuclear test

showed signs of thawing in 2015 when a standing member of the Chinese Communist Party’s

Political Bureau traveled to Pyongyang to attend the celebration of the 70[th] anniversary of the

founding of the Workers’ Party of Korea. However, the relationship between the two countries

cooled off again after the fourth and fifth nuclear tests and a long-range missile launch by

North Korea. North Korea is currently trying to improve its relationship with China by taking

advantage of China’s objection to the deployment of THAAD and holding bilateral talks with

China during the ASEAN Regional Forum. North Korea is also avoiding UN sanctions by

maintaining its trade with China.

By declaring the “Year of Friendship between North Korea and Russia” in May 2015, North

Korea has expanded its exchanges and cooperation with Russia, and the two nations agreed

to strengthen their economic cooperation during the celebration of the 67[th] anniversary of the

Agreement between North Korea and Russia on Economic and Cultural Exchanges in March

2016. Although Russia has indicated the intention to join the sanctions against North Korea

and implement the UN resolutions, it is allowing the Najin-Hasan project[35)] as an exception

considering the impact of the draconian sanctions against North Korea on its own economy.

Also, North Korea is looking to expand exchanges with Russia in many areas including

politics, economy, culture, and academics.

No real improvement has occurred in North Korea-Japan relations despite the hint of a thaw

in the wake of the Stockholm Agreement[36)] in May 2014. In 2016, after the fourth nuclear test

by North Korea, Japan stepped up its unilateral sanctions against North Korea. North Korea

retaliated by halting the re-investigation into Japanese abductees while strongly criticizing

Japan’s past history and conservative swing.

Meanwhile, Pyongyang is vehemently protesting the UN resolution on the human rights

situation in North Korea. In March 2016, North Korean Foreign Minister Ri Su-yong stated

that the country “will no longer attend meetings that attacks North Korea’s human rights

issues and will not accept resolutions of any kind.” North Korea continues to claim that its pos
session of nuclear weapons is due to Washington’s hostile policy and nuclear threats.

While protesting that UN Security Council Resolution 2270 of March 2016 is unfair, North

**35) this project began in 2000 when russian President Putin and North Korean leader Kim Jong-il agreed to jointly develop the Najin-**
hasan railway and connect it with the trans-Siberian railway (tSr) and the trans-Korean railway (tKt)— the 54km railway between
hasan near russia’s far-eastern border— and includes modernization of the port of Najin and logistics projects in North Korea.

**36) During the director-level talks between the two countries’ foreign ministries held in Stockholm, Sweden on May 26, 2014, North**
Korea agreed to launch a new inquiry into Japanese abductees and other Japanese nationals residing in its territory in exchange for
partial easing of sanctions imposed by Japan.


-----

Korea focused on trade with China per the clause for exceptions for livelihood purposes, all

the while smuggling and continuing to accumulate hard currency. With new tough sanctions

imposed based on UN Security Council Resolution 2321, which was adopted in November

2016, North Korea is striving to find a way around them.

North Korea is likely to carry out additional nuclear tests to earn recognition as a nuclear

state from the U.S. and continue with the demand for a peace treaty between the two. At

the same time, North Korea will try to resume high-level contacts with China in the hopes

of repairing the relationship with China and easing sanctions imposed on them while also

attempting to break out of international isolation by stepping up diplomacy focused on friendly

countries.

**2. Military strategy and Military Command structure**


**| Military strategy | In 1962, in accordance with the principle of “self-reliance in defense”[37)]**

embedded in the Juche ideology, North Korea adopted four military guidelines and has since

continued to build up military strength under its Songun(military first) Politics.

While maintaining a military strategy centered on guerrilla warfare, hybrid warfare and

blitzkrieg, North Korea is also exploring various tactics. After his succession to power, Kim

Jong-un strengthened North Korea’s system for conducting not only local provocations, but

also a total war. To secure military strength superior to that of ROK, North Korea is heavily

investing in asymmetric capabilities such as nuclear weapons and WMD,[38)] missiles, long
range artillery, underwater capabilities, special force units and cyber-units while continuously

enhancing the performance of its conventional weapons. Notably, North Korea has developed

a 6,800-strong unit of trained cyberwarfare specialists who are launching various forms of

cyber-attacks.

During contingency, North Korean forces are likely to resort to hybrid and guerilla warfare

and blitzkrieg. There is a strong possibility that they will launch massive surprise attacks on

limited targets, mainly using their asymmetric capabilities.

**| Military Command structure | Kim Jong-un, who is concurrently serving as the**

Chairman of the State Affairs Commission, Supreme Commander of the Korean People’s

Army, and the Chairman of his party’s Central Military Commission, maintains practical


**37) article 60 of the North Korean Constitution stipulates, “the State shall implement the line of self-reliant defence, the import of**
which is to train the army into a cadre army, modernize the army, arm the entire populace, and fortify the country on the basis of
equipping the army and the people politically and ideologically.”

**38) Weapons of Mass Destruction.**


-----

command and control over the North Korean military.

The State Affairs Commission oversees the affairs of the North Korean state and decides

upon policies that are of importance to the country. The Supreme Commander of the Korean

People’s Army has under his command the General Political Bureau, General Staff Depart
ment and the Ministry of People’s Armed Forces. The General Political Bureau supervises

party organs within the military and is responsible for matters related to political ideology.

The General Staff Department has the command authority over military operations while the

Ministry of People’s Armed Forces, which externally represents the North Korean military,

is responsible for military diplomacy and administers military logistics, procurement and

finance.

The Central Military Commission, pursuant to the Charter of the Workers’ Party of Korea,

deliberates and decides upon measures necessary for implementing the party’s military policy

and guidelines and provides guidance in overall defense affairs at the party level. The military

command structure of North Korea is visualized in <Chart 1-3> below:

**<Chart 1-3> north Korea’s Military Command structure**

**state Affairs Commission**
**(supreme Commander)**

|Col1|Guard Command|
|---|---|
|||



**General Political** **General staff** **Ministry of People’s**
**Bureau** **Department** **Armed forces**



**Ministry of People’s**
**Armed forces**

**×××**


**×××**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|×× ××× ××× ××× ×× ×× ××||||


**General Political**
**Bureau**

**Military security**
**Bureau**


**Regular** **91 Capital** **Cavalry and** **Air and**

**Mechanized** **11[th]** **Armored** **Artillery** **strategic**

**Corps** **Defense** **infantry** **navy** **Anti-Air**

**Corps (2)** **Corps** **Division** **Division** **force**

**(10)** **Corps** **Division (4)** **Command**


**Road**

**engineering**

**Construction**

**Corps**

**Corps**


*[ State affairs Commission: Former National Defense Commission, Military Security Bureau: Former Military Security Command, 91 Capital ]
Defense Corps: Former Pyongyang Defense Command, ×××: Corps, ××: Division

**3. Military Capabilities**

**| Ground force | The Ground Force is composed of 10 regular corps, two mechanized**

corps, 91 Capital Defense Corps, 11[th] Corps (known as “Storm Corps”), one armored division

and four mechanized infantry divisions under the control of the General Staff Department.

Following the re-organization of the seventh and eighth General Bureaus of the Ministry of

People’s Security into the Engineering Corps and Road Construction Corps, the Ground Force

was placed under the control of the Ministry of People’s Armed Forces.

The General Staff Department, recently restructured by adding the Command Information


-----

Bureau among others, has implemented an integrated tactical command and control system[39)]

to strengthen C4I (Command, Control, Communication, Computer and Intelligence) capabil
ities, while building up cyberwarfare capabilities through the expansion of trained manpower

and organizational reinforcement.

With about 70% of the Ground Force positioned south of the Pyongyang-Wonsan line, North

Korea maintains a readiness posture capable of carrying out a surprise attack on the South at

any time. The forward-deployed 170mm self-propelled guns and 240mm MRLs, for instance,

provide North Korea with the means for massive, concentrated surprise fire on the greater

Seoul metropolitan area. The recently-developed 300mm MRLs are capable of reaching the

middle part of ROK. North Korea has reinforced its artillery forces, including the 122mm

towed MRLs, in coastal areas north of the NLL in the West Sea and frontline areas. Mecha
nized units, warships, aircraft and special force units have been deployed forward in a move to

strengthen its provocation and attack capability in the five Northwest Islands and surrounding

regions and in frontline areas.

North Korea is also improving its operational capabilities through equipment modernization,

with its armored and mechanized units now being equipped with Chonma-ho and Songun-ho

main battle tanks.

North Korea’s special operations force is currently estimated to be 200,000-strong. The

special operations units are strategic, operational and tactical units composed of diverse

elements such as the 11[th] Corps, light infantry divisions and brigades and sniper brigades of

the Forward Corps, sniper brigades belonging to the Navy, and the Air and Anti-Air Force.

In wartime, special operations units are likely to infiltrate both the forward and rear areas

through underground tunnels and the DMZ or with the help of other means of infiltration,

such as submarines, landing craft air cushions (LCACs), AN-2 aircraft and helicopters, to

conduct hybrid operations by attacking vital units, facilities and installations, assassinating

key figures, and disrupting rear areas. The key assets of the North Korean Ground Force are as

shown in <Chart 1-4> below:

**<Chart 1-4> Key Assets of the north Korean Ground force**


**Tanks** **Armored Vehicles** **Cannons** **MRLs** **300mm MRLs**

**Approx. 4,300** **Approx. 2,500** **Approx. 8,600** **Approx. 5,500** **Approx. 10**

**39) a system supporting decision-making and strike orders by the commander (GS-2000).**


-----

**| navy | The Navy, organized under the Naval Command, is composed of two fleet**

commands for the East and West Seas, respectively, 13 naval squadrons and two maritime

sniper brigades.

Although the North Korean Navy possesses the capability to carry out a surprise attack at

any time with 60% of its forces positioned south of the Pyongyang-Wonsan line, its capacity

for deep-sea operations are limited due to the small, high-speed vessels that make up much of

the fleet.

Surface forces are mostly composed of small, high-speed vessels such as guided missile

boats, torpedo boats, small patrol craft and fire support patrol craft. Their mission is to

support the advancement of the Ground Force in connection with ground operations, while

also carrying out coastal defense. More recently, the Navy has added new mid- to large-size

vessels and various types of VSV[40)] to enhance its surface strike capability.

**<Chart 1-5> Key Assets of the north Korean navy**


**surface Combatants**
**Approx. 430**


**Amphibious Vessels**
**Approx. 250**


**Mine sweepers**
**Approx. 20**


**Auxiliary Vessels**
**Approx. 40**


**submarines**
**Approx. 70**


**| Air force | The Air Force Command of North Korea has been renamed the Air and**

Anti-Air Force Command. Five flight divisions, one tactical transport brigade and two air

force sniper brigades and air defense units are under its command.

The North Korean Air Force, with around 1,630 aircraft, has positioned its forces in four

different zones. Close to 40% of fighter aircraft are forward positioned south of the Pyong
yang-Wonsan line. With the recent forward deployment of additional bases, the North Korean

Air Force has achieved a posture capable of delivering swift strikes with minimum prepara
tions.

Through the enhancement of SAMs[41)] and improvement of the performance of weapons

systems including long-range missiles, the North Korean Air Force has attained the capacity

to carry out surprise attacks against ROK’s surveillance and reconnaissance assets, command

and control facilities, anti-air assets and industrial facilities without deploying additional

aircraft. Its AN-2 aircraft and helicopters can transport large-scale special operations forces

**40) Very Slender Vessel.**

**41) Surface-to-air Missile.**


-----

for infiltration. The Air Force has also been producing and deploying UAVs and light aircraft

for reconnaissance and strikes.

The North Korean air defense system, built around the Air and Anti-Air Force Command,

integrates aircraft, surface-to-air missiles, anti-aircraft artillery and radar air defense units.

SA-2[42)] and SA-5[43)] surface-to-air missiles are deployed to forward areas in eastern and

western regions, while SA-2 and SA-3[44)] surface-to-air missiles and anti-aircraft artilleries are

concentrated around the Pyongyang area to form a layered air defense system.

A large number of radar air defense units such as the ground controlled interception bases

and the early warning bases are spread out across North Korea, allowing the regime to scan

the entire Korean peninsula. To increase the detection accuracy of radar air defense units

and reduce the response time, North Korea is currently setting up an automated air defense

command and control system. The key assets of the North Korean Air Force are shown in

<Chart 1-6> below:

**<Chart 1-6> Key Assets of the north Korean Air force**


**surveillance and**
**Control Aircraft**
**Approx. 30**


**Transport Aircraft**
**(including An-2s)**
**Approx. 330**


**Helicopters**
**(of all three services)**
**Approx. 290**


**fighter Aircraft**
**Approx. 810**


**Training Aircraft**
**Approx. 170**


**| strategic force | The Strategic Rocket Command has been renamed the Strategic Force**

and has been promoted to a military command at the same level as the Ground Force, Navy,

and Air and Anti-Air Force Command. The Strategic Force is likely to perform similar

functions as China’s Rocket Force and Russia’s Strategic Missile Troops. Future reinforcement

efforts are expected, with a particular focus on asymmetric forces.

**| Reserve forces | The Reserve Forces of North Korea are composed of the Reserve**

Military Training Unit, which is subject to combat mobilization, the workplace-based or

regional Worker-Peasant Red Guards, the Red Youth Guard, which is a military organization

in high schools, and paramilitary units. Eligible ages of mobilization are from 14 to 60 years of

age, which corresponds to 7,620,000 or roughly 30% of the population.


**42) a guided missile system for striking mid- to high-altitude targets, with a maximum range of 56km.**

**43) a guided missile system for striking high-altitude targets, with a maximum range of 250km and developed to complement the Sa-2.**

**44) a guided missile system for striking medium-range, low to mid-altitude targets, with a maximum range of 25km.**


-----

The Reserve Military Training Unit, which can augment the combat capability of the regular

armed forces during contingency, is 600,000-strong. The unit maintains a level of training

comparable to that of the regular armed forces. The status of the reserve forces in North Korea

is shown in <Chart 1-7>:

**<Chart 1-7> north Korean Reserve forces**

|Category|strength|Remark|
|---|---|---|
|total|approx. 7.62 million||
|reserve Military training Unit|approx. 0.6 million|equivalent to rOK’s Mobilization reserve Forces (Men between 17-50 and women between 17-30)|
|Worker-Peasant red Guards|approx. 5.7 million|equivalent to rOK’s homeland reserve Forces (Men between 17-60 and women between 17-30 who are not in reserve Military training Unit)|
|red Youth Guard|approx. 1 million|advanced middle school military organization (boys and girls between 14-16)|
|Paramilitary units|approx. 0.32 million|the Guard Command, Logistics Mobilization Guidance Bureau, etc.|



**| strategic Weapons | To bolster its strategic attack capabilities, North Korea has continu-**

ously developed nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles, and chemical, biological, and radiological

weapons. North Korea first gained access to nuclear materials in the 1980s after operating

the 5MWe reactor located in the Yongbyon Nuclear Complex by reprocessing spent fuel rods.

Later in October 2006, May 2009, February 2013, and January and September 2016, North

Korea conducted five nuclear tests. North Korea is estimated to possess around 50kg of weap
ons-grade plutonium obtained from several rounds of reprocessing spent fuel rods. North

Korea is also believed to have made significant headway in its HEU[45)] program. Its ability to

miniaturize nuclear weapons also seems to have reached a considerable level.

After beginning ballistic missile developments in the 1970s, North Korea produced and

fielded Scud-B and C with ranges of 300km and 500km, respectively, in the mid-1980s. In

the late 1990s, North Korea fielded the Nodong missile with a range of 1,300km, and later the

Scud-ER, which extends the range of scud missiles. In 2007, North Korea fielded the Musudan

missile with a minimum range of 3,000km without a test-launch. Through these successive

additions to its missile inventory, North Korea has gained direct strike capabilities against

ROK and the surrounding countries of the Korean Peninsula.

As part of an effort to develop a long-range ballistic missile capable of threatening the con
**45) highly enriched Uranium.**


-----

tinental U.S., North Korea test-launched a Taepodong-1 in 1998, and Taepodong-2 missiles

in 2006, 2009, April and December 2012, and February 2016. Starting in 2012, North Korea

released footages showing the ICBM-class KN-08 on three occasions and KN-14 on one

occasion.

To flaunt its various delivery capabilities, North Korea released images of various tests

conducted since March 2016, including a simulated test of its warhead re-entry technology,

solid-fuel rocket engine test, and a ground test of an ICBM engine.

Between April and October 2016, North

Korea conducted eight test-launches of

Musudan missiles, of which only one was

estimated to have been partially successful.

North Korea is continuing with its devel
opment of SLBMs, releasing footages of test

launches four times between May 2015 and

August 2016. North Korea is expected to SLMB launch (april 2016)

heavily invest in SLBMs at the regime level to

prepare for additional test-launches and build submarine operation capabilities. The types of

ballistic missiles currently in North Korea’s inventory are shown in <Chart 1-8>.





**<Chart 1-8> Types of north Korean Ballistic Missiles**

**Alaska**

**Russia**

**north** **Washington**
**Korea**

**scud-C** 500km **China** **Japan** **LA**

**Pacific**
**Ocean**

**scud-eR** 1,000km **Guam**

**nodong** 1,300km

**Australia**

**Musudan: More than** 3,000km

**Taepodong-2: More than** 10,000km


-----

North Korea began producing chemical weapons in the 1980s and currently holds a stockpile

of an estimated 2,500 to 5,000 tons of chemical weapons. Sources indicate that North Korea

is capable of cultivating and producing various types of biological agents such as anthrax,

smallpox, and pest on its own.

**| War sustainment Capability | Despite the ongoing economic crisis, North Korea is chan-**

neling resources into developing the defense industry as a top priority in order to maintain

its war sustainment capability. North Korea has an estimated 300 armament factories, and

civilian factories designated for transition to armament production are capable of shifting to a

wartime mobilization mode in a short period of time.

With most of its war supplies stored in tunnel storage facilities, North Korea is assessed

to possess a stockpile of war supplies that can last one to three months. However, without

external assistance, North Korea’s ability to sustain a prolonged war is likely to be limited.


-----

-----

###### Chapter
# 2
National Security Strategy and Defense Policy


-----

Section 1 National Security Strategy 38

Section 2 National Defense Policy 41


-----

**section 1 national security strategy**

the Park administration is implementing its national security strategy to realize a “New era of hope” in

the security sector. the government intends to push ahead with its “trust-Building Process on the Korean

Peninsula” on the foundations of a robust defense strategy and trust-based diplomatic relations, thereby

protecting national sovereignty and the safety of the Korean people.

**1. national Vision and security Objectives**

The Park administration has set forth its

national vision of a “New Era of Hope” where

the Republic of Korea’s development and

the happiness of individual citizens form a

virtuous cycle. Under this overarching vision,

the administration has selected “economic

revival,” “welfare of the people,” “cultural

enrichment” and “establishment of a foun
dation for peaceful reunification” as its four

2016 New Year Briefings to the President by Government

principles. “Establishment of a foundation for agencies dealing with Foreign affairs and National Defense

(January 2016)

peaceful reunification” is a priority encompass
ing national security issues. To this end, three national security objectives have been estab
lished: “Safeguarding the territory and sovereignty of ROK and ensuring the safety of the

people,” “establishing sustainable peace on the Korean Peninsula and preparing for an era of

reunification,” and “promoting cooperation in Northeast Asia and contributing to world peace

and prosperity.”

First, the government will concentrate its efforts on protecting the nation’s territory and sov
ereignty as well as the people’s lives and properties from multifaceted and complex threats.

They include armed provocations by North Korea as well as current, future, and transnational

threats.

Second, the government seeks to realize sustainable peace on the Korean Peninsula and

prepare for the era of reunification by building trust between the two Koreas. Above all, the


-----

government will make the utmost effort to closely cooperate with neighboring countries and

the international community to pave the way for North Korea to abandon its nuclear program

and make the right choice. It is also committed to achieving the normalization and stable

development of inter-Korean relations and aims to bring reunification to the Korean Peninsula

by building up resolve, support and readiness for reunification both domestically and interna
tionally.

Third, the ROK government seeks to bolster national security by promoting cooperation in

Northeast Asia and contributing to world peace and prosperity. Initially it seeks to build trust

among the various nations in the Northeast Asian region through dialogue and cooperation.

Moreover, it is pursuing to expand on the synergy generated by coexistence and reconcilia
tion. The government will encourage cooperation among Eurasian nations and advance toward

peace, stability and shared prosperity in the wider region that encompasses Asia and Europe.

**2. Tenets of the national security strategy**


To successfully carry out the task of establishing a foundation for peaceful reunification,

a set of three strategies to be implemented in the fields of defense, reunification, and foreign

affairs have been selected: “Establishing a robust security posture,” “pursuing a trust-building

process on the Korean Peninsula,” and “promoting trust-based diplomacy.”

First, strong national security is the basis for the very existence of a nation, improved

inter-Korean relations, and enduring peace on the Korean Peninsula. The ROK govern
ment will also further strengthen a thorough reponse posture to deter provocations by North

Korea and resolutely retaliate to any provocation by North Korea. The government will also

be equipped with the capability to effectively take measures against North Korean nuclear

and missile threats while further reinforcing the ROK-U.S. combined readiness posture to

achieve sufficient deterrence capabilities against Pyongyang. Any transnational threats such

as terrorism, cyber-attacks, pandemics, and national disasters, as well as current and future

threats, will be addressed proactively and preemptively. In order to meet these security chal
lenges, the government will expand security cooperation by strengthening bilateral and multi
lateral relations through the development of the ROK-U.S. Alliance and strategic cooperation

with neighboring countries.

Second, through the trust-building process on the Korean peninsula, the ROK govern
ment intends to induce changes in North Korea, normalize and promote the development of

inter-Korean relations as well as achieve sustainable peace. The government will cooperate

with regional neighbors to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue, bring peace to the Korean

Peninsula and shape conditions for reunification. By adopting a reunification policy supported


-----

by the Korean people, the Government plans to bridge the divide on the North Korea and

reunification issues and for such a national consensus to build momentum towards establish
ing a reunified Korea.

Third, the ROK government seeks to make full use of its trust-based diplomacy to resolve

the so-called “Asia’s Paradox” in which the level of political and security cooperation lags far

behind the deepening economic interdependency. The Northeast Asia Peace and Cooperation

Initiative (NAPCI) is a key policy to realize trust-based diplomacy in Northeast Asia. Through

this initiative, the ROK government seeks to establish a custom of multilateral cooperation

in the region starting with those issues that countries can easily engage in cooperation, such

as climate change, terrorism, drug trafficking and the environment. Building on this feat,

ROK will aim to broaden the scope of cooperation to include more controversial issues. The

government will seek to build greater consensus on the need for change in North Korea, and

further strengthen cooperation with the international community to induce North Korea to

renounce its nuclear development and promote human rights. In the process, the government

will further garner support from the international community for reunification. As a middle

power, the government will also strive to earn greater trust from the international community

and promote an attractive national image by fully committing to its responsibilities and role in

the international arena.


-----

**section 2 national Defense Policy**

to achieve the national defense vision of “advanced elite Military,” the Ministry of National Defense
(MND) has selected and is implementing seven Key tenets of the National Defense Policy. in tandem, the

Ministry is maintaining a robust military readiness posture which is the fundamental duty of the military.

Furthermore, it is strengthening the fundamentals by establishing a barracks culture that the people

understand and the servicemembers appreciate. Moreover, while bolstering its future-oriented defense

capacity based on a robust rOK-U.S. Combined Defense System, the ministry is additionally creating a

strategic environment favorable towards promoting our national interest and preparing for reunification.


**1. national Defense Objectives**

The National Defense Objectives are: “protecting the nation from external military threats

and attack,” “supporting a peaceful reunification of the Korean peninsula,” and “contributing

to regional stability and world peace.” These objectives are discussed below in detail:

First, the constant military threats and provocations from North Korea are the primary

security threats the ROK faces today. In particular, North Korea’s nuclear weapons including

ballistic missiles, weapons of mass destruction (WMD), cyber-attacks and terrorism pose

major threats to our national security. As long as these threats persist, the North Korean regime

and its military will remain an enemy insofar as they are the agents carrying out these threats.

At the same time as contending with these threats, the ROK will also continuously expand its

capacity to respond to potential threats against its peace and security as well as transnational

and non-military threats.

Second, the ROK will achieve sustainable peace that is oblivious to the fear of nuclear pro
liferation, and make preparations for a blissful era of reunification that both Koreas can look

forward to.

Third, within the framework of the ROK-U.S. Alliance, the ROK will promote common

interests with regional neighbors and increase strategic cooperation to mitigate anxiety over

security in the region. Moreover, by strengthening bilateral and multilateral cooperation with

countries around the world that share the ROK strategic interests, the ROK will strive to

broaden the scope of security cooperation.


-----

**2. national Defense Vision and Tenets of the national Defense Policy**

**| national Defense Vision | MND has set forth a new national defense vision for the ROK**

military: “Advanced Elite Military.” The term “advanced” refers to a military for the people

in which all troops have upright values and mindsets; a military whose barracks culture is

trusted by the people; and a military of the people that serves as an example to the world

through a creative and efficient defense operations system with superior defense capabilities.

The term “elite” refers to a military in which strong and brave servicemembers are equipped

with optimal weapons and equipments, while also being trained in real combat-like situations

so as to display the highest level of unified combat power. The combined term “advanced elite

military” means a military that is elite, advanced and has the posture and capability to fight

against the enemy and win.

**| Tenets of the national Defense Policy | The ROK military has identified and is pursuing**

the following seven key Tenets of the National Defense Policy as its consistent policy direction

toward achieving the National Defense Vision: (1) Establishing a robust defense posture;
(2) Strengthening future-oriented and autonomous defense capabilities; (3) Developing the

ROK-U.S. military alliance and reinforcing defense diplomacy and cooperation; (4) Providing

military measures and readiness in accordance with the changing inter-Korean relations; (5)

Bolstering innovative defense management and promoting the defense industry; (6) Creating a

proud and rewarding environment for military servicemembers; and (7) Implementing defense

policies that are respectful of the people. The National Security Strategy and the National

Defense Policy are summarized in <Chart 2-1>.


-----

**<Chart 2-1> The national security strategy and the national Defense Policy**

**national Vision** **Tenets**

New era of hope - Economic revival

- Welfare of the people

- Cultural Enrichment

- Establishment of foundation for **national** - Protection of the country from external
peaceful reunification

**Defense** military threats and aggression
**Objectives** - Supporting peaceful reunification

-  Contribution to regional stability and

**national** - Protection of territory, sovereignty, and security world peace
**security** of the people
**Objectives** - Establishment of peace in the Korean Peninsula

and preparing for reunification

- Contribution to the cooperation among
Northeast asian countries and world peace

**national**
**Defense** advanced, elite military
**Vision**

**Tenets of** - Establishment of a stable security posture
**national** - Promotion of “the Trust-Building Process on the
**security** Korean Peninsula”
**strategy**

- Pursuit of trust-based diplomacy

**seven Tenets of Defense Policy**

① establishment of a firm national defense posture

**strategic** ① establishment of a firm national defense
**Tasks** posture and reinforcement of future-oriented ② enhancement of future-oriented, autonomous national

defense capabilities defense capabilities

② Development of inter-Korean relations through ③ Development of the rOK-U.S. alliance, defense
“the trust-building Process on the Korean diplomacy, and cooperation
Peninsula”

④ Provision of military measures and readiness in

③ realistic preparations for reunification accordance with the changing inter-Korean relations

④ Development of the strategic rOK-U.S. alliance

⑤ innovative national defense management and

and enhancement of international cooperation

promotion of the defense industry

for national security

⑤ Provision of the cooperative framework for ⑥ Creating a rewarding military service environment that
peace in Northeast asia and the world instills pride in servicemembers

⑥ Contribution to national development and ⑦ Promotion of national defense policy that are
prosperity of humanity respectful of the people


**3. Objectives and four Priorities in Defense Management**


The ROK Armed Forces has set “Defense with a Robust Foundation, Defense Preparing

for the Future” as the goal of national defense agenda in consideration of its National Defense

Vision, Tenets of the National Defense Policy and the drastically changing security environ
ment. “Defense with a Robust Foundation” refers to the concept of making working condi
tions for all servicemembers safe and enjoyable while maintaining strict discipline; creating

an environment for national defense where the servicemembers can focus on their combat

missions; and building a full-spectrum national defense posture to fight enemies through

realistic training and combat preparation.


-----

“Defense Preparing for the Future” refers to fostering an “Advanced Elite Military” that can

contribute greatly to regional stability and world peace by shaping a strategic environment

favorable of the ROK to take the initiative in defending and unifying the Korean Peninsula.

To achieve such a goal, the ROK Armed Forces has specified and is actively pursuing four

priorities in defense management: “Building a robust national defense posture,” “creating a ful
filling and advanced service environment,” “strengthening future-oriented defense capabilities,”

as well as “developing the ROK-U.S. Alliance and strengthening external defense cooperation.”

**| Building a Robust national Defense Posture | The ultimate and unchanging goal of the**

ROK military is to ‘fight the enemy and win.’ On the foundation of the ROK-U.S. combined

defense system, the ROK military maintains a strong readiness posture and is developing an

integrated civilian-government-military-police defense system based on the concept of total

war. In the face of nuclear missile and WMD threats, it is building up the ROK-U.S. Tailored

Deterrence Strategy[1)] and its counter-missile operational posture, while also establishing the

Korean triad system[2)] for effective deterrence and decisive retaliation against North Korea’s

provocation.

The ROK military will strengthen response capabilities in the face of potential threats while

proactively and preemptively responding to any transnational as well as non-military threats.

It is introducing and prioritizing training based on real-world combat scenarios to create a

combat-mission-oriented military that can fight the enemy and win. Furthermore, the military

is enhancing the servicemembers’ mentality so they can cultivate the traits of a warrior and

patriot while forming a clear understanding of the enemy, commendable character, and civic

consciousness.

**| Creating a fulfilling and Advanced service environment | To become the “Advanced**

Elite Military” trusted and respected by the Korean people, the ROK military is shaping a

new culture that can be appreciated and approved by the people and the servicemembers. It

is creating conditions to allow the servicemembers to pursue personal development so that

military service may be a productive experience for them. It is also improving the standard

of basic necessities provided to servicemembers such as food, clothing and shelter. Moreover,

it is modernizing barracks facilities and broadening support toward military families. The

ROK Armed Forces will reform the military health care policy to ensure that servicemembers

injured while serving the country are continuously and comprehensively treated by the gov
ernment and to create a health care system that focuses on preventive measures.

**1) Deterrence strategy of the rOK-U.S. alliance optimized for the Korean Peninsula against North Korea’s nuclear and WMD threats**

**2) 1: Kill Chain, 2: Korea air and Missile Defense (KaMD), 3: Korea Massive Punishment and retaliation (KMPr)**


-----

The military is implementing various policies to improve the level of welfare such as

ensuring stable living conditions for long-term servicemembers and improving child care

facilities for the families of servicemembers.

**| strengthening future-oriented Defense Capabilities | The ROK military is expanding**

its defense capabilities in order to proactively respond to North Korea’s various provocations

and to the full spectrum of transnational and non-military threats. It will bring its defense

reform plan up to date to re-align it with the changing environment, overhaul the troop

structure in favor of elite personnel, and put in place an advanced, high-efficiency defense

management system. Furthermore, it plans to integrate creativity and cutting-edge civilian

Information and Communication Technology (ICT) capabilities into the process of operating

and building the ROK Armed Forces to introduce innovations and bring about progress across

all areas of defense.

For the advancement of defense science and technology, the ROK Armed Forces will

increase investment in defense research and development and promote technology cooperation

between the military and civilian sectors by transferring technologies to the civilian sector and

applying civilian technologies in the defense field. By managing defense projects in a system
atic manner, the military will ensure the normal pursuit of defense programs and boost their

competitiveness.


**| Developing the ROK-U.s. Alliance and strengthening external Defense Cooperation |**

The ROK and the United States are building a full-spectrum combined defense system

to maintain peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula above all else. By holding defense

dialogues both on a regular and ad-hoc basis, the two countries will closely coordinate

policies, effectively manage issues of importance to the ROK-U.S. Alliance, ensure condi
tions necessary for the deployment of rotational forces, and continuously carry out combined

exercises and training.

The transition of the wartime operational control will proceed in a stable manner by period
ically evaluating whether the required conditions are met and the two countries will broaden

the level and scope of cooperation to include space and cyber cooperation, as well as interna
tional peacekeeping activities, humanitarian aid, and disaster relief.

The ROK military will improve strategic communications with neighboring countries by

installing hotlines between defense and military authorities and holding frequent senior-level

strategic dialogues while engaging in international peacekeeping operations more actively in

order to contribute to world peace and stability.


-----

###### Chapter
# 3
Establishing a Robust Defense Posture


-----

Section 1 Military Organization and Forces 48

Section 2  Maintaining a Readiness Posture against Local Provocations 54

Section 3  Maintaining a Readiness Posture against Aggression 59

Section 4 Establishing an Integrated Civilian-Government- Military-Police Defense Posture 64

Section 5 Reinforcing Response Capabilities against North Korean Nuclear and WMD Threats 67

Section 6 Establishing a Response System against Transnational and Non-military Threats 76

Section 7 Reinforcing Realistic Training and Moral Education 84


-----

**section 1 Military Organization and forces**

in the face of increasing North Korean threats, the rOK military is enhancing its command and unit

structure to maximize its capacity for joint and combined operations in diverse future operational

environments and is continuously expanding its strength, while increasing the efficiency of its current

capabilities, to be able to respond to any type of provocations.

**1. Organization of the Joint Chiefs of staff**

The Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) conducts joint and combined operations through operational

command and supervision over combat operation units and through command and supervision

over joint units.

The JCS was initially set up and operated within MND as a non-permanent organization[1)]

until it was officially established in 1963 under its current name. The JCS presently operates

through one vice chairman, four chief directorates and five offices under the chairman of the

JCS. The organization of the JCS is as shown in <Chart 3-1> below:

**<Chart 3-1> Key Organizations of the Joint Chiefs of staff**

**Chairman of the JCs**

|Vice Chairm Korea Defense Chief Directorate of Intelligence Agency Operations|an of the JCs Chief Directorate of Chief Directorate of Military support strategic Planning|
|---|---|


**Office of the**
**Chairman**


**Office of the Judge**
**Advocate**


**Office of the Public**
**Affairs**


**Office of Inspector**
**General**


**Office of Analysis and**
**experimentation**


The JCS is developing its task performance system toward close mutual support and inte
gration among the Army, Navy and Air Force by strengthening their jointness. In preparation

**1) ‘Combined Chiefs of Staff Council in 1948’, ‘Joint Chief of Staff Council’ in 1954**
and ‘Combined Chief of Staff Bureau’ in 1961.

rOK armed Forces


-----

for the anticipated wartime operational control (OPCON) transition, the JCS is enhancing its

organizational structure and functions of the ROK military and its capabilities through a sys
tematic approach to strengthen the warfighting capabilities led by the ROK forces.

**2. Organization and Key Assets of the Three services**


**| Army | The Army consists of the Army Headquarters, two Field Army Commands, the**

Second Operations Command, Capital Defense Command, Special Warfare Command, Army

Aviation Operations Command, Missile Command and support units. The key organizations

and assets of the Army are detailed in <Chart 3-2>:

**<Chart 3-2> Key Organizations and forces of the Army**


**Army HQ**

**Army Aviation**

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|||

**Operations**
**Command**


**Training and**
**Doctrine**
**Command**


**Capital Defense**
**Command**


**special Warfare**
**Command**


**Missile**
**Command**


**Personnel**
**Command**


**Logistics**
**Command**


**field Army**
**Commands (2)**
**second Operations**
**Command**

**Corps (8)**


Helicopters

Field Artillery/
MLRS

Guided Weapons

Approx. 490,000 Approx. 2,400 Approx. 2,700 Approx. 5,900 Approx. 60 Approx. 600


Troops


Tanks


*[ tanks, armored vehicles, field artillery/MLrS include the forces of the Marine Corps]

The two Field Army Commands are responsible for defense in their respective forward

areas, up to the Military Demarcation Line (MDL). The mission of the Second Opera
tions Command is to maintain the stability of the rear area and war sustaining capabilities.

Meanwhile, the Capital Defense Command is responsible for the protection of key facilities

and urban infrastructure of Seoul to help the city maintain its functions as the capital. Other

commands are responsible for special operations, aviation operations, personnel and logistics

support and education and training.

The Army, while maximizing its current capabilities through their efficient deployment, is

also continuously reinforcing its intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) capabil

army


-----

ities including reconnaissance UAVs capable of carrying out integrated offensive, full-battle
field operations, as well as maneuver and strike forces such as K2 battle tanks, K-21 infantry

fighting vehicles and attack helicopters, and counter-fire operations capabilities including the

multiple launch rocket system.[2)]

**| navy | The Navy, organized under the Navy Headquarters, is composed of the Naval**

Operations Command, Marine Corps Headquarters, Northwest Islands Defense Command
(NWIDC), and various support units. The key organizations and assets of the Navy are shown

in <Chart 3-3>:

**<Chart 3-3> Key Organizations and forces of the navy**


**navy HQ**

**naval Operations** **Marine Corps HQ/** **Logistics** **education and**

**Training**

**Command** **nWIDC** **Command** **Command**

**fleet Commands** **submarine force** **Divisions**
**(3)** **Command** **(Brigade) 2 (1)**


Troops


Aircrafts


Surface
Combatants


Amphibious
Ships


Mine Warfare
Vessels


Auxiliary
Vessels


Submarines


Approx. 70,000 Approx. 110 Approx. 10 Approx. 10 Approx. 20 Approx. 10 Approx. 70

-  including the troops of the Marine Corps (approx. 29,000)
-  Submarine Force Command: established on February 1, 2015 / Marine Corps 9[th] Brigade: established on December 1, 2015

The Naval Operations Command has command authority over naval operations as a whole,

conducting anti-surface operations,[3)] anti-submarine operations,[4)] mine and counter-mine

operations[5)] and amphibious operations. The Fleet Commands conduct defensive missions

by deploying surface combatants such as destroyers, frigates, patrol vessels and patrol killer

mediums (PKMs). Meanwhile, the Submarine Headquarters carries out operations involving

the use of submarines. The Marine Corps Headquarters is in charge of amphibious operations,

**2) a launch system in which multiple rockets are mounted in a rectangular or cylindrical-shaped**
launchers, delivering massive and concentrated fire power.

**3) Operations aimed at securing or maintaining maritime control and neutralizing or destroying the**
enemy’s maritime surface forces, using surface combat warships, submarines and aircrafts.

**4) Operations to neutralize or destroy submarines to guarantee the free use of maritime space.**

**5) Operations consisting in stopping or neutralizing the enemy’s naval forces with the help of mines**
or repulsing the enemy’s attempts at using mines. Navy Marine Corps


-----

while also being responsible for defense operations in its assigned areas and coastal islands.

The Marine Corps Headquarters operates the Quick Task Forces and the Quick Reaction

Forces. The Northwest Islands Defense Command is responsible for security and defense

missions of the northwestern islands and also provides logistics support and training support

to the Navy.

To be able to effectively respond to the various types of surface, underwater and airborne

threats, the Navy plans to acquire next-generation submarines (KSS-III), Aegis-class destroy
ers, destroyers (KDDX), frigates (FFX), patrol killer mediums, surface patrol aircraft and

maritime operations helicopters for integrated deployment. The Marine Corps will be

developed into a force capable of carrying out a diverse range of missions including multi-di
mensional high-speed amphibious operations and the defense of strategic islands.

**| Air force | The Air Force is composed of the Air Force Headquarters, Air Force Opera-**

tions Command and various operations and support units. The key organizations and assets of

the Air Force are as shown in <Chart 3-4>:


**<Chart 3-4> Key Organizations and forces of the Air force**


**Air force HQ**

**Operations** **Logistics** **eudcation and**
**Command** **Command** **Training Command**

**Air Combat** **Air Mobility &** **Air Defense Missile** **Air Defense Control**

**Reconnaissance**

**Command** **Command** **Command** **Command**


Combat Mission
Aircraft


C4ISR Aircraft


Transport
Aircraft


Trainers


Helicopters


Approx. 65,000


Approx. 410


Approx. 30


Approx. 50


Approx. 180


Approx. 30


*[ air Combat Command: established on January 1, 2016, air Mobility & reconnaissance Command: established on January 1, 2016]

The Air Force Operations Command (AFOC) has command authority over overall air oper
ations, carrying out counter-air operations (CAOs),[6)] air interdiction (AI) operations[7)] and close


**6) Operations aimed at neutralizing or destroying the enemy’s aerospace forces and anti-air system**
to gain air superiority.

**7) Operations aimed at restricting the enemy’s ability to augment or replenish forces and mobility**
before its potential military capabilities can be effectively used against the rOK army and Navy, by
stopping, disrupting or destroying them. air Force


-----

air support (CAS) operations.[8)] As part of a move toward a more centralized control of air oper
ations, the AFOC has recently re-organized its Southern and Northern Combat Commands

into the Air Combat Command and the Air Mobility and Reconnaissance Command, respec
tively. The Air Defense Missile Command carries out full-spectrum air defense missions

against airborne attacks by enemy aircraft and missile attacks. The Air Defense and Control

Command is responsible for air control within the Korean peninsula theater, air surveillance,

aircraft identification and air operation support.

The Air Force will integrate next-generation F-X fighters and Korean indigenous fighters
(KF-X) into force structures to achieve decisive air superiority, while introducing large-size

transport aircraft and aerial refueling tankers to strengthen its long-range operational capabil
ities.

**3. United states forces Korea and Augmentation forces**

The United States Forces Korea (USFK) is composed of the Eighth U.S Army (EUSA),

U.S. Naval Forces, Korea (NAVFOR-K), U.S. Air Forces, Korea (USAFK), U.S. Marine

Forces, Korea (MARFOR-K), and the Special Operations Command, Korea (SOCKOR). The

Commander of USFK concurrently serves as the Commander of the United Nations Command

and the Commander of the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command. The key organizations and

assets are as shown in <Chart 3-5>:

**<Chart 3-5> Key Organizations and forces of the UsfK**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||


**UsfK**

**8[th] Army** **naval forces, Korea** **Air forces, Korea** **Marine forces,** **special Operations**

**(nAVfOR-K)** **(UsAfK)** **Korea (MARfOR-K)** **Command, Korea**

**(sOCKOR)**


**35[th] Air**
**Defense**
**Artillery**
**Brigade**


**19[th]**
**expeditionary**
**sustainment**
**Command**


**2[nd]**
**Infantry**
**Division**


**501[st] Military**
**Intelligence**
**Brigade**


**65[th] Medical**
**Brigade**


**1[st] signal**
**Brigade**

|th Air forc|e Comman|
|---|---|
|||


**8[th] fighter Wing** **51[st] fighter Wing**


Attack Field Artillery/

Troops Fighters Helicopters Tanks Armored Vehicles MLRS Patriot Missiles

Fighters

Attack
Helicopters

Field Artillery/
MLRS


Approx. 28,500 Approx. 90 Approx. 20 Approx. 50 Approx. 130 Approx. 10/40 Approx. 60

**8) Operations consisting in attacking hostile targets in close proximity to friendly forces to support surface attack, counter-attack or**
defense operations and to thereby help achieve the military goal and guarantee the survival of troops.


-----

The U.S. augmentation forces to be deployed to the Korean peninsula in the event of a war

to support the defense of the ROK, consist of 690,000 ground, naval and air force troops, 160

vessels and 2,000 aircrafts. Pursuant to Article 2 of the Mutual Defense Treaty between the

ROK and the U.S., the augmentation forces are to be increased progressively based on how

the crisis situation develops, in two different modes; namely, the Flexible Deterrence Options
(FDO)[9)] and the Time Phased Force Deployment Data (TPFDD).[10)] The FDO are enacted

during the initial stages of a conflict when the level of crisis rises in the Korean peninsula,

to deter war and mitigate the crisis situation by deploying designated forces. If the attempt to

deter war fails, combat and support forces, as pre-planned under the TPFDD, will be deployed

to execute the ROK-U.S. combined operation plans.

**9) a series of political, economic, diplomatic and military options that are part of the crisis action procedures laid out in the CFC Crisis**
action Standard Operating Procedures, which have to be promptly executed to deter war.

**10) Force deployment list and data of the U.S. augmentation Forces for the execution of combined operational plans.**


-----

**section 2 Maintaining a Readiness**
**Posture against Local Provocations**

For early detection of signs of military provocations from North Korea, the rOK military operates the

rOK-U.S. combined intelligence assets. to prepare for diverse infiltration attempts and provocations,

combined crisis management exercises have been ramped up, with the system for surveillance, decision
making, and strike being optimized on land, sea, and airspace across enemy contact areas.

**1. Developing early Warning and Crisis Management systems**

**| establishing surveillance and early Warning Capabilities | For early detection of signs**

of North Korean provocations and the speedy transmission of detected data, the ROK military

operates the ROK-U.S. combined information assets which include signal and imagery assets

and satellites, while also periodically holding enemy provocation threat evaluation meetings.

The ROK and the U.S. jointly evaluate the various signs of provocations, including the launch

of long-range missiles and nuclear tests. All available intelligence gathered by domestic and

foreign organizations are comprehensively analyzed and shared with appropriate operational

units in a timely manner.

To be able to detect the earliest signs of North Korean provocations, the ROK military plans

to continuously expand its independent surveillance capabilities by acquiring mid- to high-al
titude reconnaissance UAVs, multi-purpose satellites and military reconnaissance satellites.

**| Developing the Crisis Management system | To effectively respond to various threats**

of provocations from North Korea, the ROK military is firmly establishing its crisis man
agement system and the ROK-U.S. Joint Response System. Security manuals were revised in

accordance with the newly-amended ‘National Crisis Management Fundamental Guidelines’
(May 2015), with operational plans and operating procedures also updated and improved

appropriately. Meanwhile, through the National Security Strategy Game, attended by high
level decision-makers of relevant government organizations, efforts are underway to develop

concrete response strategies for different types of crisis situations, while also exploring gov
ernment-wide response strategies. Crisis management exercises are held on a regular basis,

and the level of crisis management and related task performance capabilities are also period

-----

ically evaluated and monitored, maintaining an around-the-clock crisis management posture.

To be able to firmly respond to any type of provocation from North Korea, the ROK military

is also continuously upgrading the ROK-U.S. combined crisis management system by strength
ening combined crisis management exercises and enhancing interoperability between the two

countries’ command and control communications systems.

**2. Bolstering the Readiness Posture against Land, sea and Airspace Infiltra-**
**tion and Provocations in Contact Areas**


North Korea is regularly carrying out provocations on land, at sea and in the air of contact

areas, that are in direct violation of the Armistice Agreement and the non-aggression

agreement entered with the ROK. The ROK military maintains a robust readiness posture

based on the ROK-U.S. combined defense system to deter provocations from North Korea and

sternly retaliate should deterrence fail.

Surveillance equipment such as thermal observation devices, short-distance surveillance

cameras, and CCTVs has been reinforced in enemy contact areas, while a scientific guard

system has been set up at all GOPs to allow efficient surveillance over wider areas, using

fewer personnel. The number of shelters and other protective facilities has also been increased,

and the capability to respond to enemy fire provocations has been strengthened by fielding

multiple launch rockets.

In spite of agreeing to the issues related to Northern Limit Line (NLL) through the

Agreement on Reconciliation, Nonaggression and Exchanges and Cooperation (1991) and the

Protocol on The Implementation and Observance of Chapter 2, Nonaggression (1992), North

Korea is continuing to carry out high-intensity provocations in the northern waters of the

West Sea and in waters near the northwestern islands in order to nullify the NLL. The NLL is

the practical maritime boundary line that the ROK military has firmly defended through the

years. The ROK military will continue to maintain the principle of observance of the NLL and

will sternly respond to any type of provocations against this demarcation line.

To prepare for North Korean artillery provocations and raids to forcibly occupy the north
western islands, the ROK military is continuously expanding its surveillance, reconnaissance

and strike capabilities by increasing the deployment of missiles, maritime operation helicop

Dokdo Border watch in the
central frontline inside
the DMZ


155 miles of wire fence
at the front line is safe
and sound today


Defense Minister han Min-koo
inspects the readiness posture
in Yeonpyeong Unit


-----

**<Chart 3-6> Territory that the ROK Armed forces Must Protect**

**northern Limit Line (nLL)**

38° 37′ N 133° 00′ E

**Military Demarcation Line (MDL)**

**northern Limit Line (nLL)** **east sea**

38° 03′ N 123° 45′ E

Yeonpyeong Unit coast guard

**West sea**

Dokdo maneuver security operation

**south sea**

Patrol activities around the Marado island


*[ Map Source: National Geographic information institute]


-----

ters, and long-range air-to-surface missiles. In

addition, protective capabilities for the north
western islands will also be strengthened

through increased fortification, in a proactive

effort to prepare for North Korean infiltration

attempts and provocations.

The ROK military maintains a full readiness

posture to effectively defend the five northwest Defense Minister han Minkoo inspects the readiness posture

islands as well as the ROK’s territorial land, in northwestern islands (September 2016)

waters and air space in the East, West, and South Seas, including Marado Island, Ulleungdo

Island and Dokdo Island. Its resolute and readiness posture to defend Dokdo, an island whose

territorial appurtenance to the ROK is indisputable based on historical and geographic

evidence and international laws, remain particularly strong.

The ROK military is reinforcing its air surveillance and immediate response posture across

the Korean peninsula. Vigilance against North Korean drone threats (small UAVs) has been

stepped up by strengthening antiaircraft surveillance and enhancing the air defense operations

execution system in areas including detection, identification, tracking and striking procedures.

To be able to effectively respond to the changing operational environment, the ROK military

will optimize its surveillance, decision-making and strike system on land, at sea and in the

airspace of contact areas and bolster its core fighting capabilities.

**3. Maintaining Readiness Posture against Other Types of Provocations**


To proactively respond to potential terrorism and cyber-attacks against the capital area and

critical national infrastructures in rear areas, the ROK military operates surveillance assets

while also tightening cooperation with relevant government organizations. In particular, by

operating a combined coastal surveillance system, the ROK military is preparing for enemy

attempts at maritime infiltration and is enhancing its reconnaissance and surveillance capa
bilities. Meanwhile, to ensure the smooth execution of integrated defense operations, the C4I
(Command, Control, Communications, Computer and Intelligence) system has been linked

with local government agencies. Operational plans have been improved to better prepare for

enemy provocations in both the capital area and rear areas, whether in the form of infiltration

or terrorist attacks. To enable a quick response to enemy provocations, the initial response

system has been strengthened by newly establishing the Quick Reaction Forces in the Special

Warfare Command and the Marine Corps.

To counter North Korean attempts to disturb GPS signals, the civilian-government-military


-----

cooperation system has been reinforced by setting up a collaboration system with the Ministry

of Science, ICT and Future Planning and revising the GPS Signal Disturbance Crisis Response

Manual. Meanwhile, to prepare for cyber-attacks from North Korea, the cyber-operations

execution system has been upgraded, with a new cyber strategy unit created within the Joint

Chiefs of Staff.

In accordance with the ‘Act on Anti-terrorism for the Protection of Citizens and Public

Security’ and the Enforcement Decree of the said Act, the ROK military is methodically

implementing its ‘Joint Chiefs of Staff Terrorism Readiness Comprehensive Development

Plan,’ while also continuously improving its preparedness and response capability against

attempts to disturb our GPS signals and cyber-attacks by North Korea.


-----

**section 3 Maintaining a Readiness**
**Posture against Aggression**

to prepare for a full scale war initiated by North Korea, the rOK military is enhancing its operational

plans and is conducting joint and combined exercises and training. Plans are underway to revamp the

wartime mobilization system for troops and munitions to achieve greater efficiency, and to create the

army Mobilization Force Command to compensate for the shortage of active-duty troops, resulting from

the reduction of service personnel, through highly-trained reserve forces. the procurement, maintenance

and logistics systems are drastically overhauled, and all available resources of the civilian, government

and military sectors, located both inside and outside the country, are to be utilized to strengthen the war

sustainment capability.


**1. enhancing Wartime Operational Capabilities**

North Korea is expanding its asymmetric warfighting capabilities, including nuclear and

missile capabilities, while continuing to maintain a large conventional force. Its key forces

are positioned mostly south of the Pyongyang-Wonsan line for a posture capable of launching

surprise attacks and engaging in lightning warfare without needing to redeploy its forces.

In preparation for the threats of a full scale war from North Korea, the ROK military is continu
ously developing ROK-U.S. joint operational plans to new levels of effectiveness and increasing its

wartime operational capabilities through scientific and systematic training. During a contingency,

the ROK-U.S. combined and joint forces, based on the robust military alliance between the two

countries, will be operated in an offensive manner to carry out simultaneous, integrated opera
tions on land, at sea and in the air, as well as in cyber-space, to seize the initiative at the earliest

stages of war. By annihilating North Korea’s warfighting capabilities and destroying its will to

fight, the combined and joint forces will achieve a decisive victory in a short period of time.


**2. Providing High-level Training to Reserve forces (Building an elite Reserve**
**force)**

**| establishing a firm Mobilization Posture | To secure a sufficient deterrence capacity to**


-----

prevent war and strengthen the capability to sustain war, should one occur, the ROK military

is continuously improving its mobilization plans to more efficiently marshal available human

and material resources to support wartime military operations as well as disaster or emergency

response operations.

The ROK military is pursuing a revision of the relevant laws and regulations so that the units

required to execute operations can be selectively and partially mobilized during a situation

when an ‘integrated defense situation’ is declared in order to minimize the impact on the lives

of citizens and the national economy.

In 2016, Mobilization Supplement Battalions complete with troops, equipment, supplies and

ammunition were established as part of an effort to create a wartime supplementation system.

Meanwhile the zone-based mobilization designation system,[11)] which was piloted in 2013, is

set to be progressively expanded until 2018 for optimal implementation results. The transpor
tation plan for the mobilized resources in the Seoul metropolitan area is also being reviewed

and revised appropriately by taking into consideration operational and traffic conditions.

In 2017, the Army Mobilization Force Command is planned to be established to strengthen the

fighting capability of wartime mobilized ground forces.

Through the establishment of this Command, the Army’s frontline operations execution

conditions will be improved as the forces mobilized for those units that are critical for oper
ations during the early stages of war will be trained to be elite forces. The part-time military

service program,[12)] which was piloted in 2014 to guarantee the immediate combat power of the

mobilized forces during a contingency, is scheduled to be expanded in scope and eligibility by

2020 to compensate for the reduction of active-duty personnel.

The process of troop mobilization is assisted by the National Defense Mobilization Informa
tion System and the Mobilization Designation System of the Military Manpower Administra
tion to ensure that the operational requirements of the military are met. The management of

mobilization operations will also be continuously improved for both wartime and peacetime

mobilization by upgrading the National Defense Mobilization Information System and linking

it with systems of other government agencies. Peacetime mobilization operations are evaluated

for improvement both through drills and actual mobilization during the Chungmu Exercise, as

part of a sustained effort to guarantee the effectiveness of wartime mobilization.

While appropriately adjusting the wartime mobilization system for supplies and munitions

based on combined requirements with the Ministry of Public Safety and Security and other

**11) the system manages mobilization resources by dividing the country into two zones and assigns mobilization reserve forces based on**
units in which they served during the period of active duty.

**12) a program in which volunteering officer reservists, enrolled in a mobilization reserve division or reserve replacement battalion, serve**
for 20 days annually, participating in unit training and managing mobilization resources, to achieve a readiness posture capable of
promptly carrying out missions during a contingency.


-----

government agencies, MND is continuously enhancing the system by conducting a joint gov
ernment survey on mobilization resources so that optimal resources can be mobilized. The

effectiveness of the mobilization mechanism for troops and resources is also annually tested

and improved through the events held on the ‘Critically Managed Resources Testing Day.’

**| Organization of Reserve forces and Resource Management | Reservists are organized**

and managed as part of the national total war system. Reservists constitute an important force

for meeting operational requirements of the standing force during wartime and ensuring

security and responding to disasters and emergencies in their respective regions during

peacetime. Organized in accordance with the Reserve Forces Act and the Military Personnel

Management Act, reservists are mobilized either to augment active-service units during

wartime or for local and workplace defense missions during wartime or peacetime.

The number of reservists amounts to

2,750,000 as of September 2016. Volunteer

reservists,[13)] nearly 8,000 nationwide, including

women reservists and special operations

reservists, contribute to rear-area operations.

Reservists are organized into local reserve

units at the level of a town, township or neigh
borhood, and workplace reserve units and are Female reservists in training, using MiLeS equipment

separately managed depending on the number (September 2015)

of years served or type of wartime missions to which they are assigned. Reservists are

managed locally, although the Minister of National Defense has the overall responsibility for

their management, as this responsibility is delegated to military units assigned to respective

towns or townships. In 2016, standardized reserve companies (town, township or neighbor
hood-based) were set up, and their wartime and peacetime deployment plans were established

by taking into consideration operational deployment and resource management.

MND plans to efficiently manage reservists so that they can display their combat power

as substitute forces for the standing force which is being reduced. At the same time, it will

continue to enhance the reservist system by considering economic conditions and conditions

related to the livelihood of reservists in the perspective of benefiting the people.


**| enhancing Homeland Defense Operation Capabilities | MND operates reserve units for**

**13) rOK citizens aged 18 and older who applied to join the reserve forces and were selected pursuant to article 3 of the reserve Forces**
act..


-----

regional and workplace defense, and is operating a reserve force management organization[14)]

in order to guarantee the efficient mission execution by administrative zone-based reserve

units. For administrative zone-based reserve units, reserve force regional units are organized

in cities and counties and reserve force companies in towns (eup) and neighborhoods (dong)

with squads and platoons organized under companies.

For combat equipment and supplies for reserve forces, MND is working toward the goal

of replacing them by 2020, either by transferring the equipment and supplies of active-duty

forces or acquiring new ones. To guarantee conditions necessary for operational sustainment

support for reserve units in wartime and peacetime, MND is continuously enhancing its plans

by assisting with the development of reserve forces by local government agencies and through

the Integrated Defense Council.

**3. Reinforcing War sustainment Capabilities**

War sustainment capability means the ability of a country to maintain tangible fighting

capabilities such as troops, equipment, supplies and munitions that are necessary to conduct a

war.

Requirements and capabilities necessary for carrying out a war are annually assessed

through the Defense Requirement Information System (DRIS),[15)] and any shortfalls are

remedied through progressive acquisitions based on a stockpile plan.

The ‘Wartime Logistics Support Requirements and Capabilities Assessment’ is a document

providing estimated logistics support requirements for the first year of a hypothetical war and

the capability to meet the requirements. This document is used as reference information when

drafting the ‘Joint Military Strategic Capabilities Plan,’ ‘Defense Mobilization Operations

Plan’ and the ‘Defense Wartime Budget Bill.’ Through this process, war sustainment capa
bilities are being reinforced by acquiring and maintaining equipment and supplies needed to

conduct a war based on estimated wartime requirements and currently available capabilities.

The expanded application of the performance-based logistics (PBL)[16)] system has helped to

increase the utilization rate of equipment, and the field maintenance support center, a civil
ian-government-military consortium facility, provides speedy maintenance services to field

**14) an organization managing reserve forces, including regional reserve force units, reserve force companies and reserve force training**
units.

**15) an information system to estimate logistics support requirements for the first year of a hypothetical war and the capability to meet**
them (current stockpile and available resources in wartime).

**16) a program compensating military contractors providing equipment maintenance services and supplying spare parts based on their**
performance by measuring the performance according to pre-established indicators including target operating rates.


-----

operation units.

For timely procurement of spare parts that are indispensable for the operation of equipment

in both wartime and peacetime in a timely manner and comprehensive management of assets,

a model for predicting demand for spare parts and managing inventories has been developed,

enabling more efficient budget operations.

Amid the increasing importance of guided missile ammunitions during war, MND presented

a direction on ways to maintain and store guided missiles by publishing the ‘Guided Missile

Management Instructions’ whose purpose is to systematically manage these guided missile

ammunitions, and, through this initiative, it is extending its wartime ammunition support

capability. Moreover, to guarantee immediate access to ammunition procured from overseas

sources during a contingency, MND is continuously cooperating with partners worldwide.


-----

**section 4 establishing an Integrated**
**Civilian-Government-Military-Police**
**Defense Posture**

to effectively respond to increasingly diversifying security threats, the rOK military is continuously

enhancing the integrated civilian-government-military-police defense posture[17)] by organically linking all

elements of national defense and building a cooperation system with relevant government agencies and

local governments.

**1. Operation of Integrated Defense Organizations**

In an effort to achieve an integrated defense posture, the government operates organiza
tions such as the Central Integrated Defense Committee, Integrated Defense Headquarters,

Regional Integrated Defense Committees and the Integrated Defense Support Headquarters. The

command structure and cooperation system for integrated defense are as shown in <Chart 3-7>.

**<Chart 3-7> Integrated Defense Command and Cooperation system**

**Command**

**Cooperation**

|Col1|ident|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||tegrated ommittee||||
||||||
||||||
|nment Ministry of national Ministr tries Defense Inte Joint Chiefs of staff (Integrated Defense Korean Headquarters Working Police Organization)|f national||Ministr|y of the Ministry rior safety an national Korea Agency Gu|
||nse||||


**Local** **Local Military** **Local** **Local**
**Governments** **Commanders** **Police Agencies** **Coast Guards**

**Regional Integrated**
**Defense Committee**

**Integrated Defense**
**support Headquarters**


**17) a national defense posture against infiltration attempts and provocations both in peacetime and wartime, based on the integration**
of all defense elements including the government, local government agencies, military, reserve and police forces, the Civil Defense
Corps and critical national facilities, under a centralized command system.


-----

The Central Integrated Defense Committee is the highest decision-making body in matters

related to integrated defense, reporting to the Prime Minister. The Committee deliberates and

decides upon national-level integrated defense policies, integrated defense operations and

training guidelines, and the declaration or lifting of an ‘integrated defense situation.’

The Integrated Defense Headquarters is comprehensively responsible for integrated defense

operations. With the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff placed in charge of its direction, the

organization establishes and coordinates integrated defense policies, evaluates and supervises

the integrated defense posture, and conducts comprehensive analysis of the status of integrated

defense operations and devises response measures, while also developing the ‘Integrated

Defense Operations and Training Guidelines’ and related plans and overseeing their imple
mentation.

The Regional Integrated Defense Committee

is set up in 230 cities, counties and municipal

wards across the country, including Seoul and

16 other Metropolitan Cities. The Committee

deliberates and decides upon matters including

declaring or lifting an integrated defense

situation at a local level, establishing support

measures for integrated defense operations and 2016 Seoul Metropolitan City integrated Defense Committee

designating ‘vulnerable areas’ of the community (February 2016)

or repealing the designation thereof.

The Integrated Defense Support Headquarters, established at the level of a Metropolitan

City, province, municipality, county, city ward, town, township and a neighborhood, estab
lishes ordinances and standard operating procedures related to integrated defense, develops

and implements plans for supporting integrated defense operations and training, while also

operating an integrated defense situation room. The Integrated Defense Support Headquar
ters is responsible for fostering and supporting all national defense elements including civilian,

government, military and police elements.

**2. Consolidation of the Integrated Defense Posture**


To more effectively respond to increasing and diverse security threats, MND is revamping

the integrated defense posture of the ROK.

While maintaining the existing framework for integrated defense, disaster response and

terrorism response, the linkage between the various elements, including laws and regulations,

operations, organizations and facilities, resource allocation and exercises, has been tightened


-----

in a manner to maximize the capability for integrated responses.

To prepare for infiltration attempts and provocations by the enemy in peacetime and build

the capability for rear-area operations in wartime, the Integrated Defense Headquarters

conducts a comprehensive rear-area exercise on a biennial basis. In 2015, a rear-area exercise

was conducted in Seoul and seven other cities and provinces. Under the supervision of the

Integrated Defense Headquarters led by heads of local government, joint military-police oper
ations were performed to help improve the capacity for carrying out integrated defense opera
tions to protect critical national facilities and urban infrastructures. The exercise was reviewed

to identify tasks for improvement, which were then factored into policy decisions.

At the level of operations, joint exercises between the military and police first responder teams

are planned to be held regularly. Meanwhile, to effectively maintain the response posture against

acts of terrorism, exercises for the protection of vital national facilities have been introduced

along with onsite security inspection activities. Moreover, a master plan was established to

prepare for potential biological threats, and infrastructures for effectively responding to cyber
threats were expanded by creating new response organizations and training manpower.

The various crisis management organizations scattered across local government agencies

and situation rooms of different types are currently being consolidated. The Integrated Pro
tection Plan has also been improved by adding more surveillance equipment, central situation

rooms and security facilities for critical national infrastructures, and entering into security

agreements with relevant organizations.

In the perspective of utilizing resources, C4I systems have been set up in the Integrated

Defense Central Situation Rooms, with a CCTV Integrated Control Center set to be estab
lished by 2018 to enable speedy first responses during a contingency.


-----

**section 5 Reinforcing Response**
**Capabilities against north Korean nuclear**
**and WMD Threats**

While closely adhering to the government’s policy for the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, the

rOK military is strengthening both rOK-U.S. combined capabilities and independent capabilities and

heightening its defense posture to effectively deter and respond to mounting nuclear and missile threats

from North Korea. to facilitate the practical implementation of the rOK-U.S. tailored deterrence strategy

and acquire autonomous deterrence and response capabilities, while reinforcing the posture for bilateral

counter-missile operations, the rOK military is building a ‘triad system,’ adapted to the Korean defense

environment. in tandem, efforts are also underway to enhance its response capability against various

chemical and biological threats.


**1. Developing Deterrence and Response strategies against north Korean nu-**
**clear and Missile Threats**

**| Implementation of the ROK-U.s. Tailored Deterrence strategy | The ROK and the**

U.S. are actively implementing the ‘tailored deterrence strategy,’ a strategy optimized for

the Korean peninsula, developed to effectively respond to any and all situations based on the

special characteristics of the North Korean leadership and current and potential nuclear and

missile threats.

During the 1978 ROK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting (SCM),[18)] in accordance with the

Mutual Defense Treaty between the two countries, the U.S. side promised to provide a ‘nuclear

umbrella’[19)] over the ROK. In 2006, during the 38[th] SCM, in the wake of the first nuclear test

by North Korea, ‘extended deterrence’[20)] was mentioned for the first time. In 2009, at the 41[st]


**18) the highest defense-related consultative body convened annually between the rOK and the U.S.**

**19) the guarantee by a nuclear weapons state to defend a non-nuclear allied state using its nuclear capabilities, considered a major**
non-proliferation tool.

**20) the use of all available types of military capabilities by the U.S. as means of deterrence to protect its allies from nuclear and missile**
threats from an enemy, including nuclear umbrella, conventional strikes and counter-missile defense capabilities.


-----

SCM, convened after the second nuclear test by North Korea, a joint statement was issued,

outlining concrete details of extended deterrence that will be provided to the ROK; namely,

deterrence based on all military capabilities including the U.S. nuclear umbrella, conven
tional strike and missile defense capabilities. In 2013, during the 45[th] SCM, the U.S. Secretary

of Defense and the ROK Minister of Defense signed the tailored deterrence strategy, and in

September 2016, during a bilateral summit, the U.S. commitment to the defense of the ROK,

including extended deterrence, was reaffirmed.

The tailored deterrence strategy, a bilateral deterrence strategy which takes the existing

concept of extended deterrence to a new level, comprises both military and non-military

response measures that can be implemented in various phases of a security crisis, from the

stage in which North Korea threatens to use nuclear weapons to the stage in which nuclear

weapons are actually used. The tailored deterrence strategy is significant insofar as it provides

a joint response framework which makes most of deterrence methods and means available to

the two allies in a manner to maximize the effect of allied capabilities.

In April 2015, to facilitate the practical implementation of the tailored deterrence strategy,

the ROK and the U.S. consolidated the Extended Deterrence Policy Committee (EDPC)[21)]

and the Counter-Missile Capability Committee (CMCC)[22)] into the Deterrence Strategy

Committee (DSC), a new deputy minister-level consultative body. Together with the Korea
U.S. Integrated Defense Dialogue (KIDD), the Deterrence Strategy Committee convenes in

April and September every year, conducting annual exercises involving the use of extended

deterrence means. In particular, during the meeting of the Deterrence Strategy Committee

in September 2016, in the wake of the fifth nuclear test by North Korea, various deterrence

methods and response strategies against North Korean nuclear and WMD threats, including

the nuclear umbrella, were discussed.

In October 2016, during the 48[th] SCM, to ensure the effective implementation of extended

deterrence commitments by the U.S., the representatives of the two countries decided to

strengthen high-level policy and strategic cooperation within the framework of the Extended

Deterrence Strategy and Consultation Group (EDSCG).

Going forward, the ROK military will further enhance its capability for the implementation

of the tailored deterrence strategy by regularly holding policy consultations and conducting

exercises for the deployment of extended deterrence means and combined exercises.

**| establishing and Developing the Alliance’s Counter-Missile Operations Concepts |**

**21) a bilateral committee between the rOK and the U.S. was established in 2011 to guarantee the effectiveness of non-proliferation**
efforts by the U.S.

**22) a consultative body evaluating the rOK-U.S. alliance’s response capabilities against North Korean missile threats and estimating**
requirements for the development of allied forces.


-----

In 2014, during the 46[th] SCM, the ROK and the U.S. agreed on the concepts of comprehen
sive counter-missile operations; namely, to detect, disrupt, destroy and defend against North

Korean ballistic missiles (4D operations).[23)] A year later, during the 47[th] SCM held in 2015,

the two sides adopted a set of guidelines for the implementation of the concepts of 4D oper
ations and agreed to methodically carry out tasks under the said guidelines. Based on these

guidelines, the ROK and the U.S. plan to continuously enhance the Alliance’s capacity for

the practical implementation of the 4D concepts in five fields including decision-making,

planning, command and control, exercises and training, and capability development, while

striving to further develop their counter-missile capabilities and posture.

**<Chart 3-8> Tailored Deterrence strategy and 4D**


**ROK**

**ROK Capability** **Counter-Missile Capability**

**ROK Capability** **(M element)** **U.S.**
**(DIE element)** **U.S. Capability** **Counter-Missile Capability** **4D Operational**

**Concept**

**(M element)**

**U.S. Capability**
**(DIE element)**

**Tailored Deterrence**
**Strategy**


*[ Die: Diplomacy, information, economy ]
M: Military

**| Building the Triad system | To effectively deter and respond to North Korean nuclear**

and missile threats, the ROK military is putting in place the ‘triad system’ to equip itself with

autonomous deterrence and response capabilities.

The Kill Chain, currently under development as one of the three axes of this system, is for

striking North Korean nuclear and missile operations systems, including missiles, mobile

missile launchers and the paths of movement thereof, the command and control system and

relevant fixed installations. The Kill Chain is an attack system comprising a series of steps,

from the real-time detection of enemy missile threats and identifying the target locations to

deciding on the most effective means of strike and launching the strike.

Missile capabilities are currently being expanded with particular focus on ground, surface


**23) Detect: support efforts to disrupt, destroy and defend through the operation of intelligence,**
surveillance and reconnaissance (iSr) assets;
Disrupt: strike fixed infrastructures providing support for the North Korean operation of missiles;
Destroy: directly strike North Korean ballistic missiles and transporter and erector launchers (teL);
Defend: intercept North Korean ballistic missiles in flight toward the rOK soil.


rOK-U.S. Foreign and
Defense Ministers’ Meeting


-----

and subsurface-launched ballistic and cruise missiles, and air-launched guided bombs and

missiles. Surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities will also be strengthened through inte
gration of high-altitude reconnaissance UAVs (HUAVs) and military reconnaissance satellites

into force structures. To build the surveillance, identification and strike capacity against signs

of attack throughout North Korea, additional surface-to-surface missiles, long-range air-to
surface missiles, intermediate-range

air-to-surface missiles and joint direct

attack munitions (JDAM) and laser

guided missiles will be added into force

structures. At the same time, maritime

strike capabilities will also be boosted

by enhancing the performance of sub
F-15K fighter loaded with long-range air-to-surface missile (taurus)

marine-to-surface and ship-to-surface (December 2016)

missiles and developing a strategic ship to

surface missiles.

**<Chart 3-9> Kill Chain**

**Reconnaissance**
**UAV**

**Reconnaissance**
**satellite**

**Fighter**

**Strike order**

**Operations Control Center**

3 **Target** 4 **Engage**

1 **Find** 2 **Fix**

**AEGIS Destroyer**


The Korea Air and Missile Defense (KAMD), the second axis of the triad system enabling

the interception of missiles launched by North Korea before they hit their targets on the

ground, is continuously being enhanced. The KAMD is a multi-tier missile defense system

that takes into consideration the battlefield environment of the Korean peninsula. For the time

being, the system is centered on low-tier defense at the final stage of the trajectory.


-----

The KAMD consists of three main components: the early warning system, command and

control system and the interception system. An enemy missile is detected through the ballistic

missile early warning radar system or the radar system of an Aegis ship. When the detection

data are analyzed by the operations control post and transmitted to the appropriate missile-in
terceptor battery, the battery that has received the interception order tracks the missile, using

its own radar system, and intercepts it. With the ballistic missile early warning system, Aegis

ship and Patriot missile batteries currently integrated into the force structure, the ROK military

possesses the capability to detect and defend against ballistic missiles targeting key capital

area facilities and major air bases. In addition, upgraded Patriot missiles, medium-range sur
face-to-air missiles (M-SAM) and long-range surface-to-air missiles (L-SAM) are under

development, based on home-grown technology. When they are fielded in the mid-2020s, this

will expand the geographic coverage of the KAMD and improve its interception capability.

**<Chart 3-10> Korea Air and Missile Defense (KAMD)**

**Midcourse**
**phase**

**Ascending**
**phase**

**Operations**
**control center**

**Long-range**
**surface-to-air**
**(L-SAM)**

**Medium-range**
**surface-to-air**

**Early warning radar** **(M-SAM)**

**PATRIOT**

**North Korean TEL**

**Aegis radar**


The ROK military will continuously identify new requirements to further develop the

KAMD and expand interoperability with the U.S. system in a sustained effort to strengthen

the capacity to effectively deploy its counter-missile capabilities and the reliability of its

missile defense system.

The concept of the Korea Massive Punishment and Retaliation (KMPR), plan which consti
tutes the triad system, along with Kill Chain and KAMD, is continuously being developed and

refined. The idea is to punish and retaliate against North Korea in the event of a strike against

the ROK by directly targeting its leadership, including its war headquarters, through deploy
ment of missiles capable of simultaneous, massive-scale precision strikes, and special opera

-----

tions units. While the ROK military already possesses ballistic and cruise missile capabilities

that are sufficient to deliver a considerable level of punishment and retaliation, the KMPR will

maximize the capacity by developing a new optimized missile launch system and large-ca
pacity, high-performance warheads and by creating specialized units with select, elite special

operations units.

**<Chart 3-11> Korea Massive Punishment and Retaliation (KMPR)**

**Air-to-ground missile**

**Cruise missile**

**Pyongyang**

**Cruise missile**

**War Command** **Special operational**
**forces**


**| Deployment of the THAAD system by the UsfK | To ensure the security of the ROK and**

its people, and to protect alliance military forces from increasing North Korean nuclear and

missile threats, the ROK and the U.S. together decided to deploy the Terminal High Altitude

Area Defense (THAAD) system by the United States Forces, Korea as a self-defense measure.

The THAAD system is a ballistic missile defense system capable of directly targeting

and destroying short to medium-range ballistic missiles during their descent, at an altitude

of 40-150 km. A THAAD battery consists of one fire control system, one radar unit, six

launchers and 48 interceptor missiles.


-----

**<Chart 3-12> Terminal High Altitude Area Defense system (THAAD)**

**150km**

**40km**


**6 launchers,**

**48 interceptor missiles**


**Fire control** **Radar unit**


The THAAD system, as it is capable of intercepting North Korean nuclear missiles at a high

altitude of over 40km, can prevent casualties and damage on the ground. By creating a layered

defense system together with the Patriot system, jointly operated by the ROK and the U.S., and

the medium-range surface-to-air missiles (M-SAM) and long-range surface-to-air missiles
(L-SAM) that are currently under development, the THAAD system can help raise the success

rate of interception dramatically while providing defense to a significantly wider geographic

area (from one half to two-thirds of the ROK territory).

Tasks that lie ahead include negotiations for the provision of land pursuant to the Status of

Forces Agreement (SOFA), and design and construction work to build the required facilities.

The ROK and the U.S. will make their best efforts to complete the deployment of the THAAD

system and make it operational by the end of 2017.

**2. Development of Response Capabilities against Chemical and Biological**
**Threats**


North Korea’s growing chemical and biological weapons capabilities have commensurately

increased the threat of an attack based on such weapons, whether in the form of terrorism or

diseases. As a result, the importance of the ROK military’s ability to respond to chemical, bio
logical, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) attacks has increased.

Forces that protect us
USFK thaaD Deployment


-----

Using the ROK-U.S. combined intelligence assets, the ROK military maintains surveil
lance over North Korea’s chemical and biological weapon-related facilities continually and is

prepared to detect early signs of an attack and neutralize the attack. CBRN units in place at

various levels of force structures form a system capable of rapidly providing support necessary

for CBRN defense operations. The stockpile of personal protective equipment and supplies

and medical supplies including preventive and treatment drugs is continuously expanding.

To prepare for chemical and biological threats

and the spread of new infectious diseases like

Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS),

realistic readiness exercises are held every year.

Since 2011, the U.S. Department of Defense,

MND and the Ministry of Health and Welfare

jointly conduct the Able Response (AR)

exercise on an annual basis to test the adequacy

rOK-U.S. able response exercise (September 2015)

of the response system in place against a

potential biological crisis in the Korean peninsula and enhance the national-level response

capability. Some 200 people from 40 government organizations of the two countries partic
ipate in the AR exercise which include table top exercises, field exercises and senior-level

seminars. The AR exercise is contributing to improving the biological defense capability of the

two countries, as well as strengthening bilateral cooperation in this area.

In 2014 and 2016, the AR exercise was conducted in conjunction with the Ulchi Freedom

Guardian (UFG) exercise.

Meanwhile, the ROK-U.S. Biological Defense Task Force, set up in 2012, is facilitating the

sharing of crisis response experiences between the two countries and is contributing to the

advancement of cooperative tasks for enhancement of the Alliance’s biological defense capa
bilities in wide-ranging areas, from joint research and education and training to the procure
ment of medical resources and sharing of biological surveillance data.

Moving forward, MND will further strengthen the ROK military’s readiness and response

posture against natural and manmade chemical and biological weapons and take its biological

and chemical warfare capabilities and response capabilities against CBRN terrorism to new

heights by improving its capabilities related to diagnostics, treatment and decontamination as

well as its research and development capacity.

**3. Development of Defense space Power**

**| Overhauling the space-related Legal and Institutional framework | After unveiling**


-----

the ‘Basic Plan for the Development of Defense Space Power,’ MND established the Defense

Space Development Committee and the Defense Space Development Working Group in 2014,

to develop defense space capabilities and provide effective support for military operations

related to space.

In June 2014, MND completed the amendment of the Aerospace Development Promotion

Act through cooperation with relevant government agencies. The current plan is to establish

the ‘Aerospace Development Execution Plan’ for the defense field, through intragovernmental

cooperation with the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning and the National Intelli
gence Service, to enable the sharing of space policy visions for defense purposes and ensure

that related projects are carried out in a coordinated fashion.

**| Building a Domestic and International Cooperation system | MND is tightening coop-**

eration with the civilian and government sectors as well as allies overseas to efficiently build

the defense space capabilities of the ROK military. Since 2013, MND has been cooperating

with the industry, academia and research institutions in space technology.

In 2012, MND signed the ‘Terms of Reference for the ROK-U.S. Space Cooperation

Working Group’ with the U.S. Department of Defense. The Space Cooperation Working

Group met eight times, starting in 2013, to discuss a wide range of topics, from information

sharing to exchange of space manpower and cooperation in space situational awareness.

Defense space cooperation between the two countries is to be expanded over a long term to

include space-based counter-terrorism, disaster relief, search and rescue and many other fields.

In 2014, the two countries signed the ‘Memorandum of Understanding for Sharing Space Sit
uational Awareness[24)] Services and Information,’ which granted the ROK access to various

types of data related to space objects and services provided by the U.S. Strategic Command at

any time.


**24) Space situational awareness refers to the collection and analysis of data from ground and space systems to prepare for and control**
dangers from space in the form of falling or colliding space objects.


-----

**section 6 establishing a Response**
**system against Transnational and non-**
**military Threats**

the rOK military has designated counter-terrorism quick response forces under the Special Operations

Forces and the Marine Corps to ensure swift response to various types of terrorist threats. By conducting

civil-government-military-police integrated defense exercise, the military has also established a posture to

execute and support counter-terrorism operations. against cyber threats, the rOK military has responded

preemptively by establishing a system centered on the JCS for executing cyber operations and by

expanding the cyber defense system. Finally, to ensure systematic disaster management from prevention

and preparation to reconstitution during national catastrophe and disaster, the military has established a

civil-government-military collaboration system and strengthened its disaster response capacity.

**1. Reinforcing the Readiness Posture against Terrorism**

As seen in the examples of attacks in Brussels, Orlando, Istanbul and the Dhaka region of

Bangladesh, terrorist attacks are becoming increasingly more complex—attacks occur simul
taneously or consecutively in multiple locations, causing massive casualties and damage.

Spontaneous lone wolf attacks by sympathizers of ISIL and other violent extremist terrorist

groups or those who are motivated by social discontent are also on the rise, as well as acts of

terrorism by unidentified attackers.

To rapidly respond to these various types of terrorist threats, the government enacted

the Act on Anti-terrorism for the Protection of Citizens and Public Security and set up the

National Counter-Terrorism Center (NCTC). The military amended the “MND Directive on

Counter-terrorism Activities” and updated its terrorism response manual while carrying out

exercises that are tailored to different types of

terrorist attacks.

The JCS is reinforcing the posture to conduct

and support counter-terrorism operations within

military installations as well as in areas outside

military installations by holding joint tactical dis
cussions with relevant government organizations

Combined Civilian-Government-Military Counter
and conducting integrated civilian-government-mil- terrorism exercise (May 2016)


-----

itary-police exercises. Simulation exercises are conducted based on various different scenarios

of terrorist attacks. Meanwhile, to enable real-time operational command and the sharing of

visual information, a C4I system has been put in place. Necessary conditions have been shaped

for sending initial response units by sharing domestic and international terrorism information

with other government agencies and signing memoranda of understanding between local gov
ernments and local military units.

In order to rapidly carry out counter-terrorism operations, additional counter-terrorism units

responsible for their respective local areas have been designated to augment the capabilities

of the existing units such as the 707[th] Special Mission Battalion for counter-terrorism and the

Special Mission Battalion of the Navy Special Warfare Flotilla.

Thanks to these efforts, the military was able to successfully provide security support

for major international events such as the 2015 Summer Universidad in Gwangju (June

2015), Seoul Defense Dialogue (September 2015) and the CISM[25)] Military World Games in

Mungyeong, Gyeongsangbuk-do (October 2015).

To effectively respond to international

terrorist threats, combined counter-terrorism

exercises are conducted with key partner states.

The Special Forces for Counter-Terrorism of

the ROK Army and Navy participated in the

combined maritime security and counter-ter
rorism exercises organized by ASEAN Defense

Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus), Maritime Security-Counter-terrorism Combined Field training

playing a leading role and thereby enhancing exercise in Brunei and Singapore (May 2016).

the ROK’s status as a member of the Expert’s Working Group on Counter-Terrorism.

The ROK military will continue to take an active part in international counter-terrorism

efforts, including joint response and cooperation activities, and strengthen cooperation with

member states to share information on terrorism.

**2. Bolstering Response Capabilities against Cyber Threats**


**| Developing Cybersecurity Policies and systems | North Korea continues expanding its**

**25) Conseil international du Sport Militaire**


Marine Corps 1[st] Marine Division Special
Guard team Counter-terrorism Fire


-----

cyberwarfare forces and its provocations in the cyber domain such as its hacking of the ROK

hydropower and nuclear power plants.[26)] More recently, North Korea sent out a large number of

emails containing malwares, pretending to be a government agency and the Blue House, and

hacked into smartphones of senior military officials, intensifying the level of its cyber threats.

To provide an overall vision for cybersecurity efforts and medium/long-term directions for

their development, MND is drafting the “National Defense Cybersecurity Strategy,” and to

install rapid decision-making and response procedures for cyber crises, MND has developed

the “National Defense Cyber-Crisis Response Action Manual.” In 2015, the JCS created a

new unit in charge of overseeing cyber-operations and conferred upon the Chairman of the

JCS the authority to command and control cyber-operations. The cyber-operations execution

system was unified into a centralized system under the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and this struc
tural realignment is well reflected in the newly-issued “Joint Cyber-Operations Manual.”

**| fostering Cyber experts | Academic departments dedicated to cyberwarfare-related**

military studies have been created in civilian higher education institutions to train cyber

experts. To ensure that cyber experts are assigned to appropriate tasks based on their respec
tive areas of expertise, sustained efforts are made to enhance the manpower management

system. In 2016, to help cyber experts continue to improve their knowledge and skills, inter
mediate and advanced programs were expanded, and a new cybersecurity expert program

designed to foster top-level specialists was created within the National Defense Information

Protection curriculum, which is offered to all military personnel. A scientific cyber-train
ing facility is also planned for construction to offer comprehensive tactical training based on

various cyberwarfare scenarios.

**| Acquiring Technologies and systems to Respond to Cyber-threats | To prepare for**

potential cyber-attacks from North Korea, a framework for protecting critical national infra
structures and military-operated systems is currently under development. Security analysis

and evaluation have been conducted to identify and complement vulnerabilities in the existing

systems, and each unit is evaluating its cyber-protection readiness posture.

Efforts have been dedicated to developing core cyberwarfare technologies while rapidly

integrating commercial information security technologies and systems to the defense sector.

To keep abreast of the rapidly evolving cybersecurity technology environment through rapid

transfer and application of civilian response technologies and systems against cyber-threats,

a fast-track acquisition program has been established. Moreover, in an effort to strengthen

**26) an incident in which an unidentified hacking group leaked the internal data of Korea hydro and Nuclear Power on six successive**
occasions, from December 15, 2014 to March 12, 2015, demanding the government to stop the operation of nuclear power plants
and threatening to disclose additional information.


-----

research capability in this field, a research and development institution wholly dedicated to

defense cyber technology has been created. At the same time, joint research and development

projects are carried out with the civilian and government sectors for optimal outcomes.

**| Closer International Cooperation to Promote a Common Response to Cyber-threats |**

The ROK and the U.S. are broadening cooperation in the cyber field. The ROK-U.S. Cyber

Cooperation Working Group (CCWG) has been meeting on a biannual basis since 2014. In

2015, the two countries agreed on the Information Assurance/Computer Network Defense

Standard Operating Procedure (IA/CND SOP) for effective information sharing. In 2016, the

“ROK-U.S. Cyber Working-level Consultative

Group” was formed to discuss concrete strate
gies for defense cyber cooperation.

During Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD), the

Cyber Working Group (CWG) is convened to

promote multilateral cybersecurity cooperation

by finding common ground and building con
fidence between participating countries. Cyber

Cyber Working Group meeting during the Seoul Defense

cooperation with partner nations also continues Dialogue (September 2016)

to be developed.


**3. Building a Disaster Prevention and Response system**

**| Bolstering Disaster Response Capabilities | The ROK military has established a civil-**

ian-government-military joint collaboration system for systematic disaster management from

prevention and preparation to reconstitution, and is strengthening disaster response capabili
ties through education and training.

The military takes an active part in the

annual “Safe Korea Exercise” organized by

the Ministry of Public Security and Safety to

improve its field response capabilities. In 2016,

247 units participated in an integrated civil
ian-government-military exercise to hone their

skills for responding to various disaster situa
tions such as large fires, typhoon and earth- Joint Civilian-Government-Military aircraft Crash recovery

quakes. exercise (November 2016)

To promote an in-depth understanding of disaster management among officers tasked with


-----

the related duties, MND annually organizes a military-wide conference for disaster manage
ment officers. Specialized training for disaster management officers has been reinforced in

all three branches of the military along with safety education and training for commanding

officers.

To maintain a rapid situation reporting system and swiftly provide relief in areas requiring

military assistance, the three branches of the military operate 410 disaster situation rooms at

units of every echelon.

Moreover, to minimize potential disruption of public services in the event of an illegal action

by personnel managing a critical national infrastructure, the military is training specialists to

replace civilian manpower. The current number of technical and skilled military specialists is

as shown in <Chart 3-13> below:

**<Chart 3-13> Management of the Military functional specialists**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|As of november 2016|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Category|Total|Railroad/electric motor cars|Power generation|Gas|Cargo transportation|
|Persons|2,143|537|510|304|792|



**| Consolidating the national Disaster Recovery support Posture | To provide**

emergency rescue support in the event of a large scale accident such as sinking of a ship or an

airplane crash, the military operates six disaster relief units and 17 search and rescue units. To

better prepare for contingency, a close cooperation system has been established with relevant

government agencies and local governments, and civilian-government-military-police inte
grated exercises are held regularly for various types of disasters.

Over the last three years, the ROK military has provided close to 710,000 troops and 18,000

equipment to disaster relief efforts.

In February 2014, heavy snow in the east coast areas caused severe damage, leaving people

in isolation. The military committed 120,000 troops and 2,000 equipment to remove snow,

provide medical assistance, and deliver supplies to residents of isolated communities. The

military also assisted with search and rescue efforts in the aftermath of the sinking of the

Sewol ferry by committing 370,000 troops and 11,000 equipment.

Upon the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease and highly-pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI)

in Chungcheongbuk-do and Gyeongsangbuk-do between September 2014 and May 2015, the

2016 Safe Korea exercise


-----

military actively assisted with the culling of cattle and poultry, and disease control and preven
tion activities. It also operated mobile checkpoints with 1,200 troops and 420 equipment.

In 2015, when the country was hit by the worst drought in 40 years that caused heavy crop

damages, the military sent 8,100 troops and 2,000 equipment to the affected communities,

supplying water and assisting with the dredging of reservoirs to secure irrigation water.

With the MERS outbreak in May 2015,

military medical support teams, composed of

army doctors, nursing officers and medical

support staff, were sent to civilian hospitals

and community health centers. The Armed

Forces Capital Hospital and the Armed Forces Launch ceremony of the MerS Military Medical Support team

Daejeon Hospital were temporarily repurposed (June 2015)

as MERS treatment centers and provided care

to civilian patients.

In September 2016 when an unforeseen earth
quake shook Gyeongju and the nearby region,

some 1,200 troops assisted with recovery

efforts. In the wake of typhoon Chaba, nearly

45,000 troops and 482 equipment were quickly

sent to the affected areas, including Ulleungdo

Island, Ulsan, and Daegu, helping with the

repair of roads and bridges. troops assisting relief efforts in the aftermath of typhoon

Upon the outbreak of avian influenza in Chaba (September 2016)

September, in Eumseong, Chungcheongbuk-do, some 1,400 troops, equipped with 150 decon
tamination vehicles, assisted with disease control and prevention efforts. When the lives of

people in the affected areas were further disrupted by labor strikes by railroad and transporta
tion workers’ unions, the military sent 466 technical troops to alleviate the situation.

Emergency assistance and support activities for civilians conducted by the ROK military

during the past four years are summarized in <Chart 3-14>:


-----

**<Chart 3-14> Military Aid to Civilian Authorities over the Past four Years**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|As of november 2016|
|---|---|---|---|
|Year|Activities|support persons|equipment|
|total||812,401|19,885|
|2013|heavy rainfall, typhoon, and heavy snowfall damage restoration|42,528|303|
||Pine wilt disease control|14,290|0|
||Forest fire support, search and rescue, red tide control|10,134|278|
|2014|heavy rainfall, typhoon, and heavy snowfall damage restoration|146,733|2,532|
||Foot-and-mouth disease, and ai control|60,488|204|
||Sewol ferry (search and rescue, carrying caskets and medical support)|370,710|11,387|
||Forest fire support, marine pollution control, red tide control, building collapse aid, harmful chemical substance leak control|17,101|406|
|2015|Drought aid (water for living and farming, dredging a reservoir)|8,174|2,003|
||Search and rescue on missing civilians|8,419|185|
||Foot-and-mouth disease, ai, and MerS control|10,893|480|
||Forest fire support|15,637|438|
||heavy rainfall, typhoon, and heavy snowfall damage restoration, building collapse aid, red tide control, marine pollution control, pine wilt disease control|5,416|274|
|2016|Forest fire support|5,633|190|
||earthquake damage restoration|1,956|39|
||Drought, heavy rainfall, typhoon damage restoration|53,864|482|
||heavy snowfall damage restoration, building collapse aid|5,413|32|
||Search and rescue on missing civilians, marine pollution control|2,072|89|
||railroad and cargo labor union strike control|32,367|400|
||Foot-and-mouth disease, and ai control|421|97|
||Others (pine wilt disease, drought)|152|66|



**| Broadening Overseas Disaster Relief support and Cooperation | Damages caused by**

a series of large disasters that have struck several countries recently have been so massive in

scale that recovery and relief efforts by the affected countries alone have proven to be insuf
ficient. Pursuant to the Overseas Emergency Relief Act of 2007, the ROK government has

deployed the Korea Disaster Relief Team to countries and regions hit by major disasters to

assist with recovery, thereby doing its fair share in humanitarian assistance as a responsible

member of the international community and putting humanitarian values into concrete actions.

The ROK military established the “Transport Aircraft Mission Support System for Overseas

Emergency Relief” in May 2010, maintaining a readiness posture capable of sending its


-----

overseas emergency relief units to 15 Asian countries within 48 hours after a major disaster.

The military is taking an active part in disaster relief exercises held by the ASEAN Regional

Forum (ARF) and the ADMM-Plus to join the regional effort in strengthening the cooperation

for humanitarian assistance and disaster relief.

In May 2013, the ROK military jointly hosted the largest ever ASEAN Regional Forum

Disaster Relief Exercise with Thailand, where 1,800 persons from 27 countries participated.

In November of the same year, in the aftermath of typhoon Haiyan, the ROK military provided

transport planes to assist with recovery and relief efforts, ensuring fast transportation of

emergency relief manpower and supplies.

In April 2016, after the outbreak of an earthquake in Kumamoto Prefecture in Japan, the

military again provided transport planes to take part in recovery efforts for quick delivery of

relief supplies such as tents, blankets and bottled water, thereby greatly contributing to raising

the ROK’s stature in the region.

The overseas emergency relief assistance provided by the ROK military during the past 10

years is summarized in <Chart 3-15>:

**<Chart 3-15> Overseas Disaster Relief support**

|Date|Region (Type of Disaster)|Details|
|---|---|---|
|May 2008|China (earthquake)|• 3 transport aircraft(C-130) , 26.6 tons of relief supplies including military tents|
|November 2009|Cambodia (typhoon)|• 1 transport aircraft (C-130), 7 tons of relief supplies including daily necessities|
|January 2010|haiti (earthquake)|• 1 air Force rescuer (medical support)|
|March 2010|Chile (earthquake)|• 136 military tents|
|March 2011|Japan (earthquake, tsunami)|• 10 transport aircraft(C-130) (four sorties), 58.8 tons of relief supplies. transported 102 rescue personnel|
|October 2011|turkey (earthquake)|• 100 military tents|
|November 2013|the Philippines (typhoon)|• 9 transport aircraft (C-130) (four sorties), 329 tons of relief supplies. transported 2,022 personnel, including a rescue team|
|april 2016|Kumamoto Prefecture, Japan (earthquake)|• 2 transport aircraft(C-130), USD 110,000 worth of relief supplies (tents, blankets, rice, and drinking water)|


-----

**section 7 Reinforcing Realistic Training**
**and Moral education**

in order to acquire superior manpower in a stable manner and manage them efficiently, MND is acquiring

tailored manpower through agreements with universities and is gradually increasing the quota of long-term

service junior officers while further utilizing highly skilled female personnel. improvements are being made

in the school education system to foster creative individuals. also, scientific training programs are being

carried out to reinforce realistic combat training while moral education for troops is being strengthened.

**1. Acquiring superior Manpower and Developing Professional Manpower**

**| securing stable supply of superior Manpower | To gain a stable access to superior**

manpower, MND is acquiring manpower that is tailored to the military’s requirements

through agreements with higher education institutions and is conducting a pilot operation of

the ‘Reserve Non-commissioned Officers Training Corps.’

Under military-university agreements entered into partnerships with higher education insti
tutions offering military studies and non-commissioned officer (NCO) degree programs,

mid-term service officers and combat and technical NCOs are recruited for all three branches,

among college graduates who have completed courses related to military competence.

Meanwhile, the program under which all students who enroll in the military studies program

at four universities that entered into a cooperation agreement with the military in 2013 are

given military scholarships and are commissioned as officers upon graduation has been

changed. Now, those students who enroll in this program have to be selected as military schol
arship students through competition with applicants from regular colleges in order to receive

this benefit.

Currently, the military has made agreements with military studies departments in 18 uni
versities and NCO programs in 53 technical colleges. As part of an ongoing effort to acquire

quality NCOs, the ‘Reserve Non-commissioned Officers Training Corps’ pilot program is

being operated in six technical colleges since 2015.

**| Recruitment Quota of Long-term service Junior Officers Progressively Increased | To**

increase the number of career officers, the recruitment quota was raised for long-term service

officers by readjusting the overall quota of officers. By reducing the number of sergeants and


-----

first and second lieutenants, the numbers of first sergeants, captains and majors have been

commensurately increased. The relative share of long-term servicemembers to the overall

personnel is to be progressively increased from 23% officers and 34% NCOs in 2015 to 30%

officers and 47% NCOs in 2025.

**| Making Better and Broader Use of female Talents | To make broader use of talented**

female individuals in the defense field, the military is increasing its quota of service-women.

The goal of raising the percentage of service-women to 7% for female officers and 5% for

female NCOs by 2020 has been partially achieved, with the target set for officers already

reached in 2015. The target for female NCOs is also expected to be reached earlier than the

planned date in 2017. Meanwhile, to widen opportunities for women’s entry into the armed

forces, the number of student training corps in women’s colleges was increased from two to

three, while also expanding the size of recruitment. In 2014, additional three combat branches

of the Army (artillery, armored, and air defense) were opened to women, while easing the

criteria related to the location of assignment to create conditions necessary for service women

to fully unleash their potential. In parallel with the expansion of female personnel, efforts

are also being undertaken to improve the service environment for them. Various measures,

programs and facilities are being put into place to minimize the conflict between work and

personal life of female servicemembers as a mother or wife, including support for maternity

care costs, longer paid maternity and parental leaves and leave for intertility treatment.


**| fostering Creative Military specialists | MND is fostering creative military specialists**

capable of proactively responding to future battlefield environments such as cyber-war and

space war. The specialist development program is managed separately for its two components:

degree programs in specialized fields and overseas military education.

Doctoral degree programs are aimed at producing professors, researchers and experts in

special technology fields. About 20 candidates are selected every year to receive education in

quality civilian higher education institutions in domestic or overseas locations.

For master’s degree programs, generally in cutting-edge science and technology fields, such

as robotics, artificial intelligence and big data, and interdisciplinary engineering and military

fields, 230 candidates are selected every year.

Overseas military education is aimed at equipping future specialists with wide varieties of

invincible warriors
(service women)


-----

military knowledge and training them into regional experts, specialized in their respective

linguistic regions. About 300 candidates are selected every year to study in command and

general staff colleges, military branch schools and military academies located in 30 countries,

including the U.S., Japan and the U.K. Going forward, overseas military education will be

offered in more diverse countries, including Middle-Eastern, South American and African

countries, to enhance the status of the ROK military on the international scene and broaden

the geographic reach of military diplomacy.

**2. Improvement and effective Utilization of the Development and Refresher**
**Training system**

**| Improvement of school education Methods | The school education system has been**

improved in a manner to better support the overarching goal of fostering creative individuals.

The education system was shifted from a lecture-centered system to a one that is oriented

toward discussions, hands-on learning and problem solving.

Through education focused on discussion and practical exercises as well as prerequisite

learning using video lectures ahead of a class, education and evaluation methods have been

improved so that students are able to learn and master a subject on their own.

To equip junior officers with strong command skills, education in military leadership and

military ethics has been reinforced. Courses on human rights, military law and military ethics

have been added to the Officer Basic Course (OBC), the first training program offered to

junior officers upon their initial commissioning, to instill positive values and morals in them.

Meanwhile, to help them acquire command skills needed in uncertain battlefield situations,

a leadership training camp is operated. MND is set to develop and distribute such reading

materials for junior officers as ‘Positive Leadership’ and ‘Guide to Military Service Regula
tions’ and smartphone apps with instructional content in an effort to actively support the moral

and leadership education of field forces.

**| Improving the Military Academy Integrated education system | To promote the mutual**

understanding of the respective cultures of the three armed forces among cadets of Army,

Naval and Air Force academies and increase jointness between the three forces, an integrated

military academy education program has been conducted since 2012. Integrated education has

resulted in considerable improvement in terms of intimacy and camaraderie between students

of the three academies. Moving forward, integrated education will be enhanced by reflect
ing the special characteristics of each branch in instruction and prioritizing field trips and

hands-on experiences to further improve mutual understanding between the three branches


-----

and help cadets understand the need for joint operations training and the joint operations

system.

**| Military-Massive Open Online Courses (M-MOOC)[27)] Project | The Military-Massive**

Open Online Courses are a tailored online learning support system allowing all service
men and women to study required military subjects online, from their respective locations

of assignment, which integrates distance education programs of all three forces. A mobile

learning system will also be developed and launched in the near future to make education

available to military personnel at any time, from anywhere. The online learning system has

eliminated time out of the office that onsite education entails, offering the possibility of self
paced learning without temporal and spatial constraints.


**3. Reinforcing Realistic Unit Training**

**| Unit Training | In order to train strong elite forces capable of defeating any enemy, the**

ROK military conducts intensive and realistic combat training, with particular focus on such

core areas as mental training, firing, physical training and combat skills. About one half of the

available time each year is used for tactical training so that soldiers can thoroughly familiarize

themselves with combat actions and perform as intended by their command officers, in actual

combats.

To enhance combat mission capabilities, each unit sets

a realistic training goal and continues training until the

goal is reached, while also carrying out scientific training,

using the multiple integrated laser engagement system
(MILES)[28)], data communications, satellites and other cut
ting-edge technology-aided tools.

To provide conditions necessary to conduct realistic and

scientific training, the Army is setting up corps-level scien
tific training sites while creating training zones and consol
idating smaller training sites located in the same geographic

areas. The Navy is in the process of constructing the Inte
Scientific training for army using MiLeS

grated Maritime Tactical Training Ground. The Air Force equipment


**27) a military education system (Military) without maximum enrollment limits (Massive), open to all (Open), offering web-based (Online)**
courses (Courses).

**28) a combat engagement training system based on cutting-edge optical technology including laser beam transmitters and detectors.**


-----

is building the Integrated Air Base Defense Training Ground, while also implementing the

Integrated Scientific Training System for Air Defense Artillery.

Training evaluation officers are appointed for each corps to objectively and impartially

evaluate the quality of training conducted. Meanwhile, to provide conditions conducive to the

creation of combat duty-centered forces, restrictions are placed on the transfer of troops from

units of sizes smaller than battalions, and the cool-down period after a field tactical training

session has been included in the training period so that no additional tasks are assigned during

this period.

**| Key Training by the Army, navy, Air force and the Marine Corps |** **The Army focuses**

on realistic training which reflects actual battlefield situations, such as nighttime training and

combat firing training, coupled with training involving the MILES and scientific training like

battle command training and virtual simulation training. To realistically prepare troops for

various types of enemy attack, the Army is stepping up nighttime training and combat firing

training. Particularly intensive training is conducted for night-time firing and long-range firing

of mortars and artillery. Combat firing exercises are carried out together with sustainment

support units, attachment units and joint forces in an effort to maximize combat operation

capabilities.

Training using MILES equipment is

conducted in infantry, mechanized and

special warfare units, at the platoon to

company level, depending on the type of

forces. The company-level MILES, intro
duced in 2014, offers the possibility of an

after-action review to analyze the results

Counter-fire live fire exercise using the K-9 thunder (april 2015)

onsite, immediately upon the completion of

an engagement exercise, providing clear and objective training results.

This has lifted the morale and spirits of the troops participating in training, cemented

camaraderie between them and reduced accidents, producing an overall positive effect on the

barracks life.

The Korea Combat Training Center (KCTC) is planning to expand its training field and

carrying out plans to develop its training devices for simulating weapons systems, including

artillery, tanks and helicopters, for high-level units that provide support to regiment-size units,

army firepower


-----

as well as battlefield effects. When these plans are completed, regiment-size units will be able

to train on the KCTC training grounds starting in 2017.

The Battle Command Training Program (BCTP) uses computer simulation techniques to

create an environment similar to actual battlefield situations to enhance the combat command

capability of commanding officers and staff members, based on a ‘mission command’[29)]

system.

Simulator training, consisting of firing and control training and tactical simulation,

is currently used both for the purpose of education in school settings and for unit training.

Providing newly-enlisted soldiers and reservists who are unfamiliar with combat equipment

with an opportunity to learn about operating and targeting procedures, simulator training has

helped them to acquaint themselves with real-world combat situations and develop confidence.

The simulator-aided experience of various unforeseen situations that may occur in real bat
tlefield improves their ability to respond to actual combat situations, also contributing to the

reduction of budget requirements related to training equipment.

Current plans are to build 15 (6 corps-level, 9 division-level) scientific combat firing

training centers capable of holding realistic combat firing exercises and providing objective

after-action reviews and to implement a Live, Virtual, Constructive-Gaming (LVC-G) -based

integrated training system which combines actual terrain training situations (Live), simula
tion equipment-assisted training (Virtual) and computer simulation technique-aided combat

command exercises (Constructive).

The Army also conducts various types of combine exercises, ranging from special oper
ations and unconventional warfare to air infiltration, WMD removal operations, combined

arms exercises, air assault and high-altitude low-opening training. In August 2015, an inte
grated live fire exercise of the largest scale in the history of the Army was carried out, with

close to 2,000 participants from 47 units including a tank battalion, showcasing ROK-U.S.

combined operational capabilities to the ROK public. Combined exercises carried out by the

Army during the past two years are as listed in <Chart 3-16>:


**29) a command model in which the command officer, while communicating his intent and presenting**
planned missions to his staff with clarity, providing resources and means necessary to carry them
out and guaranteeing conditions for their effective execution by subordinate command officers,
delegates decisions related to their actual execution down the hierarchy as much as possible, to
encourage autonomy, creativity and active involvement on the part of units under his command
carrying out the missions.


army special
Warfare Command
haLO training


-----

**<Chart 3-16> Army Combined exercises during the Past Two Years**

**Unit: a time**

|Category|Total|Domestic|Col4|Col5|Overseas|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Subtotal|ROK-U.S. combined|Multilateral combined|Subtotal|ROK-U.S. combined|Multilateral combined|
|2015|37|36|36|-|1|1|-|
|2016|21|20|20|-|1|1|-|



**The Navy conducts realistic maritime training, adapted to the respective battlefield envi-**

ronments of the East, West and South Seas. Cooperative and joint training are carried out with

the participation of ground and air forces and consist of component training and mission-based

training. Component training is basic training that is conducted according to the characteris
tics of the combat environment, such as anti-surface, anti-submarine, anti-air, anti-amphibi
ous and anti-ballistic operations. Mission-based training is specialized training which includes

maneuver training, northwestern island defense training, joint response training against local

provocations near the NLL and maritime interdiction training. State-of-the-art surface com
batants, submarines, amphibious ships, maritime patrol aircraft, and maritime operations and

utility helicopters participate in mission-based training.

Combined training falls into two catego
ries which are ROK-U.S. combined training

to strengthen the combined defense system

and multilateral combined training aimed

at promoting humanitarian assistance and

military cooperation. The ROK-U.S. combined

training is carried out in various forms to

enhance the operational execution capabilities

Missile live fire exercise in the east Sea (May 2015)

of the combined forces and increase interop
erability between the two Navy forces, such as maritime counter-SOF training, anti-sub
marine maritime search training, amphibious operations training, mine warfare training,

rescue warfare and joint logistics over-the-shore (JLOTS) training. Examples of multilateral

combined training and exercises include the Cobra Gold Exercise, West Pacific Mine Count
er-Measure Exercise (WPMCMEX), Rim of the Pacific Exercise (RIMPAC), anti-ballistic


Live fire exercise
in the east Sea


Navy anti-air, anti-surface,
anti-submarine fire training


Navy UDt SeaL
cold weather
training


-----

missile training, and the Search and Rescue Exercise (SAREX) conducted with neighboring

nations such as Japan, China and Russia. The combined training and exercises carried out

during the past two years are detailed in <Chart 3-17> below:

**<Chart 3-17> navy Combined exercises during the Past Two Years**


**Unit: a time**

|Category|Total|Domestic|Col4|Col5|Overseas|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Subtotal|ROK-U.S. combined|Multilateral combined|Subtotal|ROK-U.S. combined|Multilateral combined|
|2015|20|16|14|2|4|1|3|
|2016|21|15|14|1|6|-|6|



Cruise training[30)] takes place for a period of 90-120 days every year, alternately in one of

the four navigation routes in the world’s four sea areas. In 2015, cruise training covered 15

countries. Combined anti-air operations and combined multilateral naval communications

process exchanges with navy forces and air forces of host countries are contributing toward

the enhancement of task performance capabilities of midshipmen as well as military coopera
tion and exchange with these countries.

To carry out these training realistically, the Navy is building a scientific training system by

setting up the Integrated Maritime Tactical Training Ground and the Guided-Weapon Tactical

Simulation Center, both of which make use of simulation equipment to reflect changes in naval

weapons systems. This is coupled with a plan to construct a modern standard training center

enabling naval ships damage control training[31)] in an environment similar to an actual ship.


**The Air Force is carrying out realistic combat training, including local provocation**

readiness training, wartime operations readiness training and specific mission-based training,

under the goal of fostering elite warriors, trained primarily for combat missions, that are able

to promptly respond to all types of situations and threats. The various kinds of local provoca
tions readiness training conducted by the Air Force include Northwestern Islands (NWI) prov
ocation readiness training, combined coastal infiltration training, maritime infiltration inter
diction training, nighttime infiltration and attack training, aircraft hijacking and air terrorism

response training, and guidance training for aircraft carrying defectors and refugees.

Two types of wartime operations readiness training are conducted which are independent

**30) the cruise training is offered to seniors of the Navy academy.**

**31) this training is aimed at improving the ability to control all types of damage to naval ships and risk factors, from ensuring the**
effective readiness posture in peacetime to response to and recovery from damage situations so that fighting capabilities are
maintained at their maximum level at all times.


-----

training solely by the ROK Air Force and the

ROK-U.S. combined training. Independent

training and exercises conducted by the ROK

Air Force includes combat readiness training,

wartime battle space management training,

wing/combat command air strike package

training and large-scale campaign-level

training (Soaring Eagle). The ROK-U.S. Multilateral combined tactical training (October 2016)

combined training and exercises include a

large-scale combined air campaign exercise (Max Thunder), aerial refueling exercise, a mul
tinational combined tactical training (Red Flag-Alaska), and humanitarian assistance and

disaster relief training (Cope North).

Specific mission-based training by the Air Force ranges from defensive counter-air training

to air interdiction training, close air support training, air transport/special operations training

and combat search and rescue training. Defensive counter-air training to counter attempts at

intruding into the ROK air space by enemy infiltration forces is carried out in the form of

massive track infiltration response training or combined air-defense training. Air interdiction

training is aimed at disrupting, delaying and destroying enemy support forces that have been

augmented to the front area before they become a threat to the ROK military. With focus on

enhancing the capacity to detect and attack moving targets, air interdiction training is regularly

carried out together with ground forces, the Joint Surveillance and Target Attack Radar

System (JSTARS), and Special Warfare Command aircraft strike controllers, as a combined

or joint exercise. Close air support training to support operations by ground and naval forces is

conducted both as daytime and nighttime exercises, urban and maritime exercises and in the

form of rear-area close air support training.

Airborne/special operations training, aimed at enhancing operational capabilities related to

low-altitude infiltration and airborne missions, takes the forms of air transport training and air

mobility aircraft airdrop package training. Meanwhile, to improve the capability for wartime

combat search and rescue operations, joint search and rescue training with the Special Warfare

Command, maritime search and rescue operations under lighting support, and combat search

and research taskforce training are conducted.

In tandem, scientific training, assisted by ground simulation training equipment, the air


2016 air defence
artillery competition


2016 multinational combined
tactical training (red Flag-alaska)


-----

combat maneuvering instrumentation (GPSACMI) and the electronic warfare training system
(EWTS), is also carried out due to limitations in carrying out actual air maneuvers training.

Combined training by the Air Force during the past two years is listed in <Chart 3-18> below:

**<Chart 3-18> Air force Combined exercises during the Past Two Years**


**Unit: a time**

|Category|Total|Domestic|Col4|Col5|Overseas|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Subtotal|ROK-U.S. combined|Multilateral combined|Subtotal|ROK-U.S. combined|Multilateral combined|
|2015|5|3|3|-|2|-|2|
|2016|5|3|3|-|2|-|2|



**The Marine Corps conducts a wide variety of education and training programs to build**

the capability to operate as effectively on the ground and at sea as in the air, and satisfactorily

fulfill amphibious operations, Northwest Islands defense operations, and stabilization opera
tions.

Commanding officers and staff members undergo battle command training aided by

computer simulation techniques to thoroughly familiarize themselves with command proce
dures and strengthen operational execution capabilities. This is coupled with combined arms

training specialized for each unit and wintertime cold weather training.

To foster battle-ready operational execution

capabilities, the Marine Corps participates

in the Cobra Gold Exercise, Khaan Quest

Exercise, RIMPAC and other overseas training

and carries out combined types of training such

as the ROK-U.S. Marine Combined Amphib
ious Exercise (Ssang Yong) and the Korea

Marine Exercise Program(KMEP).[32)] The

Combined amphibious Operations exercise (March 2016)

northwest islands defense training program is

notably conducted using a method centered on past precedents to allow the Marine Corps to

maintain a preemptive readiness posture. The combined amphibious exercise (Ssang Yong)

is carried out in a manner to improve the capability for combined forcible entry operations.


**32) a rOK-U.S. combined training program for tactical**
marine units conducted in the rOK with the objective of
enhancing combined operational execution capabilities
and increasing interoperability between the two
countries’ marine corps through a systemic approach.


Maritime firing
exercise near the
Northwestern islands


Navy·Marine Corps
joint amphibious
operations exercise


rOK-U.S. Marine
Corps combined air
land battle training


-----

Combined training and exercises by the Marine Corps during the past two years are detailed

in <Chart 3-19>:

**<Chart 3-19> Marine Corps Combined exercises during the Past Two Years**

**Unit: a time**

|Category|Total|Domestic|Col4|Col5|Overseas|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Subtotal|ROK-U.S.|Multilateral|Subtotal|ROK-U.S.|Multilateral|
|2015|21|17|16|1|4|1|3|
|2016|22|18|17|1|4|1|3|



**| Joint[33)] exercise[34)] and Training[35)] | In the face of the dire security conditions on the**

Korean peninsula, the ROK military maintains a robust readiness posture by concentrating on

reinforcing joint and combined operational capabilities.

The Taegeuk Exercise is an annual command post exercise led by the Joint Chiefs of Staff

to enhance wartime and peacetime operational capabilities and command capabilities. After

receiving back the peacetime operational control of the ROK armed forces, the Joint Chiefs

of Staff in 1995 began the Taegeuk Exercise to strengthen operational execution capabilities.

With the participation of operations commands (corps-level) since 1999, the Taegeuk Exercise

has grown into a theater-level command post exercise. A theater-level joint operations sim
ulation model has been introduced for a more realistic exercise, improving its overall effec
tiveness. Since 2014, the focus in the exercise has been placed on increasing proficiency with

operational procedures, particularly in areas that are actually important for the ROK forces to

prepare.

The Hoguk Training is a military-wide field training carried out annually under the

command of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to ramp up the operational execution capabilities of

large-size units. Starting in 2015, the Hoguk Training has been linked with the Hwarang and

other similar training programs, with the East and West Sea exercises becoming integrated, in

an effort to enhance the efficiency of training and strengthen its jointness.

The Hwarang Training is a rear-area training participated by all national defense elements

including civilian, government, military and police forces. The goal of the training is to

**33) activities, operations and organizations participated by two or more branches of the armed**
forces of the same country for a common goal.

**34) exercise aimed at improving proficiency with operations execution procedures, and conducted**
as close as possible to the real combat while considering operational plans, doctrines, and
battlefield environments. hoguk training

(Namhangang

**35) training to help individuals and units acquire skills necessary to carry out their assigned tasks** river river-crossing
through practice. training)


-----

achieve proficiency with implementation procedures for wartime and peacetime operational

plans and firmly establish the integrated civilian-government-military-police defense posture.

The Hwarang Training is scheduled to be upgraded to a realistic integrated defense exercise

into which all national defense elements are concentrated by 2018, through consolidation with

the Chungmu Exercise.[36)]

**| Combined[37)] Training and exercise | The**

Key Resolve (KR) exercise and the Foal Eagle
(FE) training are a ROK-U.S. combined the
ater-level command post exercise (CPX) and a

combined field training exercise (FTX) that are

carried out annually, during the first half of the

year.

The KR exercise focuses on monitoring Key resolve (Kr) exercise 2016

and testing the combined defense posture and

improving proficiency with warfighting procedures.

In 2015, the establishment of the Opposing Force (OPFOR) Operation Plan led by the Joint

Chiefs of Staff, coupled with a follow-up review, helped to increase the ROK military’s ability

to take the initiative in theater-level combined exercises. Five countries contributing combat

forces to the United Nations Command (UNC), including Australia, Canada, Denmark, the

UK and France, attended the combined exercise as observers. To enhance the ROK military’s

planning capability, the ROK and the U.S. agreed to have the ROK military take the lead in

planning starting in 2017.

The FE training is a field training aimed at improving the ROK-U.S. combined operations

and rear-area protection operations capabilities. Since 2008, the Foal Eagle Exercise has been

conducted together with the KR exercise in an integrated manner. In 2016, the exercise was

carried out by a ROK-US combined force that was enhanced quantitatively and qualitatively

as a multilateral combined forces exercise with the participation of Canadian, Australian and

New Zealand forces.

The Ulchi Freedom Guardian (UFG) exercise is a theater-level command post exercise

aimed at enhancing the independent capabilities of the ROK military as well as the ROK-U.S.

combined capabilities against local provocations by North Korea and the warfighting capabil
ities of the ROK-U.S. combined forces in the event of a full-scale war. In 2015, the effective

**36) an emergency readiness exercise to test and ascertain the effectiveness of wartime readiness plans and improve proficiency with**
their implementation procedures, centered on hands-on exercises.

**37) refers to the relationship of cooperation between military units or government organizations of two or more countries or allied**
nations.


-----

ness of the exercise was increased through close cooperation with the United States Pacific

Command (USPACOM). Seven countries providing combat forces to the UNC, including the

U.K., France, Australia, Canada, Denmark, New Zealand and Colombia attended the UFG

exercise as observers.

In accordance with the conditions-based wartime oper
ational control (OPCON) transition plan, the ROK and the

U.S. will continuously explore ways to develop future-ori
ented combined exercise execution means to build the

ROK military’s capability to take the initiative in combined

exercises. The Joint Warfighting Simulation Center
(JWSC), newly established in 2014, has developed and is

fully utilizing the Joint Training System (JTS). The Center

develops war game models for joint and combined drills and

provides exercise control and simulation control services,

playing the role of a control tower. Battle simulation centers

Joint Warfighting Simulation Center

(BSC), located in the U.S. mainland and on the Korean

Peninsula, are connected to each other through a dedicated war game network, providing

support toward joint and combined exercises as well as independent exercises by the ROK

military and the USFK, and war game conducted by educational institutions.

**4. strengthening Moral education of servicemembers**

**| Moral education system and the Current status | To nurture a sound defense and**

security vision in servicemembers and arm them with a soldierly mindset and an unwavering

resolve to prevail, the ROK military is strengthening its moral education.

Under the banner of ‘Mental Armament before Combat Skills Learning,’ the regular curric
ulum for newly-enlisted soldiers is extensively allocated to moral education subjects such as

‘Military Spirit,’ ‘National Vision’ and ‘Security Vision.’ Training programs and barracks life

as a whole are used as platforms for moral education.

School-based moral education is focused on the thorough internalization of national, security

and military values. To help officers acquire the requisite capabilities of future military

instructors, strong emphasis is laid on presentations and discussion-oriented education and

hands-on training for student-instructors.

For unit-level education, intensive moral education sessions are offered on a daily, weekly

and half-year basis to bolster the mental readiness of troops and their determination to prevail.

Educational effectiveness is amplified through video lectures by experts via Defense TV and


-----

IPTV, self-study and practical experiential education. In addition to the regular curriculum, a

newspaper in education (NIE) program has been introduced as a special moral education tool

to increase the awareness of the security situation among servicemembers and nurture sound

values in them.

To magnify the effectiveness of moral education, diverse and creative content that can

appeal to the current generation of servicemen and women is produced, and support is also

provided toward the production of such content. Specialists in relevant fields are invited as

guest lecturers to conduct battalion-level moral

education seminars.

Meanwhile, the ‘Unification and National

Security Vision Contest’ during which service
members present content they prepared them
selves helps them to spontaneously internalize

defense values and put them into actions, at

the same time as adding excitement to life in 2015 Unification and National Security Vision Contest (July 2015)

barracks.

**| establishment and Operation of the national Defense Agency for spiritual and Mental**

**force enhancement | In 2013, the National Defense Agency for Spiritual and Mental**

Force Enhancement was established by consolidating mental and moral education functions

scattered across each service agency, to strengthen education on national and security values.

Under its initiative, a new military spirit curriculum has been created for field-unit combat

troops and officers from the rank of Lieutenant Colonel to Major. The curriculum consists of

case studies on military spirit, discussions about role models and trips to historic battlefields.

The agency also carries out a variety of research and development activities, including hosting

seminars to promote the development of mental force, calling for papers on mental force-re
lated themes and developing content.


**| Personality education of servicemembers | To foster outstanding servicemembers**

who are also positive and responsible citizens of a democratic society, a character education

system has been established, with emphasis on seven fundamental values including creativ
ity, courage, responsibility, respect, cooperation, loyalty and justice. Intensive education by

civilian experts in character education is coupled with video-based education in everyday

ethics.


-----

###### Chapter
# 4

Strengthening Future-Oriented National Defense
Capabilities


-----

Section 1 Refinement and Development of Defense Reform 100

Section 2 Force Enhancement based on Jointness 110

Section 3 Defense R&D and Promotion of the Defense Industry 117

Section 4  Securing an Adequate Defense Budget and Enhancing the Efficiency of Defense Budget Management 125

Section 5 Development of Defense Informatization 134

Section 6 Promoting Defense Logistics Innovation 137


-----

**Section 1 Refinement and Development**
**of Defense Reform**

MND continues to push ahead with the Defense Reform Basic Plan (2014-2030)— which reflects both

domestic and foreign security situations as well as changes in the defense environment—with the aim of

fostering an “advanced elite military.” While the military is undergoing structural reform in order to become

more responsive to contingencies of future warfare, MND has also been seeking innovative ways of

establishing a highly efficient and advanced management system for national defense. Lately, the reform

has been gaining even more ground via additional developments in “Creative Defense.”

**1. Status and Progress of Defense Reform**

In December 2005, MND established its first Defense Reform Basic Plan (2006-2020) in

response to the changing patterns in warfare— mainly precipitated by scientific advance
ments—and heightened demand for more innovative defense management in general. Aiming

to transform the military from a quantitative structure revolving around manpower into a

qualitative structure centered on information and knowledge, MND has not only expanded

the country’s civilian-ruled defense, but also transformed the military structure into one that

is more suitable for future warfare. In addition, MND has also sought to improve barracks

culture in order to meet the contemporary standards and allow systematic reform for low-cost

yet highly efficient defense management.

Since then, MND has amended and reinforced the basic plan according to assessments made

every five years under the National Defense Reform Act on domestic and foreign security sit
uations and the overall progress of defense reform. In 2009, MND adopted the newly revised

Defense Reform Basic Plan (2009-2020), which prioritized countermeasures to military

threats from North Korea, such as long-range missile launches and its second nuclear test,

before moving on to other agenda, such as cultivating future warfare experts and improving

the effectiveness of research and development through the private sector.

In August 2012, MND once again modified the Defense Reform Basic Plan (2012-2030)

in order to reflect further changes in the domestic and foreign security environment, espe
cially after the attack against the ROKS Cheonan and the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo Island.

By extending the target year for the completion of reforms from 2020 to 2030, MND primarily


-----

focused on increasing the ROK’s deterrence capabilities against North Korea and restructuring

the armed forces into the most optimized unit structure for responding to North Korean prov
ocations.

Since 2013, there has been an upsurge in North Korea’s asymmetric threats—nuclear and

other WMD threats— and a heightened demand for a more efficient defense management

system. As a result, in March 2014, the Defense Reform Basic Plan (2014~2030) was set in

motion with the intention of training an “advanced elite military force backed by innovation

and creativity.” The primary focus of the plan is not only on attaining the capabilities required

to simultaneously prepare for North Korea’s asymmetric threats and those of local and full
scale war, but also on improving the military structure— by such means as increasing the

number of officers and NCOs—to prepare against a reduction in military resources. Moreover,

the combat capacity of the nation’s military forces is being boosted by realistic training and

more effective management of military personnel while efforts such as improving mobiliza
tion, training reserve forces into an elite force, and innovating logistics operations are pursued

to establish an advanced defense management system.

In 2016, MND drafted the Defense Reform Basic Plan (2014~2030) Change 1 based on its

assessment of the progress achieved by all the defense reforms over the preceding ten years.

After devising the optimal countermeasures against military threats from North Korea, MND

rectified its plans for the reorganization of troops and focused on securing core combat power

linked to structural reform while considering the nation’s fiscal outlook. Furthermore, the

new revision also reflects other areas that may contribute to future advancements in national

defense, such as the creative development of human resources, and the establishment of

ICT-based training environments and the foundation for advanced national defense informa
tization.

Since 2015, as part of the efforts to re-establish the direction of the defense reforms and

formulate a blueprint for the future, MND has been pushing ahead with its Creative Defense[1)]

paradigm, which has so far proven to be a promising new stimulus for reform.

**2. Major Achievements of Defense Reform (2013-2016)**


In terms of military structure, the ability to execute joint and combined operations has been

**1) A new paradigm in defense development that generates innovative defense value through convergence of creativity and scientific**
technology with national defense affairs
※ ‌Innovative defense value refers to generation of creative military management, pioneering of unprecedented types of military
strength, realization of highly efficient and advanced defense management, and construction of a convergent ecosystem that
enables civilian and military structures to co-exist with mutual benefits.


-----

strengthened by carrying out organizational restructuring within the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(JCS), Army, Navy and Air Force. In order to enable offensive integrated operations[2)] under

a network-centric environment, the mobilization division of the Army was reformed along

with the creation of the Navy’s Submarine Command, Marine Corps’9[th] Brigade, and the Air

Force’s Tactical Air Control Wing. Between 2006 and 2016, the number of standing troops was

reduced by almost 56,000 personnel, while the proportion of officers was increased by 6.2%

as part of the transition to an elite military structure. Furthermore, K2 tanks, Korea Utility

Helicopters (KUH), submarines, frigates (FFX) and Medium-range Surface-to-Air Missiles
(M-SAM) were all reinforced in order to help cope with North Korea and other potential

threats.

In the field of defense management, military occupational specialties open to female ser
vicemembers have now been expanded to include all specialties, and the number of training

corps for female cadets has been increased from two to three. In order to form elite mobile

reserve forces, a part-time service system for officer reservists was carried out in a trial run,

while in the case of homeland defense reservists, old or obsolete personal firearms have been

entirely replaced with M16s.

A total of eighteen organizations, including the Joint Interoperability Technology Center,

have been designated as organizations operating under the responsibility of the military,

while the efficiency of defense management has been enhanced by replacing noncombatant

military vehicles with commercial vehicles. Meanwhile, investments in defense R&D have

been expanded gradually in order to ensure optimal conditions for more creative research and

development.

In order to enhance the sense of pride and raise the morale of the men and women of the

armed forces, salaries have been increased and recreational facilities expanded. Also, the

childcare environment of military families has been improved through the establishment of

military day-care centers and joint childcare facilities. Meanwhile, a system for remote medical

examination and treatment as well as medical evacuation helicopters have been provided for

servicemembers serving in areas with limited accessibility, such as the frontline guard posts
(GP) and coastal guard posts.

**3. Direction of Military Structure Reform**

**| Command Structure | The command structure will be restructured in the direction of**

**2) A concept to win a war by paralyzing the enemy’s center of gravity through the preemptive and proactive integration of capabilities**
and activities across all areas of land, sea, air, space and cyberspace while adhering to an offensive mindset under a Network-Centric
Operational Environment (NCOE)


-----

strengthening jointness and preparing for the future operational environment on the Korean

Peninsula while maintaining the current joint forces system. The Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) is

establishing a theater operation command and execution system with the JCS at the center by

focusing on reinforcing military command[3)] assistance, intelligence and operations functions.

The JCS will be restructured to distinguish the operational command section that carries out

theater operations[4)] and the military command assistance section that carries out military

strength build-up and military structure development. The reorganization plan for the JCS is

shown in <Chart 4-2>.

**<Chart 4-1> Organization Plan of the Joint Chiefs of Staff**


2016


2030

**Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff**


|and assistance onal command)|Opera command|
|---|---|
|airman of the Second Vice C fs of Staff Joint Chie||


**Chief Directorate**
**of Strategic Planning**


**Second Vice Chairman of the**
**Joint Chiefs of Staff**

**Chief Directorate of Intel, Operation,**

**Sustainment Support, Planning and**
**Communications**


**Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff**

**Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff**

**Korea Defense** **Chief Directorate** **Chief Directorate**

**Chief Directorate**

**Intelligence** **of Military** **of Strategic**

**of Operations**

**Agency** **Support** **Planning**


As the Republic of Korea and the United States of America have agreed during the 46[th]

Security Consultative Meeting in 2014 to shift gears from the current Combined Forces

Command structure into a ROK-led Future Command[5)] based on the Future Command

Structure concept, a Future Command organization will be gradually established within the

JCS to strengthen the ROK’s combined command capabilities in conjunction with the pursuit

of the “conditions-based wartime operational control transition”.

**| Troop Structure | In an effort to transform the military from a conventional quantitative**

structure to an advanced qualitative structure, the number of standing troops will be reduced

to 522,000 by 2022. The cutback will fall specifically on the Army alone, where it is estimated

that approximately 387,000 troops of the current 490,000 will remain, while the number of

personnel in the Navy, Marine Corps and Air Force will remain the same. The reduction will


**3) The military command responsible for the establishment of operations for strategic planning and military strength build-up as well as**
operational command and management of operation forces.

**4) The authority for planning and enforcing joint and combined operations, independent operations and operations against local**
provocations as well as for leading military training relevant to such operations.

**5) As a ROK military-led theater operations command consisting of a ROK-U.S. combined staff, the Future Command will be responsible**
for the ROK’s defense and combined operations during wartime.


-----

occur gradually, taking into consideration the timing of both the restructuring of troop for
mations and the build-up of military strength in relation to weapons systems. The aim is to

increase the cadre force to consist more than 40% of the entire manpower by 2025, with the

ultimate goal of forming a more elite military force centered on the cadre force. The standing

troop reduction plan is shown in <Chart 4-2>.

**<Chart 4-2> Standing Troops Reduction Plan**

**Category** **Standing Troop** 2016 2022 **Category** **Standing Troop**



|Category|Standing Troop|
|---|---|
|Army|Approx. 490,000|
|Navy|Approx. 41,000|
|Marine Corps|Approx. 29,000|
|Air Force|Approx. 65,000|

|Category|Standing Troop|
|---|---|
|Army|Approx. 387,000|
|Navy|Approx. 41,000|
|Marine Corps|Approx. 29,000|
|Air Force|Approx. 65,000|


**| Unit Structure |** **The Army will be restructured into a unit based structure capable of**

executing integrated offensive operations under a network-centric operational environment. In

order to effectively command and control operations at the frontline, whether in times of war

or peace, the Army will combine the First ROK Army (FROKA) with the Third ROK Army
(TROKA) to form the Ground Operations Command. The Ground Operations Command,

which will focus mainly on the crucial functions of operations command such as communica
tions, intelligence, operations and firepower, will command the ground operations units at the

corps level, while a ground intelligence group, intelligence communications group and service

support group will be organized under the Ground Operations Command in order to support

ground operations. The plan for the reorganization of the Army’s unit structure is shown in

<Chart 4-3>.

**<Chart 4-3> Army Unit Structure Reorganization Plan**

2016 2030


**Army Headquarters**

**Army First ROK** **Army Third ROK** **Operations CommandSecond** **CommandDefense Capital** **CommandWarfare Special** **Operations CommandAviation Army** **CommandMissile**

**Corps (3)** **Corps (5)**


**Army Headquarters**

**Operations CommandGround** **Operations CommandSecond** **CommandDefense Capital** **CommandWarfare Special** **CommandAviation** **CommandMissile**

**Regional** **Maneuver**
**Corps (5)** **Corps (1)**


-----

As the highest tactical echelon for ground operations, the regional corps will be reinforced,

so that it will be able to execute independent operations, defend the frontline at each axis,

and be utilized as the primary unit during offensive operations. Aviation groups, air defense

artillery groups, and the logistics support brigade will be organized for each corps to reinforce

both combat and combat support capabilities. This reorganization will be carried out with

regard to the eastern and western operational environments. Meanwhile, the Maneuver Corps

is expected to be employed as the main operational unit in the event of multi-dimensional,

high-speed maneuver warfare. It will maintain its mechanized infantry divisions while rein
forcing its intelligence and combat support in order to swiftly respond to changes in the opera
tional environment on the Korean Peninsula.

**The Navy will not only prepare against the known threats by securing the ability to jointly**

operate its forces on a multi-dimensional level—above water, underwater and in the air—

but will also strive to become capable of protecting national interests of all types, including

maritime routes and resources. In line with plans to field KSS-III submarines, Aegis destroy
ers, naval operations helicopters and maritime patrol aircrafts, the Submarine Command,

Air Wing, and Maritime Task Flotilla will be reorganized, and the special warfare flotilla’s

combat operations unit will be strengthened. The plan for the reorganization of the Navy’s unit

structure is shown in <Chart 4-4>.

**<Chart 4-4> Navy Unit Structure Reorganization Plan**


2016


2030


**Navy Headquarters**

**OperationsCommand Naval** **Marine Corps HQ** **CommandEducation Training and** **CommandLogistics** **Reporting Direct Units**


**Navy Headquarters**

**OperationsCommand Naval** **Marine Corps HQ** **CommandEducation Training and** **CommandLogistics** **Reporting Direct Units**


|Comm|mand Command HQ Units|
|---|---|
|||
|et Maritime Maritime Spe||

|Comm|mand Command HQ Units|
|---|---|
|||
|et Maritime Maritime Spe||


**Commands Fleet (3)** **Component Flotilla** **Submarine Command** **Intelligence Maritime Group** **WingAir** **Maritime Flotilla Task** **Warfare Special Flotilla**


**Commands Fleet (3)** **Component Flotilla** **Submarine Command** **Intelligence Maritime Group** **WingAir** **Maritime Flotilla Task** **Warfare Special Flotilla**


*[ ‌Squadrons and Battalions to be established under Submarine ]
Command, Air Wing, Maritime Task Flotilla, and Special
Warfare Flotilla

**The Marine Corps will be transformed into a marine-air-ground task force that is capable**

of executing various types of missions, such as defending strategic islands and carrying out

multi-dimensional, high-speed amphibious operations. Marine divisions will undergo restruc
turing via a build-up of its military strength in battlefield surveillance as well as its ability

to strike and defend. Aligned with the plan to field amphibious task helicopters, the Marine

Corps will also establish the Marine Aviation Group. The plan for the reorganization of the

Marine Corps’ unit structure is shown in <Chart 4-5>.


-----

**<Chart 4-5> Marine Corps Unit Structure Reorganization Plan**

2016


2030


**Division1[st]** **Division2[nd]** **Logistics Support Group** **and Training Education Group** **Brigade6[th]** **Brigade9[th]** **Yeonpyeong Unit** **Division1[st]** **Division2[nd]** **Logistics Support Group** **and Training Education Group** **Brigade6[th]** **Brigade9[th]** **Aviation Group** **Yeonpyeong Unit**

|Northwest Islands|Defense Command|
|---|---|
|||
|||


**Division1[st]** **Division2[nd]** **Logistics Support Group** **and Training Education Group** **Brigade6[th]** **Brigade9[th]** **Yeonpyeong Unit**

**Marine Corps HQ/**

**Northwest Islands Defense Command**

**Division1[st]** **Division2[nd]** **Logistics Support Group** **and Training Education Group** **Brigade6[th]** **Brigade9[th]** **Aviation Group** **Yeonpyeong Unit**


**The Air Force will develop its structure to primarily focus on joint operations, specifically**

of air and space, in order to conduct offensive, effects-based operations. It will also create a

Satellite Surveillance Control Unit that will help monitor satellite activities above the Korean

Peninsula and restructure its Tactical Intelligence Group as the Aerial Intelligence Wing. The

plan for the reorganization of the Air Force’s unit structure is shown in <Chart 4-6>.

**<Chart 4-6> Air Force Unit Structure Reorganization Plan**

2016 2030

**Air Force Headquarters** **Air Force Headquarters**

**Operations** **and Training** **Reporting** **Operations** **and Training** **Reporting**
**Command** **Command** **Units** **Command** **Command** **Units**

**Functional** **Air Defense** **Air Defense** **Tactical Air** **Tactical** **Satellite** **Functional** **Air Defense** **Air Defense** **Tactical Air** **Aerial**

**Air Force Headquarters**

**Air Force** **Education** **Direct**

**Logistics**

**Operations** **and Training** **Reporting**

**Command**

**Command** **Command** **Units**

**Functional** **Air Defense** **Air Defense** **Tactical Air** **Tactical**
**Command** **and Missile** **and Control** **Control** **Intelligence**
**(2)** **Command** **Command** **Wing** **Group**

**Air Force Headquarters**

**Air Force** **Education** **Direct**

**Logistics**

**Operations** **and Training** **Reporting**

**Command**

**Command** **Command** **Units**

**Satellite** **Functional** **Air Defense** **Air Defense** **Tactical Air** **Aerial**

**Surveillance and Control** **Command** **and Missile** **and Control** **Control** **Intelligence**
**Unit** **(2)** **Command** **Command** **Wing** **Wing**


**| Military Force Structure | The military force structure is being reformed with the focus**

on securing the capability to effectively respond to provocations from North Korea and other

potential threats. In addition to attaining early warning and realtime surveillance capabilities,

the military will establish a command and control system designed to enable network-based

simultaneous integrated operations. The force structure will also be reorganized into a

maneuver and strike system backed by cutting-edge science and technology.

The surveillance and reconnaissance forces will continue to monitor the Korean Peninsula

and the surrounding regions, while reconnaissance satellites and surveillance drones
(Unmanned Aerial Vehicles) will also be reinforced in order to assist battlefield visualiza
tion across all echelons. Moreover, command and control intelligence systems, which include

command and control systems and satellite communication systems, will also be strengthened

in order to assist the communication of battlefield situations and various command decisions.


-----

Given that the operational field for ground

forces will expand as a result of unit reorga
nization, the ground forces will be reinforced

with the introduction of the 230-mm Multiple

Launch Rocket System (MLRS), mid-size

tactical vehicles and Korea Utility Helicopters
(KUH), while K2 tanks, K-9 self-propelled

High-altitude unmanned surveillance aerial vehicle

guns and light armed helicopters will also be

acquired to strengthen maneuver and strike

capabilities.

Meanwhile, the naval forces will aim to

control the surrounding seas and execute

multi-dimensional, high-speed amphibi
ous operations by acquiring various vessels

such as destroyers (KDDX), frigates (FFX), 230 mm MLRS

submarines (KSS-III) and landing crafts
(LST-II).

The Air Force will secure F-X fighters,

the ROK’s indigenous KF-X fighters,

aerial refueling tankers and long-distance

transport aircraft in order to bolster its

Destroyer (KDDX)

ability to conduct long-range air operations.

They will also acquire defensive military strength, such as surface-to-air missile systems
(i.e. PATRIOT), shoulder-launched surface-to-air missiles, and new protective gears against

Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear and high-yield Explosive (CBRNE) attacks. The

Kill Chain, Korea Air and Missile Defense (KAMD) system, and Korea Massive Punishment

and Retaliation (KMPR) plan will provide further countermeasures to North Korea’s nuclear

and missile threats.

**4. Direction of Defense Management Reform**


**| Improvements in Defense Training and Personnel Management | In order to help**

cultivate the ability to carry out combat missions during various battle situations and to

implement systematic training, scientifically advanced training centers will be established at

fifteen pre-existing military training grounds, and by 2030, roughly 3,300 training sites will

be integrated by region for army and division level units and by garrison for echelons at bat

-----

talion-level and higher. The military will draw up a plan to acquire and utilize elite manpower

that have creativity and the ability to integrate, increase the selection ratio of long-term service

for junior-level officers, and seek to extend the retirement age for each rank for career military

servicemembers.

**| Improving the Mobilization System and Training of Elite Reserve Forces | The military**

will modify the laws and regulations related to mobilization to enable immediate mobilization

of essential forces during contingency, and pursue the establishment of the Army Mobilization

Command which will be able to systematically manage and control the mobilized resources.

The system that manages mobilization by region will be expanded in order to ensure efficient

use of the mobilized resources and the ability to exert their combat power immediately. To

train reserve cadres into an elite force, the peacetime non-standing cadre force service system

will be expanded in phases until 2020. Battalion-level reserve force training sites will be inte
grated with brigade-level training sites by 2024 in order to provide a highly scientific training.

**| Innovating the Logistics Operation System and Expanding the Utilization of Civilian**

**Resources | MND will establish a military distribution system that reflects ongoing changes**

in the distribution environment, and modernize its distribution facilities through standardiza
tion. It will adopt the concept of a user-centered one-stop distribution support system,[6)] and

develop a logistics intelligence system that will allow the immediate support of materials and

resources by keeping track of logistics assets in realtime. Furthermore, MND will continue to

endeavor for efficient defense management by continuing to expand the utilization of civilian

resources, such as commissioning military base management to the private sector, outsourcing

the maintenance of military equipment, and renting commercial vehicles.

**| Advancing Defense Science Technologies and Strengthening Cyber Warfare Response**

**Capabilities | MND plans to foster the Agency for Defense Development into a world class**

research facility with the aim of promoting joint research and development between the private

and military sectors as well as developing state-of-the-art weaponry and core defense tech
nologies. The groundwork for the defense industry will be strengthened as MND plans to

welcome inputs from firms that possess cutting-edge technologies, enabling R&D projects of

more creative and inventive ideas for future weapons systems. The fast-track method will be

introduced and an educational institute specializing in defense acquisition will also be estab
lished in order to improve the overall defense acquisition system. As for bolstering response

**6) Reducing costs in budget, manpower and facilities by eliminating any factors that may hinder the efficiency of the current military**
distribution system and also reducing the number of stages in the distribution process from 5 stages to 3 stages in order to allow
more timely and systematic distribution for the user


-----

capabilities against cyber warfare, MND will foster cyber experts and continue to develop

new cyber technologies.

**| Improving Welfare and Conditions for Military Service | To enhance the quality of life**

for military personnel, childcare facilities and services within the military will be improved,

additional culture centers and recreational facilities will be opened within the barracks, and

better welfare will be provided to servicemembers and their families. In some cases, MND

may introduce certain forms of social compensation for servicemembers, such as allowing

them to trade in their military experience for college credits. MND will also operate an

increased number of professional counselors available for servicemembers by making these

counselors available up to the battalion-level for GOP units and up to the regiment-level for

general units. It will also create a healthy barracks environment focused on disease prevention,

improve the military’s medical support system, and pursue the establishment of a military

trauma center as a specialized trauma patient treatment organization.


-----

**Section 2 Force Enhancement based on**
**Jointness**

MND continues to strengthen its defense capabilities in order to establish a robust security posture

against diverse threats including the increasing threats of North Korean nuclear weapons and missiles. To

this end, the ROK military has adopted a counter-fire reinforcement plan that will help realize the concept

of joint military strategies and joint operations based on assessments of strategic environments and threat

analyses.

**1. Basic Direction of Force Enhancement**

In order to effectively respond to various military threats from North Korea, MND is

enhancing its forces based on selection and concentration strategy within a framework of

available funds. MND will enhance those forces required to prepare against North Korea’s

nuclear and missile threats, which are difficult to withstand, as the top priority. With regard

to those forces required to prepare against North Korea’s local provocation threats which have

a large policy and strategic impact, MND will acquire vital forces first focused on gaining an

edge over North Korea. Forces to prepare against terrorism, cyber threats and a full scale war

will be gradually reinforced considering the availability of financial resources.

In terms of key battlefield functions, battlefield awareness will be improved by acquiring,

in phases, reconnaissance satellites, multi-purpose satellites and various other manned and

unmanned surveillance aircraft, as well as signal intelligence collection systems. Such acqui
sitions are expected to furnish the ability to survey and reconnoiter the Korean Peninsula and

its surrounding areas, in addition to securing early warning systems and enhancing battlefield

visualization capabilities. As for command and control and communication forces, MND will

focus on establishing a realtime network for sharing information on battlefield situations by

improving the interoperability of command and control systems for each echelon and building

a high-speed, high-capacity, digital-based communications system. The underlining purpose

is to create a network-based operational environment by expanding both the capacity for

timely decision support and command and control.

As for ground forces, MND will continue to acquire the K-series tanks and self-propelled

artillery, 230-mm MLRs, KUHs, and long-range missiles in order to enhance the ground


-----

forces’ capacity for offensive integrated operations. Also, considering that the area of opera
tional responsibility for each echelon is expanding, MND will acquire an automated combat

system with enhanced maneuverability, firepower and defensive capabilities, as well as intelli
gent ammunitions of a new concept.

Meanwhile, the naval forces will acquire KSS-III submarines, maritime patrol aircraft and

amphibious attack helicopters in order to boost its capabilities for maritime control of areas

surrounding the Korean Peninsula and multi-dimensional amphibious operations.

The air forces will progressively acquire F-X fighters and KF-X fighters to enhance its air

operation capabilities, and will improve its long-range air operations and ability to launch

precision strikes on strategic targets by acquiring aerial refueling tankers and precision-guided

weapons.

The defense forces will gradually enhance their defense capabilities against aircraft and

ballistic missiles as well as EMP[7)] and chemical, biological and radiological attacks. Defense

capabilities for individuals, facilities and equipment will also be reinforced to help guarantee a

higher survival rate during the early stages of a war.

**2. Major Force Enhancement Projects**


**| 2013 Force Enhancement Projects | The 2013 defense budget amounted to 34,497**

billion won, of which 10,174.9 billion was allocated to the force improvement budget, rep
resenting a 2.8% increase from 2012. The major force enhancement projects for 2013 are as

shown in <Chart 4-7>.

**<Chart 4-7> Major Force Enhancement Projects for 2013**

|Weapon Systems|Ongoing Projects|New Projects|
|---|---|---|
|Battlefield Awareness/ Command and Control, Communications|• ‌High-altitude unmanned surveillance aerial vehicle (HUAV) • ‌Satellite all-military air defense warning system|• ‌Performance upgrade of reconnaissance UAVs for corps • ‌Portable satellite / air-to-ground communication radio|
|Maneuver / Fire|• K-2 Tank • K-10 ammunition supply vehicle|• Remote fire control system • K-56 ammunition supply vehicle|
|Maritime Assets|• Amphibious Ship (LST-II) • Jangbogo II-class submarine|• Auxiliary training ship • Amphibious attack helicopter|
|Air Assets|• Intermediate-range GPS-guided bomb|• Tactical Air Control Wing|


**7) Electro-Magnetic Pulse**


-----

**| 2014 Force Enhancement Projects | The 2014 defense budget amounted to 35,705.6**

billion won, of which 10,509.6 billion was allocated to the force improvement budget, rep
resenting a 3.3% increase from 2013. The major force enhancement projects for 2014 are as

shown in <Chart 4-8>.

**<Chart 4-8> Major Force Enhancement Projects for 2014**

|Weapon Systems|Ongoing Projects|New Projects|
|---|---|---|
|Battlefield Awareness/ Command andControl, Communications|• ‌High-altitude unmanned surveillance aerial vehicle (HUAV) • Thermal observation device (TOD-III)|• Mobile sea surveillance radar • Air traffic control radar|
|Maneuver / Fire|• K-2 Tank • Counter-fire radar|• 230mm MLRs • Remote controlled munitions|
|Maritime Assets|• PKX-B (Batch-I) • Jangbogo II-class submarine (Batch-I)|• Amphibious Transport Ships|
|Air Assets|• F-X|• Korean indigenous fighters (KF-X)|



**| 2015 Force Enhancement Projects | The defense budget for 2015 amounted to 37,555**

billion, of which 11,014 billion was allocated to the force improvement budget, representing

a 4.8% increase from 2014. The major force enhancement projects for 2015 are as shown in

<Chart 4-9>.

**<Chart 4-9> Major Force Enhancement Projects for 2015**

|Weapon Systems|Ongoing Projects|New Projects|
|---|---|---|
|Battlefield Awareness/ Command and Control, Communications|• ‌High-altitude unmanned surveillance aerial vehicle (HUAV) • Thermal observation device (TOD-III)|• Reconnaissance UAVs for Divisions • ‌Tactical Information Communication Network (TICN) • Korean Joint Tactical Data Link|
|Maneuver / Fire|• K-2 Tank • K-9 Self-Propelled Artillery|• New 7.62mm machine gun • Minefield Clearing Line Charge|
|Maritime Assets|• Gwanggaeto III-class Destroyer • Jangbogo III-class submarine (Batch-I)|• Submarine Rescue Ships (ASR-II) • New sea surveillance radar|
|Air Assets|• F-X • Aerial Refueling Tanker|• Basic training helicopter|



**| 2016 Force Enhancement Projects | The 2016 defense budget amounted to 38,842.1**

billion won, of which 11,682.4 billion was allocated to the force improvement budget, rep
resenting a 6.1% increase from 2015. The major force enhancement projects for 2016 are as

shown in <Chart 4-10>.


-----

**<Chart 4-10> Major Force Enhancement Projects for 2016**

|Weapon Systems|Ongoing Projects|New Projects|
|---|---|---|
|Battlefield Awareness/ Command and Control, Communications|• ‌High-altitude unmanned surveillance aerial vehicle (HUAV) • Tactical Information Communication Network (TICN)|• Joint Operation Analysis Model-II (R&D)|
|Maneuver / Fire|• K-2 Tank • K-9 Self-Propelled Artillery|• Wheeled Armored Combat Vehicles • Medium Range Infantry Missiles|
|Maritime Assets|• Gwanggaeto III-class Destroyer • Jangbogo III-class submarine (Batch-I)|• Amphibious Attack Helicopters • 2.75-inch Guided Rocket|
|Air Assets|• F-X • Aerial Refueling Tanker|• GPS Guided Bomb (500lbs class) • Air Combat Maneuver Training System|



**3. 2017-2021 Defense Mid-term Force Enhancement Plan**


Beginning in 2017 and continuing for the next five years, the focus will remain on establish
ing the Kill Chain and the Korea Air and Missile Defense (KAMD) to defend against North

Korea’s nuclear weapons and missiles, reinforcing the main forces that are undergoing military

restructuring under the current defense reforms, and strengthening the nation’s military

capacity to respond to local provocations and a full scale war.

In preparation against North Korea’s nuclear and missile threats, the ROK military will

enhance its ability to detect, distinguish and attack any and all parts of North Korea by

acquiring mid- and high-altitude surveillance drones, long-range air-to-surface guided

missiles, and early warning radars for ballistic missiles. The ability to detect subma
rine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBM) will be particularly reinforced so that the Kill Chain

and the KAMD can be introduced at the most appropriate time.

To prepare for the expansion of the operational arena and the reduction of troop numbers as

elements of the national defense reform, MND will acquire the forces essential for military

restructuring at the most suitable time. The surveillance area will be expanded by reinforcing

the unmanned reconnaissance aircraft for each echelon, and the employment of forces will be

reduced but more efficient by procuring and upgrading various items of military equipment

such as K2 tanks and 81-mm mortars. Furthermore, personal night vision goggles and com
munication equipment will be supplied to troops at the battalion-level and lower units in order

to strengthen the unit’s combat power.

In order to strengthen its defense capacity against local provocations and a full scale war,

the ground forces will attain the capability to strike North Korea’s newly developed 300-mm

multiple rocket launcher by acquiring tactical surface-to-surface guided weapons and 230-mm

multiple rocket launchers. They will also strengthen the capability to prepare against covert


-----

enemy invasions and surprise attacks by field deploying local air defense radars and Mine

Detector II. Meanwhile, naval and amphibious forces will deploy new high-speed boats

and 2.75-inch guided rockets in order to prepare against Northern Limit Line (NLL) prov
ocations and ambushes of islands. Ulsan-class frigates and 3,000-ton submarines will help

strengthen surface and underwater operations, while amphibious operation capabilities will

also be enhanced by reinforcing large transport vessels and landing ships. The air forces will

secure their ability to perform covert infiltrations and long-distance operations, as well as its

strike ability against all parts of North Korea by field deploying the F-35A and aerial refueling

tankers. It will also aim to gain the upper hand in air operations by enhancing the performance

of the KF-16 and by conducting further research and development on the KF-X fighter.

**<Chart 4-11> 2013~2016 Major force enhancement Projects**

**High-Altitude Unmanned**
**surveillance Aerial Vehicles**


**Tankers**


**Aerial Refueling**


**f-X**


**Korean indigenous**
**fighters (Kf-X)**

**230mm MLRs**

**K2 Tanks**

**Amphibious Transport**

**Gwanggaeto III-class**

**ship**

**Destroyer**
**Jangbogo III-class**
**submarine**


**4. efficient Pursuit of Defense force Improvement Project[8)]**

**| Modification of Laws and Regulations regarding Defense Acquisition | In order to**

carry out defense force improvement projects in a transparent and efficient manner, defense

project related laws and regulations are being revised.

In 2014, the authority to decide the requirements concerning weapon systems was handed

from MND to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, while the authority to establish the mid-term defense

**8) Project to enhance military capabilities by purchasing weapon systems, carrying out r&D including new development and**
performance enhancement, and establishing relevant facilities required for such activities ( article 3 of the Defense acquisition
Program act)


-----

plan, prepare the test and evaluation plan, and reach a decision on the evaluation was trans
ferred from the Defense Acquisition Program Administration (DAPA) to MND in order to

strengthen the connection between defense policies and defense force improvement projects

and to improve the independence and objectivity of tests and evaluations. Henceforth, DAPA

will focus on drawing up the defense budget for defense force improvement, program manage
ment, and the execution of contracts.

Through such a restructuring of functions and management between the relevant organiza
tions, defense acquisition is now expected to become more systematic and efficient than ever

before.

**<Chart 4-12> Modification due to the Revision of Defense Acquisition Program Act (2014. 11. 10.)**

**MND** **DAPA** **Army, Navy and Air Force** **JCS**


**Current** **Revised**


**Propose** **Decision on** **Planning mid-term** **Budget** **Propose** **Decision on** **Planning mid-term** **Budget**
**requirements** **requirements** **plan** **allocation** **requirements** **requirements** **plan** **allocation**

**Operation and** **Fielding and** **Test and** **systems** **Operation and** **Fielding and** **Test and** **systems**
**maintenance** **deployment** **evaluation** **maintenance** **deployment** **evaluation**


**Propose** **Decision on** **Planning mid-term** **Budget**
**requirements** **requirements** **plan** **allocation**

**R&D of**
**weapon**

**Operation and** **Fielding and** **Test and** **systems**
**maintenance** **deployment** **evaluation**

**Procurement**


**Propose** **Decision on** **Planning mid-term** **Budget**
**requirements** **requirements** **plan** **allocation**

**R&D of**
**weapon**

**Operation and** **Fielding and** **Test and** **systems**
**maintenance** **deployment** **evaluation**

**Procurement**


Since 2015, intellectual property rights concerning defense R&D contributed by non-profit

entities, such as universities and government-funded research institutes, have been acknowl
edged in an effort to encourage greater participation by the private sector. Furthermore, if a

core research and development project proposed by an appointed research institute[9)] is selected,

the corresponding research institute responsible for the project will be given the authority to

lead the project.

In December 2015, the Defense Industry Technology Protection Act was enacted in order

to systematically protect valuable technologies and prevent them from being leaked overseas.

**| Requirement Review and Analysis and Evaluation | MND, bearing in mind the defense**

budget and finances, currently enforces a requirement review framework – as determined by

the JCS – that inspects the adequacy and validity of weapons systems as part of the effort to

promote efficient defense acquisition.

The Force Requirements Review Committee (FRRC) has greatly contributed to making the

defense acquisition process more efficient, having reviewed a total of 36 requirement cases


**9) An institute appointed by the Administrator of the DAPA to develop, test and measure defense commodities; manufacture and inspect**
relevant machinery and tools; analyze the defense industry; and develop related software (Article 3 of the Defense Acquisition
Program Act)


-----

over the last three years, of which 25 cases were identified in the very early stages as requiring

revision or carrying potential risk factors. Since 2015, MND has been operating an integrated

system of requirement review that determines the relative priority of the requirements, and

such information has been reflected in the establishment of the mid-term defense plan.

As of late November 2016, a total of 161 cases of analysis and evaluation have been carried

out in order to support various decision-making processes about whether to pursue a certain

project. Henceforth, the analysis and evaluation process will be developed into a method for

distinguishing redundancies and connections among similar or related defense acquisition

projects and prioritizing each project from a comprehensive perspective. In addition, there are

plans to establish a database management system in order to make it more convenient to accu
mulate, manage and share the results of conducted analyses and evaluations and to increase

the transparency and efficiency of the process.

**| Timely Execution of Tests and Evaluations | Tests and evaluations are conducted in**

order to determine whether a weapons system or a core technology that is due to be acquired

or developed meets the military’s performance standard and criteria.

As of November 2016, MND has tested and evaluated a total of 86 projects, including the

procurement of aerial refueling tankers, in the two years since taking over the responsibility

from the DAPA in 2014. The results of these tests and evaluations have since been utilized in

the decision-making process of whether or not to pursue the field deployment of such projects.

MND will continue its efforts to conduct timely tests and evaluations in order to select only

the finest weapons systems whose superior performance has been verified.


-----

**Section 3 Defense R&D and Promotion of**
**the Defense Industry**

MND is increasing the R&D budget and expanding civilian-military technology cooperation as a means to

promote a future-oriented defense R&D that is both creative and challenging. MND is pursuing innovation

of the defense industry in order to establish fair competition and nurture defense companies while

improving the transparency, efficiency, and expertise of the industry.


**1. Advancing Defense Technologies and Expanding Civilian-Military Technology**
**Cooperation**

**| Promoting Creative and Challenging Defense R&D | MND is in the process of changing**

the paradigm of its defense R&D from one that followed advanced countries into one that is

creative, challenging and future-oriented,[10)] and at the leading edge of the industry based on a

“selection and concentration” strategy.

The proportion of the overall defense budget occupied by the defense R&D budget is

rising.[11)] In addition, the policy of prioritizing domestic R&D has resulted in an improvement

of the ROK’s defense technology, placing the country in 9[th] place in the world in terms of

defense technology capabilities[12)] as of 2015.

In January 2014, the Institute of Advanced Defense Technology Research was set up within

the Agency for Defense Development to strengthen R&D on cutting-edge weapons systems

and core technologies for the future, and to apply advanced technologies developed by the

private sector to national defense. The number of R&D personnel involved in developing

strategic weapons and new technologies is being increased in stages, and research facilities

such as those dedicated to preparing for future warfare are also being strengthened. Further
more, the designation of defense research organizations and the establishment of specialized

research centers have been expanded to increase cooperation with civilian research centers

and universities.

In addition, efforts are being made to create an environment that facilitates creative and


**10) Research and development that has considerable impact on the advancement of weapon systems or defense technology**

**11) 2013: 2.44 trillion won → 2014: 2.33 trillion won → 2015: 2.44 trillion won → 2016: 2.56 trillion won**

**12) ‘2015 Analysis of National Defense Science and Technology’ (Defense Agency for Technology and Quality, 2015)**


-----

challenging R&D. The R&D budget for new technologies has been increased, and a pilot

system for certifying efficient R&D[13)] has been introduced. In addition, the authority to select

core technology development projects has been transferred to the Agency for Defense Devel
opment in order to grant more independence to researchers. Naming civilian experts as project

managers (PM) is also encouraging the execution of creative and challenging research.

In order to secure the ability to develop cutting-edge weapons systems, the R&D budget will

be gradually increased until it accounts for about 15% of the entire defense budget. In addition,

investment will be concentrated on future warfare, including reconnaissance, precision

bombing, automation and defensive technologies.

**| Strengthening Civilian-Military Technology Cooperation | Civilian-military coop-**

eration is being promoted to contribute to strengthening the nation’s defense and industrial

capabilities. Civilian-military cooperation projects are conducted under the ‘Civilian-Mil
itary Technology Cooperation Project Promotion Act,’[14)] in close collaboration with the

ministries concerned, including the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning and the

Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy. As part of these efforts, the budget for joint civil
ian-military projects was raised to 67.7 billion won in 2016 (from 41.6 billion won in 2013).

The joint projects are divided into the following four main categories: civilian-military tech
nology development aimed at developing technologies or materials that can be used both by

the military and the private sector; civilian-military technology transfer projects, which facili
tate the mutual transfer of technologies; the civilian-military standard standardization project,

which unifies and standardizes standards for the civilian and defense sectors; and civilian-mil
itary technology information sharing projects.

To promote civilian-military technology cooperation project, the R&D Support Center and

the Institute of Civilian-Military Technology Cooperation were set up within the Agency for

Defense Development in 2014.

Parts, technologies and materials developed through cooperation projects are widely used in a

variety of areas of defense. Examples include the auxiliary power unit fitted in the Surion helicop
ter; core components of the mid-sized waterjet system used in the Navy’s high speed boats; carbon

and carbon compound materials used in the brake discs of the landing gear of the KF-16 fighter

jet; and the technology[15)] used in the production of components for the air vent of the T-50 jet.

**13) A system that reduces potential disadvantages for R&D personnel whose project results prove to be inadequate or even a failure,**
and grants them the opportunity to reattempt a project if it is determined that their research has been conducted in good faith.

**14) A bilateral law enacted in April 1998 between the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy and the Ministry of National Defense.**

**15) The technological skill that involves taking materials this is hard to process, such as subminiature titanium alloy or aluminum alloy,**
and freely shaping them - like one would with plastic - in order to unify the complex forms of multiple structures into a single form
and lighten their weight.


-----

**<Chart 4-13> Examples of Civilian Technology Utilized in the Military**

|Civ. Technology|Auxiliary power unit|Small-medium waterjet system|Carbon composites|Micro aerospace component|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Examples|||||
||Surion Helicopter|Navy Vessel|KF-16 Fighter|T-50 Advanced Pilot Training|



The transfer of technologies developed with the defense R&D budget to the private sector

is also on the rise.[16)] MND has been selecting 100 items considered to have great potential for

civilian applications annually since 2013; and has also placed 2,249 patented technologies in

the defense technology trading system. Such efforts have led to the execution of fifteen civilian

projects including the development of a cyber monitoring system for computer networks, an

optical transmission and reception module, and security and certification for mobile devices.


**<Chart 4-14> Examples of National Defense Technology Civilian Applications**

|Defense Technology|QVGA level uncooled infrared detector|Real time network traffic tracking|Vehicle radar system and target detection|Vessel RCS prediction S/W design using SBR|Security access point|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Civil Applications||||||
||Surveillance camera|Computer network cyber detection|Optical transmission and reception module|Radar cross section prediction/analysis|Mobile terminal security authentication system|



Civilian-military cooperation will continue to be strengthened and expanded to create a

favorable environment for growth in both the civilian and military sectors.


**2. Strengthening Competitiveness of the Defense Industry**

**| Strengthening the Defense Industry | The government operates a range of support**

measures aimed at strengthening the country’s defense industry. In order to establish fair com
petition, the government has been widening the application of the “uni-resource, multi-sup

**16) 2013: 52 cases → 2014: 81 cases → 2015: 97 cases**


-----

plier” system.[17)] As of November 2016, 62 defense resources are being supplied by multiple

suppliers. In addition, the study of defense industry fundamentals has been systemized, and

new suppliers are being encouraged to join the industry by gradually expanding the disclosure

of defense resources.[18)]

Defense suppliers are also given support specifically tailored to the size of each company.

The support measures for SMEs and venture companies have been put in place, and, as of

November 2016, 231 companies are operating out of eight Defense Venture Centers located

across the country. Companies that are evolving into established defense contractors are

provided with support in developing key technologies and components. SMEs with techno
logical capabilities and the potential to enter overseas markets are provided with support in

technology development, consulting, and aid in developing export strategies. The government

will continue to provide support for improving local firms’ technological capabilities and the

quality of their products in order to nurture globally competitive defense companies.

**| Promoting Defense Exports | The export of defense goods results in improving defense**

firms’ operating rates and profitability, which in turn facilitates the growth of the country’s

defense industry, while the export of items of defense equipment leads to a stable revenue

stream as they require a steady supply of parts after the initial sale, which has a large job

creation effect.

The government has been working to secure markets and sales routes, providing strategic

support for export items, and strengthening the necessary infrastructure in order to increase

defense equipment exports.

As the purchasers of defense equipment are generally foreign governments, the ROK gov
ernment is expanding intergovernmental cooperation, including signing defense and acquisi
tion agreements, holding defense acquisition conferences, and encouraging interaction among

high level defense officials. The government certifies the quality of local defense equipment

through military aircraft airworthiness certification[19)] and DQ mark certification[20)] among

others. In addition, the government operates systems designed to assure foreign govern
ments of the quality of domestic products, such as the defense acquisition support system. In

**17) The system where additional supplier for certain resource is designated through evaluation in case a new supplier applies for the job**

**18) Surveying the domestic level of skills and technologies that are available as well as the conditions for production in order to procure**
a new supplier for pre-existing defense commodities, while simultaneously attracting private entities to join the defense industry as
a result.

**19) A government-sponsored certification that verifies whether a military aircraft is safe to operate**
within the scope of operation and whether it has the requisite capacity and functions to do so.

**20) A certification bestowed by the government to sanction the quality of a military-produced**
export commodity in order to enhance its competitiveness as an export good (DQ means 2016 Black Eagles 2015
Defense Quality). Singapore Airshow Seoul ADEX


-----

addition, events such as Seoul ADEX[21)] and MADEX[22)] are held to publicize South Korean

products and to create export opportunities.

The government also provides training programs for SMEs that lack manpower, and holds

regular meetings with exporters.

Seoul International Aerospace and Defense Exhibition 2015 (Seoul ADEX)


Such efforts have enabled defense exports to increase rapidly since 2006, with authorized

exports amounting to USD 3.541 billion in 2015, and remaining above the USD 3 billion mark

for three consecutive years. Refer to <Chart 4-15> for annual exports.

**<Chart 4-15> Defense Industry Exports**


**Unit: $100 million**

34.16 36.12 **35.41**


40

35

30

25

20

15

10


23.82 23.5

11.66 11.88
10.31
8.45

2.53


2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Export destinations have also diversified from the North American and Asian markets to

the Middle East, Europe and South America. As a result, the number of countries to which

the ROK exports defense equipment increased from 47 in 2006 to 90 in 2015. The number of

exporters has also increased, from 47 in 2006 to 156 in 2015. The nature of the exported items


**21) Seoul International Aerospace & Defense Exhibition**

**22) International Maritime & Defense Exhibition**


-----

has also become increasingly diverse; where exports were once dominated by ammunition and

fire extinguishers, but today the country’s most successful exports consist of aircraft, subma
rines and support ships.

**<Chart 4-16> 2010~2015 Defense Industry exports by Region**

26.5%

10.7% 27.6%

30.7%

3.6%

0.9%


The government plans to implement export policies tailored to each specific export desti
nation as part of its plans to nurture the defense industry as a powerful engine of economic

growth. For emerging nations, the government will seek defense industry cooperation in con
nection with cooperation on defense and economic support. For nations with advanced defense

industries, the ROK government plans to expand defense industry cooperation through tech
nological cooperation, purchasing, and joint projects.

**3. efforts to Innovate the Defense Industry**

MND and the DAPA are seeking various innovation measures with a view to improving

the fundamental problems of the defense industry. They are working to create a transparent

business environment, improve the management system and operation of the defense industry,

establish an efficient work performance system, and continue seeking ways to strengthen the

competitiveness of the industry. They will also periodically analyze and evaluate the results

of the implementation plan and continue to supplement it so that actual innovation plans are

established as early as possible.


-----

**| Promotion Focus | MND, the ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), the DAPA, and the civilian**

advisory council members will form a defense industry innovation task force to diagnose the

causes of corruption and mismanagement in the defense industry, and to strengthen the trans
parency, expertise, efficiency and competency of the industry by executing 44 innovation

projects in four major areas.

**<Chart 4-17> Priorities and Tasks per Innovation Area of the Defense Industry[23)]**

|Category|Priorities and tasks|
|---|---|
|Creating a Transparent Business Environment|Priority: Promote transparent business practices trusted by the people|
||Tasks: ‌Create a defense project director position, improve independence of military personnel management within DAPA, strengthen punishment for corrupt public servants, implement corruption reporting and reward system|
|Establishing a Professional and Efficient Business Execution System|Priority: ‌Establish efficient task system through communication and collaboration and foster professional personnel to promote requirement plan/total life cycle system management|
||Tasks: ‌Expand participation by advisory committee, establish specialized education institution for defense acquisition, prepare a weapon acquisition manual, reorganize DAPA’s manpower structure, expand the transfer of items related to force operation projects to the Public Procurement Service, internally strengthen the operation of the ICT23), etc|
|Strengthening the Competitiveness of Defense Industry|Priority: Fulfillment of a defense industry with technical superiority|
||Tasks: ‌Promote fidelity recognition system, modify defense material designation system, modify national defense standard (NDS), introduce price ceiling for compensation of deferment, etc|


**| Creating a Transparent Business Environment | In order to create a transparent business**

environment that the public can trust, a monitoring system has been developed to prevent cor
ruption in advance and enable defense industry workers to carry out their tasks reliably. MND

has carried out pre-verification of the defense industry including investigation and prevention

of corruption, and expanded the provision of information on budget and required capability

that businesses demanded. It also made it clear that corrupt public servants will be severely

punished regardless of their status and severity of their corruption, while the reward for whis
tleblowers has been raised from a maximum of KRW 20 million to KRW 200 million.

To prevent external influences and interventions that may arise in the execution of defense

programs, the personnel system has been improved so that military service members above the

rank of colonel serving at DAPA will only work in the DAPA until discharge. Also, MND will

seek an extension of the period during which retired public officials are restricted in getting a

job position in the private sector. MND will continue to enhance the transparency of defense

projects by expanding the participation of civilian experts in each phase of a project, strength
**23) Integrated Concept Team**


-----

ening restrictions against public servants, and activating the reward system for whistleblowers.

**| Establishing a Professional and Efficient Business Execution System | Consider-**

ing that defense programs are technologically complex and have complicated procedures, it

is necessary to establish an information management system and to establish detailed work

manuals, among other measures, so that defense programs are managed by expert personnel.

Above all, an efficient defense program management through communication and coordina
tion with the relevant agencies is required.

To improve the professionalism of employees in the defense acquisition field, the govern
ment is promoting the establishment of a specialized education institution for defense acqui
sition; and reducing the ratio of military personnels working at DAPA from 50% to 30% and

increasing the ratio of public servants from 50% to 70% by 2018.

**| Strengthening the Competitiveness of the Defense Programs | To acquire optimal**

weapon systems that can meet the performance criteria demanded by the military at a reason
able cost, a method of evaluation that prioritizes performance has been introduced, improving

upon the previous low-cost bidding system. In order to revitalize the weapons system and core

technology and secure equity between domestic and foreign companies, the deferred cash

fund[24)] has been limited to 10% of the contract amount, and a creative and challenging R&D

environment is being created by introducing the ‘fidelity recognition system,’ which reduces

the liability for core technology R & D failures if the researcher in question is judged to have

executed the research in good faith.

**24) The contract partner must pay in cash the percentage of a contract amount specified by the Ordinance of the Ministry of Planning**
and Finance multiplied by the number of days of delay if the contractual partner delays in fulfilling its contractual obligation.


-----

**Section 4 Securing an Adequate Defense**
**Budget and Enhancing the Efficiency of**
**Defense Budget Management**

To maintain a firm security posture and promote stable defense reform, an adequate defense budget must

be guaranteed. As such, MND is striving to secure an appropriate national defense budget while promoting

efficient use of civilian resources and efficient management in all areas of defense, ensuring transparency

and efficiency in budget execution.


**1. Defense Budget Status**

The national defense budget is required for building, operating, and maintaining military

forces in order to produce a public good called national defense. The size of the defense budget

is determined by the costs of responding to security threats and the ability of the state to bear

the financial burden.

The ROK is continuously exposed to various security threats such as North Korea’s military

threats and the accelerating arms race among its neighboring nations; however, it is difficult

to secure an adequate defense budget due to fiscal constraints and the increase in the demand

for welfare caused by a low birthrate and an aging population. As of 2017, the national defense

budget accounts for 2.39% of the GDP and 14.7% of the government budget.


**<Chart 4-18> Defense Budget for the Past Five Years**

**14.5** **14.4** **14.5** **14.5** **14.7**


**40.3**


**38.8**


Government budget to GDP ratio (%)

Defense budget (trillion won)


Defense budget increase rate (%)

Defense budget to GDP ratio (%)


**37.5**
**35.7**
**34.3**

**4.2** **4.9**
**4.0** **4.0**

**3.6**

**2.40** **2.40** **2.40**
**2.39** **2.39**


2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
*[ Based on general account budget]


-----

Each country’s national defense budget tends to be proportional to the severity of the security

threats it faces. As of 2015, countries that are relatively stable in terms of their security envi
ronment, such as Germany and Italy, spent approximately 1-2% of their GDP on their defense

budget, whereas countries such as Israel and Jordan, which have profound security concerns,

spent approximately 4-6% of their GDP on national defense.

In 2015, the ROK’s ratio of defense budget to its GDP was higher than the world average of

2.14%, but lower than those of major nations involved in conflicts or military confrontations,

such as Israel, Jordan, and Pakistan.

**<Chart 4-19> Defense Budget to GDP Ratios of Key nations**

Russia

Israel

4.18%

U.S.

6.22%

ROK

3.33% Pakistan

2.40%

2.75%

1.00%

1.28%

Japan

4.20% China

Jordan


*[ Source: the Military Balance 2016 (international institute for Strategic Studies (iiSS), February 2016)]

**2. The necessity of securing an Adequate Defense Budget**

The ROK faces significant challenges in a constantly changing strategic environment. Its

Northeast Asian neighbors are accelerating their arms race, and North Korea is continuously

conducting extreme provocations such as its fourth and fifth nuclear tests and ballistic missile

test launches even during the discussions by the international community to condemn and

impose additional sanctions on the regime. Considering the heightened public interest towards

military culture innovation, MND will continue to foster a service environment that allows

servicemembers to concentrate on combat missions safely in high spirits. The national defense

reform must follow the plan in order to transform the military into an information and technol

-----

ogy-intensive military structure since a reduction in manpower resources due to the declining

birthrate is anticipated.

When a large portion of the defense budget is spent on legal expenses, essential basic

expenses, and continuing expenses, it is difficult to effectively cope with the rapidly changing

security environment at the current growth rate of the defense budget.

To protect the ROK from North Korea’s nuclear and WMD threats and guarantee a stable,

peaceful life for the Korean citizens, it is necessary to maintain the military at a level commen
surate with the size of the ROK economy, and secure an adequate defense budget to support it.

**3. Defense Budget and the Mid-Term Defense Plan**


**| 2017 Defense Budget | For 2017, to secure robust security capabilities trusted by the**

public, the defense budget was set at 40.33 trillion won, representing an increase of 4.0% from

the previous year’s budget. Within the budget, the cost for improving defense capabilities with

regard to the acquisition and development of weapons system was 12.2 trillion won, and the

force operating cost required to operate and maintain the troops and the existing forces was

28.14 trillion won. The National Defense Budget for 2017 is shown in <Chart 4-20>.

**<Chart 4-20> 2017 Defense Budget (General Account)**


**Unit: billion won, %**

|Category|Col2|FY 2016|Col4|FY 2017(B)|Changes(B-A) Increase rate(%)|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Main Budget(A)|Including supplementary budget|||Increase rate(%)|
|Total Defense Budget||38,799.5|38,842.1|40,334.7|1,535.2|4.0|
|Force Operating Costs|Subtotal|27,159.7|27,159.7|28,137.7|978.0|3.6|
||Troop Operating Costs|16,406.7|16,406.7|17,146.4|739.7|4.5|
||Operations and Maintenance Costs|10,753.0|10,753.0|10,991.3|238.3|2.2|
|Force Improvement Budget||11,639.8|11,682.4|12,197.0|557.2|4.8|



The force operating cost, which accounts for 70% of the defense budget, was increased by

3.6% over the previous year to 28,137.7 billion won, reflecting the focus on improving service

conditions by establishing a strong defense posture and fostering an open barracks culture.

To establish a strong defense posture that is trusted by the public, it is necessary to guarantee


-----

logistics support for equipment maintenance, parts repair, and fuel, so that the forces currently

in operation can demonstrate their optimal combat power. MND reinforced the operational

and boundary facilities in the frontline areas by fortifying the Northwest Islands and rein
forcing GOP fences and tactical roads while prioritizing investment in the establishment of

realistic training grounds similar to the battlefield environment and expansion of scientific

training using the multiple integrated laser engagement system (MILES).

To nurture an open barracks culture, professional counseling centers and various gym facili
ties, including indoor gymnasia and futsal stadiums, have been expanded, and book cafes have

been installed.

Much effort has been dedicated to improving service conditions to create a rewarding and

prideworthy service environment as well. In 2013, the salaries of military personnel began to

increase drastically and the trend continued for 2017 with the growth rate set at 9.6%. This

resulted in salaries more than doubling the level paid in 2012. In order to guarantee a hygienic

environment and training conditions for the servicemembers, restrooms of outdoor training

facilities were improved, and air conditioning was installed in the living quarters and mobili
zation training rooms.

The defense capability improvement budget ratio increased by 4.8% from the previous year

to 12,197 billion won. This budget focuses on strengthening core combat power against North

Korean provocations, securing essential forces through unit reorganization to execute the ROK

military’s defense reforms, strengthening core capabilities to establish a self-reliant defense

posture, and carrying out creative national defense R&D.

To prepare for North Korea’s asymmetric threats through the early fielding of the Kill Chain

and KAMD, 1,697.6 billion won has been allocated to 29 projects, including the high-altitude

unmanned surveillance aerial vehicle (HUAV) and the PATRIOT upgrade projects.

To secure the necessary force for defense reform in connection with the designated period of

unit reorganization, 3,473.4 billion won has been allocated to 40 projects including the estab
lishment of the Tactical Information Communication Network (TICN) for new weapons of the

future and new technology development, while advanced operating forces such as large attack

helicopters, frigates, and the F-35A have been secured in order to strengthen the ROK’s self-re
liant defense capabilities.

**| Mid-Term Defense Program for 2017-2021 | The Mid-Term Defense Program is**

a blueprint for the construction and operation of military forces over the next five years in

response to the anticipated threats now and in the future, as well as ongoing changes in the

security environment. From 2017 to 2021, the focus will be on strengthening the forces to

deter and counter North Korean nuclear and missile threats, promoting defense reforms, and

preparing for the transition of wartime operational control. In addition, it is expected that the


-----

troop maintenance costs necessary to improve the troops’ welfare as well as to augment the

number of cadres will increase significantly. Likewise, the logistics support requirements

necessary for the expanded operation of advanced equipment are also expected to increase.

The total budget allocated to the “Mid-Term Defense Program 2017-2021” is 226.5 trillion

won. In order to increase the feasibility of the mid-term plan, the average annual growth rate of

the fiscal resources required for the plan has been reduced from 7% to 5%.[25)] The quantity of

each asset has been reduced to reflect the concept of future joint operations, and their fielding

schedules have been adjusted in consideration of their priorities. Resources have been saved by

increasing management efficiency by integrating redundant and dispersed tasks.

**<Chart 4-21> ‘2017~2021 Mid-Term Defense Program’ Budget Breakdown**


**Unit: trillion won**

|Category|Col2|2016|2017~2021 Mid-Term Defense Program Budget Breakdown|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||2017|2018|2019|2020|2021|Total|
|Defense Budget (Increase Rate) Force Operating Costs (Growth Rate) (Share) Force improvement budget (Growth Rate) (Share)||38.8 (3.6%)|41.0 (5.6%)|43.2 (5.4%)|45.4 (5.1%)|47.5 (4.6%)|49.4 (4.1%)|226.5 (5.0%)|
||Force Operating Costs (Growth Rate) (Share)|(27.2) (2.7%) (70.1%)|(28.3) (4.2%) (69.0%)|(29.5) (4.3%) (68.3%)|(30.6) (3.8%) (67.4%)|(31.8) (3.7%) (66.9%)|(32.9) (3.6%) (66.6%)|(153.1) (3.9%) (67.6%)|
||Force improvement budget (Growth Rate) (Share)|(11.6) (5.7%) (29.9%)|(12.7) (9.0%) (31.0%)|(13.7) (7.8%) (31.7%)|(14.8) (7.9%) (32.6%)|(15.7) (6.4%) (33.1%)|(16.5) (5.2%) (33.4%)|(73.4) (7.3%) (32.4%)|



The force operation portion of the Mid-term Defense Program was drafted with the

emphasis on enabling the existing operational forces to demonstrate their capabilities and

creating a fulfilling and advanced service environment. In order to ensure the performance

of existing operating forces, MND will establish an advanced security system through the

reinforcement of facilities such as GP and GOPs in contact areas and the modernization of

combat support facilities. It will also ensure proper logistics support for core weapons systems

such as the F-35A and attack helicopters to fully exercise their combat powers. Scientific

training equipment and training grounds required for realistic education and training have

been reflected in the program, and the budget for reserve force training will be gradually

increased,[26)] improving training conditions with additional combat equipment.


**25) 6 trillion won less than the “Mid-Term Defense Program2016-2020” (Average annual growth of 7%; total financial resources of 232.5**
trillion won)

**26) Planned for increase from 12 thousand won (2016) to 30 thousand won (2021)**


-----

As a means to build up a fulfilling and advanced service environment, the basic meal

allowance has been raised, and a greater number of civilian cooks have been hired. The quality

of distributed supplies has been improved as well to reflect the feedback from the servicemem
bers. All these measures combined have led to improved servicemember welfare and morale.

The main plan for improving the food and living conditions for servicemembers is shown in

<Chart 4-22>.

**<Chart 4-22> Main Plan to Improve Service Conditions for Servicemembers**

(Unit : thousand won) **2,195**

**226** 1,767 for every cafeteria (1 civilian cook

195 **8,339won** for every cafeteria (1 civilian cook with more than 50 personnel)

155


97

7,334won

with more than
110 personnel)


2012 2015 2017 2021 2016 2021 2016 2020

**Salary doubled** **Greater number**
**Basic meal allowance raised**
**(Based on corporal’s pay)** **of civilian cooks hired**

Improving the military’s medical support system by establishing a remote medical treatment

system for units located in isolated areas and a military trauma center for trauma patients and

those wounded in action during peace/wartime have also been reflected in the program. The

Mid-Term Defense Program for defense capabilities improvement allocates top priority to

establishing the Kill Chain and KAMD in order to respond to the North Korean nuclear and

missile threats. Other focus areas include force reinforcement in preparation for troop reduction,

improving local provocation and full-scale war response capabilities, and strengthening defense

R&D capabilities to secure organic development capabilities of advanced weapons systems.

A total of 5.4 trillion won has been allocated for securing the Kill Chain to enhance the capa
bilities to detect target indications, and identify and strike the targets across the entire region

of North Korea. Furthermore, an additional 2.5 trillion won has been allocated for KAMD to

reinforce capabilities to detect SLBM and ballistic missiles launched from anywhere in North

Korea, defend key facilities, and to intercept targets.

20.3 trillion won has been allocated to reinforce the ROK military’s surveillance and recon
naissance capabilities for monitoring the operation areas that have been expanded as part of

the defense reform and to establish a command and control system capable of transmitting

data and imagery to tactical-level echelons.

In order to strengthen its capabilities against North Korea’s local provocations and full scale

war, the ROK has allocated 24.1 trillion won to strengthen its counterfire, surface, and under

-----

water operational capabilities and to secure clandestine infiltration, strike, and long range

operational capabilities. To ensure conditions for creative R&D that can lead the development

of advanced weapons systems, the proportion of R & D expenditure will increase to 9.2% by

2021, and resources will be allocated to developing new future technologies such as unmanned

systems.

**4. Enhancing the Efficiency of Defense Management**


**| Promoting Defense Fiscal Reform | In order to spread advanced management tech-**

niques to the defense sector and increase efficiency of defense operations, the Defense Man
agement Efficiency Inspection Committee has been in operation since 2013. In 2013, the

committee selected thirty major projects and conducted preliminary feasibility studies and

in-depth evaluations of force operation projects. In 2014, the committee expanded the defense

management streamlining activities to all defense organizations, selecting 14 tasks in 3 areas,

such as streamlining manpower and organization, improving standards and procedures, and

streamlining defense finance.

In 2015, the Defense Management Efficiency Inspection Committee was transformed into

the Defense Fiscal Reform Promotion Group, which selected and managed projects requiring

substantial financial reform over a long term. During the same year, MND created a support

team for Jaundae and integrated combat support missions— which had been conducted in a

redundant, dispersed manner by 17 units in the Jaundae area— to streamline its manpower,

budget, equipment, and facilities.

MND has improved the credibility of defense budget execution by modifying the salary

payment system, thus resolving the annual labor cost shortage problem. Furthermore, by inte
grating the facilities program in the defense capability improvement field, which has shown a

low execution rate, with the facilities program in the force operation field, MND saved budget

and improved the execution rate.

In 2016, MND focused on achieving tangible results by expanding the fiscal reforms to

include the defense capability improvement field and introducing an incentive-based system.

In order to increase the effectiveness of the ROK military’s force reinforcement plan, previ
ously determined force reinforcement projects have been reviewed at the origin in order to

remove or revise unnecessary projects. In the field of defense facilities, a new facility man
agement system[27)] has been applied to the divisional class units to eliminate the imbalance

**27) A management system that derives appropriate surface areas of facilities belonging to units of each echelon based on the Defense**
Organization Quota and uses the results as objective standards for identifying scarce facilities, project priorities, and maintenance
budget.


-----

of facility management by each unit and to secure transparency of facility budgeting and

efficiency of execution. The defense planning and management system has been improved

on a step-by-step basis in order to respond flexibly to changes in the defense environment,

to optimize the planning document system for rational allocation and efficient operation of

limited defense resources, and to implement the fast-track system for weapons systems.

**| Operation of the Military Executive Agency System | In order to enhance expertise and**

efficiency in carrying out defense related duties, appropriate organizations are designated and

operated as military executive agencies[28)] under the principle of competition.

From its pilot operation from 2009 to 2016, eighteen agencies in six areas covering mainte
nance, supply, medical, research, printing, and information services, have been designated and

operated as organizations responsible for military management.

Organizations designated as military executive agencies are also generating tangible results,

increasing productivity and improving service qualities. For instance, the Korea Armed Forces

Printing & Publishing Depot’s rate of printing error has been reduced from 1.68% to 0.41%

since its designation in 2009; the Armed Forces Capital Hospitals reduced their private referral

consultation rates from 8.5% to 2.97%, and were certified as general hospitals in 2015, con
tributing to increased reliability. Military executive agencies have increased their competitive
ness and gained trust on the quality of their products and services by applying for 71 patents

based on proactive work ethics and acquiring 59 external certifications.

**| Securing Fair Value of Former Military Real Estate | Although enormous fiscal**

resources are required for facility projects of unit reorganization under defense reforms, budget

shortage is expected given the fiscal conditions and the size of the defense budget. In order to

secure the large funds needed for the facility projects, the city management plan involving

disposal of military real estate that are unsued after unit relocation have been developed in

consultation with local governments to resolve the problem of undervaluation of state-owned

properties.

In the future, continuous efforts will be made to reduce the financial burden of the state

and to steadily pursue facility projects by securing appropriate value of unused military sites

arising from the relocation process.

**28) A system where a publicly employed chief of an agency is given the administrative and financial autonomy and the responsibility for**
the outcome


-----

**5. Efficient Use of Civilian Resources**

MND has established the five-year ‘Basic Plan for the Use of Civilian Resources in Defense’

to reduce annual military expenditures and improve service quality by utilizing civilian

personnel, capital, facilities, and management techniques in such areas as logistics, facility

management and welfare facility operations.

In accordance with the Basic Plan for the Use of Civilian Resources in Defense (2016-2020),

service support duties of supply units, such as laundry, waste collection, repair services,

and snack transportation and distribution, have been contracted out to civilian companies to

enhance the welfare of servicemembers and create an environment in which they can concen
trate on combat missions.

Through the introduction of the performance-based logistics support (PBL)[29)] system

with civilian performance management techniques, the parts procurement period has been

shortened and the equipment operation rate improved. ESCO and WASCO[30)] projects have

been undertaken to improve the existing energy and water supply facilities, thus reducing

costs.

To contribute to the welfare of servicemembers and reduce the budget, the ROK will

continue to find areas that can draw upon the expertise and creativity of the private sector and

improve the quality of combat service support functions by promoting the combat mission-ori
ented environment.


|<Chart 4-23> ‘Basic Plan for the|Use of Civilian Resources in Defense (2016~2020)’|
|---|---|
|Category|Tasks|
|Outsourcing to Private Sector|Outsourcing service support duties of supply units, military facility management, and snack transportation.|
|Applying Management Techniques and Infrastructure|Medical supply prime vendor system, Performance-Based Logistics (PBL), etc.|
|Inducing Private Participation and Attracting Private Capital|Military supply commercialization, ESCO and WASCO projects, building field maintenance support center, military residence and private investment into informatization business such as BTL/BTO, etc.|
|Utilizing Civilian Manpower|Employing civilian cooks, etc.|


**29) The military provides performance measurement indicators such as the target utilization rate while contractors perform dedicated**
maintenance and repair parts support and pay the performance based logistics (PBL).

**30) A project to attract private sector investment with energy and water saving expertise, which improves military facilities without the**
initial financial investment and reduces utility fees (ESCO: Energy Service Company, WASCO: Water SavingCompany)


-----

**Section 5 Development of Defense**
**Informatization**

By utilizing advanced information and communication technologies, it is possible to visualize the battlefield

and to share realtime information by linking all the elements required for battlefield management and

defense management according to their purpose, function, and level. MND has initiated the transition to a

function-oriented information system and is currently establishing an integrated service system based on

big data.

**1. Development of Defense Informatization Development Framework**

**| Development of the Basic Defense Informatization Implementation Plan | MND has**

been developing its “Defense Informatization Basic Plan” so as to reflect the changing security

environment and ICT development trends. The plan proposes medium- and long-term devel
opment directions for implementing the defense vision and objectives in the defense informa
tization field. The main objectives are to enhance the timeliness of decision-making capability

and maximize the effects of successful missions by distributing realtime information among

various operational elements; and to optimize the defense resource management and opera
tions maintenance capability by providing the users with customized decision-making infor
mation in the defense management field. To achieve these objectives, MND has been sophis
ticating the defense architecture and enabling the introduction of new technologies in IT; the

information system is being converted from a simple information processing system into a

more service-oriented system in order to provide comprehensive and analytical decision-mak
ing information; and a cloud-based computing ICT environment that assures distribution of

information and mobility on a massive scale.

**| Timely Introduction of Advanced Information Technology |  MND has pushed ahead**

with the Defense Experiment project and government-wide IT Convergence R&D Coopera
tion projects to introduce new and advanced civilian IT such as the Internet of Things, Cloud,

Mobile, Big Data, Artificial Intelligence, UAV, and Virtual Reality in a timely manner.

The “Defense Experiment” project aims to pilot test outstanding new civilian IT in the

defense area and then gradually introduce them to the entire military after evaluating its

effectiveness. From 2007 to 2015, a total of 37 projects were selected and processed, and out


-----

of these projects, 21 projects have been verified in its applicability to military and currently

expanding its implementation. Such project includes artillery battalion smart alert system to

reinforce the surveillance capability for the areas occupied by battalion level units.

In 2016, four projects were selected as defense experiment projects, including the estab
lishment of a mobile command and control system to reinforce counter-terrorist command

and communications. Since 2007, the government-wide IT Convergence R&D Cooperation

projects have continuously pursued the discovery and promotion of collaborative tasks with

various government ministries in a drive to apply the leading domestic IT to the defense area.

In 2015, MND collaborated with the Ministry of Science, ICT, and Future Planning to pursue

R&D and demonstration projects in the force support area, innovation of defense management

and the military culture, and the cultivation of professional technical manpower. As part of the

IT cooperation projects carried out between the ministries, 18 collaborative projects are being

carried out, including the establishment of a smart training management system for army

training centers to improve the efficiency of training and unit management.

In the future, MND will continue to expand demonstration projects that combinenew IT

such as IoT, big data, intelligence information technology, UAV, 3D printing and so on.

**2. Sophistication of Information Communication Infrastructure and Informa-**
**tion System**


**| Sophistication of Information Communication Infrastructure | MND has been**

building a high-speed, high-capacity strategic and tactical communication network and

developing a defense information communication infrastructure in order to build a mobile

and cloud computing based service environment. To ensure systems operations in various

tactical situation developments, such as improving the performance of the Military Broadband

Convergence Network (MBCN) established in 2011, step-by-step consolidation of the pur
pose-built wired information communication and operations networks, and conversion to the

next-generation Internet Address System (IPv6)[31)] are underway.

**| Establishing Information System and Ensuring Interoperability | MND continues to**

streamline extensive defense related duties and support rational decision-making, primarily

by sophisticating its information systems to become more centered on key functions such as

personnel, military, mobilization, and medical care, and by building an integrated service

system that is based on big data.


**31) An Internet Protocol developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force in 1994 (IPv6: Internet Protocol version 6)**


-----

In order to execute Network Centric Warfare (NCW), a key characteristic of modern

warfare, decisions have to be made quickly by sharing information on the situation in realtime,

which is made possible when elements such as monitoring, command and control, strikesys
tems, and resource information systems are all connected. For this to be realized, interopera
bility[32)] of battlefield elements is vital.

**<Chart 4-24> Concept and Vision of Defense Interoperability**

Command and Command and
control system control system

Resource Resource
information system information system

Command and
control system

**Limited**

Surveillance **information** Strike system
system **sharing**

Resource
information system

Command and
control system

**Realtime info**

Surveillance system **sharing (NCW** Strike system

**implementation)**

Resource
information system


MND has revised the Defense Informatization Standards,[33)] established the integrated man
agement system for information system interconnection, and implemented the interoperabil
ity evaluation and certification[34)] system according to the international standards in order to

ensure the interoperability of weapons systems and the force support system.

In the future, MND will develop adefense interoperability policy by establishing mid- to

long-term development plan that reflects the latest IT developments and changes in the

interoperability environment.

**32) A characteristic which allows the sharing, exchange, and operation of information or data between ground-sea-air forces and**
battlefield elements.

**33) An information technology standard applied when developing force support systems and securing compatibility and interoperability**
among systems.

**34) A system used by MND to evaluate the status of reflection and implementation of the interoperability requirements in the**
development processes of weapons and force support systems.


-----

**Section 6 Promoting Defense Logistics**
**Innovation**

In order to solve deep-rooted structural problems in the defense logistics field, such as rising equipment

maintenance costs, difficulties with the timely procurement of overseas purchases, the abolition of treasury

bonds, and the weakening of the military supplies distribution channel, MND, through defense logistics

innovation, is preparing comprehensive and fundamental solutions in the diverse logistics field which include

determination on requirements, production and R&D, procurement, supply, maintenance, and transportation.


**1. Background and Direction**

The introduction of state-of-the-art weapons systems has inevitably led to a large increase

in maintenance requirements. Thus, to resolve the limitations on the timely procurement of

repair parts of equipment purchased overseas, MND has been pursuing national defense inno
vations since 2014.

In 2016, MND began focusing on seven areas: procurement innovation, repair part man
agement innovation, logistics innovation, maintenance support innovation, quality improve
ment of military supplies, establishment of logistics information system, and establishment of

total life cycle system management. In 2017, MND will carry out innovations across all areas,

including the three areas of ammunition support, unified logistics support during wartime and

peacetime, and the optimization of military manpower.


**<Chart 4-25> Concept of Logistics Innovation**

-  ‌Effective system management based on the total life cycle
(requirement – acquisition – management & maintenance – destruction)



-  Improvement of procuring imported repair parts

-  Diversifying contract methods for military supplies

-  Selective contracting system for military supplies




-  Establishment of the integrated Logistics information system -  ‌Scientific estimate of repair part

-  ‌Development of on-site automated military supplymanagement system **Establishment** **Cycle System ManagementTotal Life** **Procurement Innovation** **Repair Part** -  ‌Individual history management of repair partsrequirements

**of Logistics** **Management**
**Information System** **Innovation**

**Quality** **Distribution** -  ‌Reduction of military supply distribution

-  Commercialization of military supplies **Military SuppliesImprovement of** **Innovation** and support steps

-  ‌Alignment of the defense specification **Maintenance**
management system **Support Innovation**

-  ‌Quality improvement of uniform and -  ‌Expansion of Performance-Based Logistics
supply distribution standards (PBL) system

-  ‌Establishment of civ-mil-gov integrated
field maintenance support center


-----

**2. Procurement and Repair Parts Innovation**

**| Procurement Innovation | Procurement Innovation is being pursued to ensure the stable**

supply of high-quality military supplies timely manner and at the appropriate price for each

unit. Regarding repair parts for foreign equipment with limited timely procurement, MND

analyzes procurement time by using the non-responsive items procurement manual, and is

improving the procurement success rates by devising solutions for each limiting cause. The

contract types are also being diversified to suit the characteristics of each item of military

supplies.

In order to stabilize the procurement of military supplies and to shorten the contract admin
istration period caused by annual contract renewal process, MND has expanded the criteria

of items subject to long-term contracts and applied the multiple awards schedule (MAS)[35)] to

supply materials that meet the demand of the demanding forces. To stably supply repair parts,

the ‘performance ceiling contract’ is also applied.

**| Repair Part Management Innovation | In order to supplement the problems of acqui-**

sition, operation and inventory management of repair parts, MND has been innovatively

improving the repair parts operating system since 2014. Accurately predicting the demand

for repair parts of each major equipment by applying the repair parts requirement estimation

model resolves chronic problems such as the issue of inventory depletion and repair parts that

have not been used for a long time are being resolved. At the same time, MND has readjusted

the item inventory level according to items to be able to deal with the changes in demand more

effectively while reducing the total inventory of repair parts. In addition, MND has established

a system that centrally adjusts and controls the inventory levels in real time by managing his
torical inventory level of each repair part item.

**3. Distribution Innovation and Maintenance Support Innovation**

**| Distribution Innovation | To ensure war sustainment capability, it is important to have**

a distribution system that can provide timely logistics support in accordance to combat units’

demands. MND has been improving the military materials supply support phase in order to

shorten the lead time for the user, i.e. combat units. When a combat unit requests military

supplies considering the priority level of each item and the inventory level, logistics support

**35) This is a contract system in which, at the time of procuring military materials, the contracting agency has to conclude unit price**
contracts with two or more vendors that supply the same or similar products of the same or similar quality and function. Then, the
demanding forces select the product and the selected vendor supplies the products.


-----

units directly supplies military materials to each requesting unit thereby reducing the average

supply support phase from four to five phases to two to three phases and curtailing the average

user waiting time to within 10 days. The 2014 pilot project revealed that the distribution speed

was improved by more than 40% and the transportation costs were reduced by 50%. Accord
ingly, each branch of the military is expanding its pilot programs and military-wide implemen
tation of this system will start from 2018.

**| Maintenance Support Innovation | Rapid maintenance support of combat equipment**

is crucial for maintaining seamless combat readiness during peacetime and maximizing the

combat-sustainment capability during wartime. With increase in introduction of advanced

weapons systems, the military is considering various measures to utilize the specialized main
tenance capabilities of the military and the private sector, and aims to prevent overlapping

investments and improve maintenance efficiency.

The expansion of the Performance-Based Logistics (PBL) support system is underway to

keep the operation rate of major equipment stable. Since the introduction of the system in 2010,

the average procurement period for repairs has been shortened by 73% and the equipment

operating rate has been improved by 3%. As a result, the range of application of systems,

previously used mainly for air weapons systems, has been expanded to ground and naval

equipment such as self-propelled guns, tanks, and ship engines. Thus in the future, the system

will be applied not only to currently operated equipment but also to equipment for weapons

systems that will be acquired.

An integrated civil, government, and military field maintenance support center is being

established to utilize the skills and resources of a large number of civilian maintenance

companies scattered throughout the country to provide quick maintenance support. The field

maintenance support center in the western part of Gyeonggi-do was completed in 2015 and is

currently operating a pilot project. Based on the pilot project results, an eastern center in Gang
won-do is planned to be set up in 2019 to increase the utilization rate of combat equipment by

shortening the maintenance period and to vitalize the regional economy.


**4. Improvement of Military Supplies Quality**

By reflecting servicemember’s opinion, MND has been pursuing commercialization of

military supplies to improve quality and to increase private companies’ participation in

military procurement markets.

After identifying commercially replaceable military supplies, MND implements pilot testing

of the items, and quickly purchases and distributes the military-grade commercial items to


-----

improve military supplies’ quality, to save budget and to secure an alternative supply source.[36)]

This enhances military supplies operation.

MND is making improvements to the supply standard and quality of clothes and materials

frequently used by servicemembers, thereby improving the satisfaction of soldiers and

improving their combat efficiency.

**5. Building a foundation for Innovation**

**| establishment of Logistics Information system | MND is establishing an integrated**

logistics information system in order to efficiently manage resources and improve logisti
cal support capabilities via the realtime monitoring of logistics assets such as equipment,

materials, and ammunition. The integrated logistics information system is an information

system that covers all fields of military support[37)] by integrating military materials, ammuni
tion, and maintenance support of each service. The system is designed not only to synchronize

with the battlefield management system and private systems to provide timely information

provision in wartime and peacetime situations, and also to the reliability of logistics informa
tion. The conceptual layout of the integrated logistics information system is shown in <Chart

4-26>.

**<Chart 4-26> Concept of the Integrated Logistics Information system[38)]**

On-site Logistics Tracking Military
Management Integration of Logistics Information System Supplies

Equipment Logistics

Material Ammunition Maintenance Command
Information Information Information Information

Supply Integration Supply
(GPS (GPS
/ PDA) / PDA)

**Defense Integrated Logistics** Information of

logistics import/Information on **Information System** vehicle and logistics transport between
storage/delivery the Logistics
between the Logistics Command and
Command and divisions
organization units

Linked

InformationFiscal KJCCS [38)]/C4I Transportation Information Procurement Information InformationFacility


**36) Budget savings resulting from the 2016 commercialization of military supplies: total of 64 billion won (61 billion won from**
commercial vehicle purchases, 3 billion won from conversion of ordinary items)

**37) 15 areas including requirements, planning and budgets, procurement, funds, properties, payments, transportation, storage,**
inspections and tests, equipment operation, maintenance and management, disposal handling, command evaluations, common
support, and lists and specifications.

**38) Korean Joint Command and Control System**


-----

MND is also developing a ‘military supplies field management automation system’ that

enables realtime asset management by applying automatic barcode recognition and mobile

technology during the process of importing, inspecting, storing, and delivering military

supplies. In 2014, a pilot system for 16 supply units was built, and MND is planning to reflect

this system into the mid-term plan and budget after supplementing and establishing opera
tional concepts so that the system can be applied in all services after resolving inconvenience

in usage and improving requirements.

**| Promoting Total Life Cycle System Management | MND manages performance, cost,**

technology, and information from a holistic perspective of the total life cycle process, ranging

from the weapons systems planning stage to acquisition, operation maintenance, and disposal

from a holistic perspective. Also, by analyzing the specifications of weapons systems that are

actually operated by field units, MND is establishing an analytical evaluation and feedback

system to apply in the development of similar weapons systems.


**6. Force Support System Development**

While the force support system[39)] is considered the key element for ensuring the combat

performance of weapons systems and troop survival, as it consists of military supplies used

mainly by troops, such as equipment, materials, food, clothing, etc., the development of the

force support systems is relatively lagging compared to that of weapons systems.

To enhance the level of force support system area to that of advanced countries, MND is

promoting large-scale developments aimed at increasing the efficiency of the acquisition

system and project management, and strengthening expertise-based acquisition work.

First, the acquisition system area must establish mid-term and long-term acquisition strate
gies to create future-oriented requirements that take into account the development of science

and technology; and re-establish the requirements planning system to increase the connectiv
ity among planning, programming and budgeting. While in the R&D area, cooperation among

industry, academia, and government is being strengthened to foster greater participation by

companies and increase the utilization of the R&D capacity of other government departments.

To this effort, in addition to existing government invested R&D methods, MND is imple
menting improved procurement method and procedures which include diversification of R&D

investment methods, simplification of regulation regarding acquisition, expansion of company


**39) All elements used to support the combat performance of troops and weapons (other than weapon systems), such as equipment,**
materials, general facilities, resource management, and base system software. The term “non-weapon system” was changed to
“force support system” on January 1, 2012.


-----

invested R&D and civil-military cooperation.

MND plans to shorten the acquisition period and reduce the budget by applying a test and

evaluation method appropriate to the item’s characteristics, and to establish the acquisition

project management information system in order to manage the progress status in realtime

and share development information between business organizations. In addition, by utilizing

contracted specialists, MND has actively improved any outdated or impractical defense

standards from 20 to 30 years ago and also has utilized the Internet to widely disclose such

standards[40)] so that it may help in lowering the entry barriers of the military supplies market

and in promoting fair competition among contractors.

In order to strengthen the acquisition infrastructure, MND plans to establish a special

research institute and to support systematic and scientific acquisition work. By discover
ing superior civilian technologies and commercial items and applying them to the force

support system, the institute will serve as a window for civil-military technology coopera
tion. Moreover, a professional training program will be put in place, and improvements will

be made to the human resource management system to increase the professionalism of the

personnel in charge of acquisition work; and acquisition related laws will be adjusted in order

to foster improvements in work stability and work efficiency.

Through such large scale improvements to the acquisition process, MND will strengthen

the transparency, efficiency, and expertise of the force support system thereby providing the

service members with better quality military supplies.

**7. Strengthening International Logistics Cooperation**

To enhance the war sustainment capability, not only domestic military and civilian resources

need to be efficiently utlized but also an international logistics cooperation system that allows

us to receive continuous military support from allies and friendly nations needs to be estab
lished.

Since its first meeting in 1979, the ROK-U.S. Logistics Cooperation Committee (LCC),

which is a subcommittee of the ROK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting (SCM), has served

as a channel for reinforcing cooperation and discussing matters regarding logistics, such as

repair parts, ammunition, and oil support. Its 48[th] meeting was held in 2016. ROK-U.S. Mutual

Logistics Support Agreement was signed in 1988 to provide emergency requirements such as

an unexpected demand for fuel, repair parts and services that occur during combined training

**40) Of the total 21,599 cases of standards, 11,017 cases (51%) are undergoing expansion (4,143 cases in 2013 → 4,623 cases in 2014 →**
8,961 cases in 2015 → 11,017 cases in 2016)


-----

maneuvers or joint missions. In 1991, the ROK and the United States concluded the joint

“Umbrella Agreement” concerning Wartime Host Nation Support (WHNS UA) to increase

the defense capability on the Korean Peninsula by supporting the rapid deployment of U.S.

reinforcements during wartime. To achieve this, a wartime supportplanning and application

process covering twelve areas, including engineering, maintenance, and supply, will be carried

out every two years. In 2016, the two countries agreed to the principle of costsharing for the

twelve areas of wartime support, and are also pursuing a “MOA on Wartime Host Nation

Support (WHNS MOA)” which will specify the details of the agreement.

To ensure seamless mission execution of friendly countries during contingencies and to

effectively confirm logistics support for the ROK military’s overseas deployment activities,

MND has signed MLSA with friendly countries including the UK. The ROK has concluded

MLSAs with fifteen countries, including Germany,with whom the ROK concluded the

“Agreement on Cooperation in Military Operations and Disaster Relief and Humanitarian

Assistance,” Thailand, New Zealand, Turkey, Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, and

Spain. The MLSA status is shown in <Chart 4-27>.

**<Chart 4-27> Mutual Logistics Support Agreements Status**


**Nations that have concluded MLSAs with the ROK (Concluded Years)**


U.S. (1988), Thailand (1991), New Zealand (2007), Turkey (2008), Philippines (2009), Israel/Australia (2010), Canada (2010),
Singapore/Indonesia (2011), Cambodia/Spain/UK (2012), Mongolia (2013), Germany (2016)

In addition, MND engages in discussions on current logistics issues and methods to enhance

cooperation among the parties concerned at regular logistics cooperation meetings with major

allied countries such as Australia, Singapore, and Israel. MND also actively participates in

multilateral logistics cooperation symposiums such as PASOLS.[41)]

To enhance defense cooperation and to vitalize defense exports, MND is strategically

transferring military supplies which the ROK Military no longer uses to friendly nations.

In the past, MND transferred military supplies mainly to Asian countries, but recently the

transfer of military supplies has been expanded to various countries in Latin America and

Africa. Transfer items are also diversifying from vessels, aircraft, maneuvering/engineering

equipment to weapons, ammunition, etc. The transfer status of military supplies is shown in

<Chart 4-28>.


**41) Pacific Area Senior Officer Logistics Seminar**


-----

**<Chart 4-28> Transfer Status of Military Supplies**

|Period|Region|Transfer Items|
|---|---|---|
|1993~1999|Asia|Vessel, aircraft, vehicle, combat gear, etc.|
|2000~2009|Asia, Latin America|Vessel, aircraft, engineering equipment, maneuvering equipment, etc.|
|2010~present|Asia, Latin America, Africa, Oceania|Vessel, engineering equipment, maneuvering equipment, weapons, landing gear, ammunition, etc.|


-----

-----

###### Chapter
# 5

Development of the ROK-U.S. Alliance and
Reinforcement of Defense Exchanges and Cooperation


-----

Section 1 Development of a Future-Oriented ROK-U.S. Alliance 148

Section 2 Expansion of Defense Exchanges and Cooperation 155

Section 3 Overseas Deployments and Peace Keeping Operations (PKOs) 170


-----

**Section 1 Development of a Future-**
**Oriented ROK-U.S. Alliance**

The ROK and the United States are committed to maintaining a strong combined defense posture capable

of responding to any North Korean aggression and military provocation, and will continue promoting

the smooth transition to a new combined defense system that is led by the ROK military and a future

command system supported by the USFK. The ROK-U.S. Alliance is developing into a comprehensive

strategic alliance that extends beyond cooperation on national defense to encompass politics, economy,

society, and culture. For its part, MND is committed to ensuring the USFK’s stable settlement through the

successful implementation of the USFK base relocation project and to further developing and deepening

the ROK-U.S. Alliance.

**1. Developing into a Comprehensive Strategic Alliance**

The ROK-U.S. Alliance continues to work as a cornerstone of the ROK’s efforts to achieve

liberal democracy and economic prosperity even in the face of persistent North Korean threats

and provocations.

The ROK-U.S. Alliance has been developing into a comprehensive strategic alliance by

incorporating the common values and mutual trust that are set forth in the June 2009, “Joint

Vision for the ROK-U.S. Alliance,” and reiterated in the May 2013 Joint Declaration in Com
memoration of the 60[th] Anniversary of the ROK-U.S. Alliance,” and the 2015 Joint Fact Sheet

titled The Republic of Korea-United States Alliance: Shared Values, New Frontiers.

The ROK-U.S. Alliance aims not only to ensure security on the Korean Peninsula but also

to contribute to building peace and prosperity in Northeast Asia and the wider world. Against

this backdrop, the ROK and the United States are continuing to strengthen their cooperation

on a wide range of global security challenges that are of interest to the two nations beyond

the scope of maintaining peace on the Korean Peninsula including international peacekeeping

activities, stabilization and reconstruction efforts, and humanitarian assistance and disaster

relief.

The two countries have strengthened their cooperation in the outer space and cyberspace

domains. The agreement for the ROK-U.S. Defense Space Cooperation Working Group
(SCWG) were concluded in 2012, and a memorandum of understanding (MOU) concern
ing sharing space situational awareness services and information was concluded in 2014.


-----

Two countries share a belief in the importance of strengthening mission assurance for space

capabilities, and are engaging in joint exercises for space missions and senior-level table top

exercises (TTX) involving space experts. The ROK is working towards dispatching its officers

to the U.S. Air Force for space education and training.

Furthermore, advancements in the ROK-U.S Alliance’s abilities in the cyber sector are

being made. Relevant agreements were concluded in 2013, and the ROK-U.S. Cyber Coop
eration Working Group (CCWG) now convenes twice each year, while the operational rules

for information exchange were established in 2015 to build an infrastructure that allows both

countries to exchange cyber related information in an effective and timely manner. In 2016,

the ROK-U.S. Cyber Task Force was formed in order to examine specific defense cyber coop
eration plans.

In the future, the ROK government will work with the Trump Administration to share the

ROK-U.S. Alliance’s current and future development plans, and to keep discussions open on

key issues while maintaining close consultation throughout the policy formulation process.

**2. Maintaining a Firm ROK-U.S. Combined Defense Posture**


**| Strengthening ROK-U.S. Combined Defense Posture | The ROK and the United States**

are committed to maintaining a robust ROK-U.S. combined defense posture capable of firmly

responding to any North Korean aggression or provocation. The two countries are continu
ously developing joint operation plans as well as performing joint training exercises, such as

the Key Resolve (KR), Foal Eagle (FE), and the Ulchi Freedom Guardian (UFG), in order

to verify the operation plans and enhance their combat capabilities. To maintain an effective

combined defense posture, the two countries

operate various security consultative bodies

such as the Security Consultative Meeting
(SCM), the ROK-U.S. Military Committee

Meeting (MCM[1)]), and the Korea-U.S. Inte
grated Defense Dialogue (KIDD[2)]). In June

2016, the ROK-U.S. Combined Division was

organized to enhance the execution capabili
Celebration of 100[th] anniversary of 2[nd] Infantry Division and

ties of combined operations at the tactical level. establishment of ROK-U.S. Combined Division (December 2016)

**1) The highest level consultative body among the ROK-U.S. military authorities, held annually at the Joint Chiefs of Staff of the two**
countries 

**2) Various ROK-U.S. defense councils were integrated into the KIDD to improve efficiency and effectiveness and it has been in operation**
since 2012


-----

The Division has enhanced the Korean military’s ability to carry out combined operations by

contributing to advancements in the combined operational plans and by fostering low-level

and mid-level officers and NCOs with combined operations capabilities.

In events of intensified crisis on the Korean Peninsula due to North Korea’s strategic provo
cations, the United States has been deploying its strategic assets to deter further North Korean

threats. Shortly after North Korea’s fourth and fifth nuclear tests and launching of long-range

ballistic missiles, the U.S. Air Force deployed B-52 and B-1B bombers, F-22 stealth fighter

jets, USS North Carolina nuclear submarine, and the USS John Stennis Air Wing as a strategic

deterrence.

Deployment of B-52 and F-22 on the Korean Peninsula

In the future, the combined operational plans will be reinforced on the basis of regular

joint exercises and stable management of the current Alliance situation by operating various

security consultative bodies, in order to continue strengthening the ROK-U.S. combined

defense posture.

**| Conditions-based OPCON Transition Plan | Operational control (OPCON) is the**

authority to command military units to carry out a specific operation at a designated time

and space, and is distinguished as either armistice or wartime OPCON. Under the current

ROK-U.S. combined defense system, the ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff exercises OPCON during

armistice; on the other hand, during wartime, the Combined Forces Command controls the

military units designated by the Presidents of the ROK and the United States via the ROK-U.S.

Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) and the ROK-U.S. Military Committee Meeting
(MCM). As the security environment deteriorated with the North Korean nuclear and WMD

threats becoming ever more imminent, the ROK and the United States assessed that the ROK

military would need to be equipped with initial critical response capabilities before the transi
tion of wartime OPCON.

At the 46[th] SCM held in October 2014, both countries agreed to pursue the transition once the


-----

ROK military is ready to lead the combined forces and security environment situations meet

the conditions required for the wartime OPCON transition[3)]. The conditions-based wartime

OPCON transition plan[4)] was approved by the 47[th] SCM consultation held in November 2015.

To meet the conditions for the transition of wartime OPCON, the ROK and the United States

agreed to secure various core military capabilities such as the Kill Chain and the Korea Air

and Missile Defense (KAMD). Also, the two countries are verifying the ROK-led future

command structure through combined exercises by applying the new command structure in

these exercises. The preparations for the transition of wartime OPCON, including the transfer

of forces, planning and policy, and alliance management, are periodically evaluated by the

three subcommittees of the combined governance system, i.e. the Steering Committee, the

ROK-U.S. MCM, and the SCM.

The two countries will exert their best efforts to meet all of the necessary conditions for

wartime OPCON transition by mid-2020 by meticulously handling the preparation process

for transition, the timing of transition, and post-transition establishment of the ROK mili
tary-led combined training exercise system and formation of the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces

Command (tentative name: Future Command).

**3. Ensuring a Stable Stationing Environment for United States Forces Korea**


**| USFK Base Relocation | The ROK and the United States are currently consolidating the**

USFK bases scattered throughout the country into two hub bases in Pyeongtaek and Daegu

to ensure a stable stationing environment for the USFK and the balanced development of the

ROK territory.

The USFK base relocation project consists of two plans, the Yongsan Relocation Plan
(YRP), which entails the relocation of the USFK headquarters in Yongsan to Pyeongtaek, and

the Land Partnership Plan (LPP), which entails the relocation of the U.S. 2[nd] Infantry Division

in Dongducheon and Uijeongbu to Pyeongtaek.


**3) The ROK and the United States agreed upon the following three wartime OPCON transition**
conditions. 1) To secure the military capabilities required to lead the ROK-U.S. combined
defense after the wartime OPCON transition. The United States will continue to provide bridging
and enduring capabilities. 2) To secure the essential response capabilities of the ROK forces
against North Korean nuclear and missile threats during the early phases of local provocations
or aggression. The United States will provide and operate extended deterrence measures and
strategic assets. 3) To manage security environment on the Korean Peninsula and in the region that
is conductive to a stable wartime OPCON transition.

**4) A document that replaces the existing “2015 Strategic Alliance,” a comprehensive document of the**

ROK-U.S. Alliance implementation plan (COTP: Conditions-based OPCON Transition Plan).


Deployment of US
B-1B bomber on the
Korean Peninsula


-----

The construction of the Pyeongtaek base, where the USFK headquarters and the U.S. 2[nd]

Infantry Division will relocate to, is approximately 92% complete as of November 2016. In

May 2016, the advance units of the Eighth Army headquarters in Yongsan successfully moved

to Pyeongtaek, and the relocation of most of the USFK units will be completed by 2017. In

accordance with the ‘Special Act on Support, etc. for Pyeongtaek-si, etc. following Reloca
tion of U.S. Military Bases in Korea,’ the construction of residential support facilities and

amenities - including roads, waterworks, sewerage facilities, and town halls for the inhabitants

of Pyeongtaek who were displaced due to the relocation - are also under way. As of November

2016, fifty-four USFK bases have been returned to the ROK’s control and twenty-six more are

scheduled to be returned.

Both countries recognize the importance of the relocation and return of USFK bases, and

will continue to cooperate closely with each other for the success of the YRP and LPP.

**| Defense Burden Sharing | “Defense burden sharing” refers to the ROK government**

bearing a portion of the total stationing costs of the USFK, which plays an important role in

the defense of the Korean Peninsula. According to Article 5 of the Status of Forces Agreement
(SOFA)[5)] concluded by the ROK and the United States in 1966, the United States is to bear

the stationing costs of the USFK, and the ROK is to grant the facilities and sites. However,

until 1991, the United States not only covered the stationing costs but also provided funds for

the construction of necessary facilities in consideration of the economic situation of the ROK.

In 1991, the ROK and the United States concluded the Special Measures Agreement (SMA)[6)]

relating to Article 5 of the SOFA in consideration of the financial conditions of the ROK gov
ernment, and since then the ROK has been sharing a portion of the USFK’s stationing costs.

The defense burden sharing cost is organized into three categories: personnel expenses, the

ROK funded construction, and logistics cost. The amount of the defense burden sharing cost

has been determined according to the comprehensive considerations of the USFK’s defense

contribution to the Korean Peninsula, the need to provide a stable stationing environment for

the USFK, and the ROK’s financial capacity and security situation.

In accordance with the 9[th] SMA concluded in February 2014, the ROK’s total contribution

was 920 billion won; and future increments will be no more than 4% of the annual contribu
**5) Article 5 of the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) (Facilities and Areas – Cost and Maintenance)**

-  Section 1: ‌The United States shall bear the expenses incurred by the maintenance of the USFK without imposing any burden on the
Korean side.
• Section 2: The Korean side shall provide facilities and areas without imposing any burden on the U.S. side.

**6) Signed every two to five years since 1991 (SMA: Special Measures Agreement)**


-----

tion, and will be reflective of the previous year’s consumer price index[7)]. To enhance the trans
parency and accountability in executing the burden sharing funds,[8)] the ROK and the United

States concluded the “Exchange of Notes on System Improvements.”

More than 90% of the defense burden sharing cost has been redirected to the ROK’s

economy since contributions to regional economic development are made in the form of

creating demand for equipment, services, construction and jobs for Korean employees. The

labor costs are used for Korean employees working at the USFK. It can be said that 88%

of ROK funded construction cost is actually returned to the ROK economy since domestic

companies execute the construction contracts, orders, and construction management, except

for design and construction oversight costs, which account for 12% of the total. Thus, all of the

logistics cost sharing is returned to the ROK economy since domestic Korean contractors are

executing the projects.

The ROK and the United States will continue to cooperate closely to carry out improve
ments to the system and to execute and operate the burden sharing program smoothly.

**<Chart 5-1> Defense Burden sharing status**


**As of 2016**

Support salaries for rOK employees
of USFK (up to 75% of the total salary)
(all support in the form of cash)


ammunition storage, aircraft maintenance,
railroad transportation and vehicle support,
and material support

(all support in the form of goods)


Supporting USFK facility construction,
including barracks and surrounding facilities

44.7% (all support in the form of goods net of 12%

design and construction inspection costs)

**Logistics**

16.9% **support** 38.4%

**159.1 billion**
**won** **Personnel**

**363 billion**
**won**

**Total**
**944.1 billion**
**won**

**Military construction**
**422 billion won**

44.7%


**| enhancing ROK-U.s. Mutual Understanding | The ROK government and military**

have regularly invited USFK personnel to diverse events and carried out mutual exchange

programs to strengthen trust and friendship between the blood-forged allies. Since 1972, more

than 18,000 USFK soldiers have participated in various Korean cultural experience events 
including Taekwondo camps, temple stay, National Palace and museum tours - and relationship


**7) the contribution to the defense budget in 2015 was 932 billion Won (2013 inflation rate of 1.3% applied); 944.1 billion won will be**
provided in 2016 (inflation rate of 1.3% applied).

**8)** ① Strengthening pre-coordination from the allocation stage; ② establishing a system of advance consultation in the field of military
construction; ③ removing or easing the difficulties of SMes; ④ USFK efforts to improve the welfare of Korean workers and increase
transparency in personnel expenses; ⑤ increased transparency in budgeting and budgeting.


-----

strengthening events in a bid to enhance their understanding of Korean history and culture and

to forge a stronger sense of friendship. Various private events are also being actively conducted

to express appreciation for the USFK's unyielding commitment to the ROK. In 2013, to com
memorate the 60[th] anniversary of the ROK-U.S. Alliance, the ROK-U.S. Alliance Academic

Seminar, the ROK-U.S. Alliance Vision Development Seminar, the ROK-U.S. Alliance

Frontier Marathon, the ROK-U.S. Alliance Band Concert, and the ROK-U.S. Alliance Concert

were held to promote harmony between the two countries.

For its part, the USFK also organizes

various events and programs. The “Good

Neighbor Program,” officially launched

in 2003, promotes the positive role of the

USFK and mutual understanding by recog
nizing organizations that contribute to the

development of the Alliance. The Program

USFK servicemembers experience Korean culture

includes such events as open house events,

local festivals, friendship dinners, visits to U.S. military vessels and English classes for local

residents. For soldiers who are new to Korea, USFK also runs various programs designed to

help them overcome cultural differences between the two countries and to gain a better under
standing of Korean culture.


-----

**Section 2 Expansion of Defense**
**Exchanges and Cooperation**

The ROK Military is developing cooperative defense relations with Japan, China, and Russia based on the

ROK-U.S. Alliance in order to ensure peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula. Moreover, by expanding

the scope of defense diplomacy to Southeast Asia, the Middle East, Central and South America, and Africa,

and actively participating in multilateral security consultative bodies, MND is contributing to world peace.


**1. Enhancing Defense Exchanges and Cooperation with Neighboring Countries**

**| Defense Exchanges and Cooperation with Japan | The ROK and Japan share the basic**

values of liberal democracy and market economy, and cooperate in securing the peace and

prosperity of not only the Northeast Asian region but also the world.

The two countries have periodically held

Defense Ministerial Meetings since 1994. At

the 14[th] meeting in 2009, the two countries

concluded the Letter of Intent on Defense

Exchanges between the Republic of Korea

and Japan. At the 16[th] meeting in 2015, the two

countries agreed to enhance cooperation to

respond to North Korea’s provocations and to

ROK-Japan Defense Ministerial Meeting (October 2015)

provide humanitarian disaster relief. During the

Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD) held in October 2015, the Defense Ministers of the ROK and

Japan met to share thoughts on defense exchanges and cooperation between the two countries

and agreed to continue making efforts for the stable development of the ROK-Japan relation
ship. In November 2016, the ROK-Japan General Security of Military Information Agreement
(GSOMIA) was concluded to effectively deter North Korean nuclear and missile threats by

utilizing Japanese intelligence capabilities to enhance the ROK’s security benefits.


Defense exchanges and cooperation


-----

In addition, the two countries are striving to broaden their mutual understanding through

Defense Policy Talks, working-level meetings on defense exchanges and cooperation, and

security policy consultative meetings. The Search and Rescue Exercise (SAREX) is conducted

biennially to enhance cooperation in the area of disaster relief.

However, some Japanese political leaders’ regressive perception of history and unjust claims

of dominion over Dokdo Island have become obstacles to the future development of the rela
tionship between the two countries.

MND will respond stringently to Japan’s unjust claims on Dokdo Island while continuously

cooperating on major security issues, including North Korean nuclear threats, for the peace

and stability of Northeast Asia.

**| Defense Exchanges and Cooperation with China | The ROK and China have worked at**

developing their relationship in various areas, including politics, economy, society, and culture,

since the establishment of diplomatic relations in 1992.[9)] In particular, the “ROK-China Joint

Statement for a Future Vision” and the ROK-China Joint Statement adopted in 2013 and 2014,

respectively, have been opportunities for establishing a comprehensive, multi-layered strategic

communication channel in the political and security areas.

In June 2013, the Chairman of the ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) met with the PLA Chief

of General Staff of China for talks. In February 2015, the ROK Defense Minister had talks

with the Chinese Defense Minister, and both countries exchanged broad opinions about the

situation in the Northeast Asian region and on the Korean Peninsula, as well as discussing

ways to promote exchanges and cooperation including strategic communications between the

two countries and the repatriation of the remains of Chinese troops. In September 2015, three

representatives from the ROK Army, Navy, and Air Force attended China’s military parade

commemorating the 70[th] anniversary of Victory over Japan Day of World War II.

A channel of cooperation and communi
cation regarding the security status on the

Korean Peninsula and in the wider Northeast

Asia region was established with the opening

of a hotline between the ROK and the Chinese

Ministry of Defense in December 2015.

Additionally, the ROK-China relations are

gradually improving as the two countries

Korean National Military Symphony Orchestra’s performance

expand their exchanges in many other areas, in China (March 2014)

**9) Friendship and cooperative relations (upon the resumption of diplomatic relations in 1992), Cooperative Partnership (1998), Overall**
Cooperative Relations (2000), Total Cooperative Partnership (2003), Strategic Cooperation Partnership Relations (2008)


-----

such as meetings between the JCS and the Chinese General Staff, the ROK-China Defense

Policy Talks, the repatriation of the remains of Chinese troops, the performance by the Korean

National Military Symphony in China, and the Military World Games, as well as exchanges

by military research institutes, and mutual education exchanges by respective education insti
tutes.

In the future, MND will strive to contribute to peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula

and in Northeast Asia by continuously expanding defense exchanges and cooperation with

China at a level commensurate with the mature “strategic cooperative partnership” between

the ROK and China.

**| Defense Cooperation with Russia | Since the beginning of diplomatic relations in 1990,**

the relationship between the ROK and Russia has improved in a number of vital areas such as

politics, economy, energy, science and technology. Ever since the two countries’ relationship

was elevated to a “strategic cooperative partnership” in 2008, the ROK and Russia have been

strengthening their cooperation, which includes substantive cooperation to resolve the North

Korean nuclear issue, by holding two ROK-Russia summits in 2013, and the G20 Summit in

September 2016.

To enhance trust between the two countries, the ROK and Russia are expanding exchanges

of senior-level personnel. In particular, the ROK Vice Minister of National Defense visited

Russia in March 2013 and established the momentum to reinforce strategic communication

regarding military cooperation between the two nations. In November 2015, the Deputy

Minister for Policy of MND and the Vice Minister for International Cooperation of the

Russian Ministry of Defense held a strategic conference in order to conduct regular meetings

among high-ranking national defense personnel.

In addition, through JCS chief director-level dialogue and joint military committee meetings,

the two countries are continuing to develop their strategic cooperation at the working level,

and broadening the scope of their military cooperation via exchanges between units and

mutual education exchanges.

In order to enhance military trust, the two countries are committed to continuously

reviewing the implementation status of the “ROK-Russia Maritime Accident Prevention

Agreement” signed in 1994 and are pursuing the establishment of a hotline between the two

countries’ air forces in accordance with the “Agreement on the Prevention of Dangerous

Military Activities.”

MND will develop the relationship between the two countries into one that will contribute

to peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula and in Northeast Asia by expanding defense

exchanges and cooperation with Russia and enhancing the military trust between the two

countries.


-----

**2. Expanding Defense Exchanges and Cooperation with Key Countries in Each**
**Region**

**| Southeast Asia and Oceania | MND**

actively engages in defense exchanges

and cooperation with a number of

countries in Southeast Asia and Oceania

to enhance the ROK’s national interests

while seeking peace and stability in the

Asia-Pacific region. In addition, MND

ROK-Vietnam Defense Ministerial Meeting (May 2015)

actively pursues defense and defense

industry cooperation with Southeast Asian countries through mutual visits of high-ranking

personnel.

In May 2015, the Defense Ministers of the ROK and Vietnam agreed to cooperate on cyber

security, military education activities, and international peacekeeping operations (PKO).

In September 2015, at the Vice Ministerial Defense Strategy Dialogue the two countries

discussed specific measures and signed a “Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation for

United Nations Peacekeeping Operations between the ROK and Vietnam” for mutual coopera
tion in international peacekeeping operations.

Practical cooperation plans, including mutual visits of high-ranking military personnel and

military education exchanges, were discussed during the ROK-Philippines Defense Ministe
rial Meeting held in September 2015. Also, the legal foundations for comprehensive exchanges

of military intelligence and secrets were established under the “Agreement on the Protection of

Classified Military Information between the ROK and the Philippines.” In November 2016, the

Philippines Defense Secretary had the opportunity to meet with the ROK Defense Minister to

discuss the expansion of reciprocal defense cooperation.

In June 2016, the ROK’s Vice Defense

Minister visited countries with traditional ties

with North Korea, such as Cambodia and Laos,

to agree on ways to cooperate in resolving

the North Korean nuclear issue, including the

faithful implementation of the UN Security

Council resolutions to sanction North Korea;

discussions were centered on various coop
ROK-Laos Signing the Letter of Intent for Opening a Military

eration measures such as military education Attaché Office (June 2016)

exchanges, peacekeeping activities, anti-terrorism measures, and the removal of landmines and

other abandoned ordnance. In September 2016, the ROK and Cambodian Defense Ministers


-----

held talks and reaffirmed their willingness to develop the defense cooperation between the

two countries.

In addition to senior-level personnel exchanges, the ROK MND has laid foundations for

defense cooperation with various countries in Southeast Asia through the mutual opening of

military attaché offices. In November 2015, the Cambodia Military Attaché Office in the ROK

was opened, and in August 2016 a ROK defense attaché was stationed at the ROK Embassy

in Cambodia. In June 2016, MND agreed to establish a military attaché office in Laos and, in

August 2016, MND agreed to pursue separately memorandums of understanding on defense

cooperation with Cambodia, Laos, and Myanmar.

To enhance the measures for defense cooperation with key middle-ranking powers of

Oceania such as Australia and New Zealand, MND engages in discussions with their

high-ranking military personnel.

In September 2015, the ROK and Australia held the 2[nd] ROK-Australia Foreign and Defense

Ministers Meeting, after which the Foreign and Defense Ministers of the two countries

announced the “ROK-Australia Defense and Security Cooperation Blueprint” in accor
dance with the "Vision Statement for a Secure, Peaceful and Prosperous Future between the

Republic of Korea and Australia." The Blueprint comprises the plans for cooperation on nine

security and defense areas, including combined training, military education exchanges, and

cyber security, etc. Following the ROK-Australia Foreign and Defense Ministers Meeting,

the 4[th] ROK-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting was held to conclude the “Implement
ing Arrangements on Defense Education and Training Engagement between the ROK and

Australia” and laid the foundation for systematically developing cooperation and exchanges in

the area of military education.

MND also concluded the “ROK-New Zealand Agreement on Defense Cooperation” with

New Zealand in April 2014. The two countries agreed to earnestly pursue cooperation on

defense at the Defense Ministerial Meeting held in September 2015. In the future, the ROK

and New Zealand will cooperate in such areas as military education exchanges, participation

in combined training, etc.

**| Southwest Asia | MND is pursuing various forms of defense cooperation with key**

Southwest Asian countries through exchanges of senior-level officials, regular meetings, and

other initiatives.

At the ROK-India Defense Minsters’ Meeting held in April 2015, the two countries held dis
cussions on military exchanges and mutual defense industry cooperation plans; following the

visit of the Prime Minister of India in 2015, the leaders of both countries agreed to strengthen

cooperation in such areas as maritime security, cyber security, and military education

exchanges, and to open a bilateral foreign and defense ministerial meeting.


-----

The ROK-Pakistan defense industry cooperation improvement plans were discussed when

Pakistan’s Defense Industry Minister attended the Seoul International Aerospace & Defense

Exhibition (Seoul ADEX) in October 2015. Discussions on detailed cooperation plans concern
ing the defense industry’s current situation took place at the ROK-Pakistan Joint Committee

Meeting on Defense and Military Affairs held in December 2015.

In the future, MND will continue pursuing the expansion of national defense and defense

industry cooperation with key Southwest Asian countries through exchanges of senior-level

officials and regular meetings.

**| Central Asia | Most Central Asian countries became part of the Commonwealth of**

Independent States (CIS)[10)] after achieving independence from the former USSR. Central

Asia spans an immense territory stretching from the area bordering China to that bordering

Europe. Amongst the diverse Central Asian countries, five have achieved political stability

and economic growth since gaining their independence.

MND signed the “ROK-Uzbekistan MOU on Military Education Exchanges and Coopera
tion” with Uzbekistan in April 2015; the two countries are now holding annual Defense Policy

Talks to discuss plans for enhancing cooperation between them.

An “MOU on Defense Exchanges and Cooperation” was concluded with Azerbaijan in

December 2013 to establish a foundation for enhancing defense exchanges and cooperation. In

2016, Azerbaijan dispatched a military officer to the ROK military education institute for the

first time.

With the visit of the President of Turkmenistan to the ROK and the signing of a “MOU

on Defense Cooperation between the Republic of Korea and Turkmenistan” in 2015, founda
tions for systematic defense cooperation between the two countries were laid. Currently, MND

is preparing for the establishment of a regular consultative body, such as the Defense Policy

Talks.

In order to achieve substantial defense cooperation with the CIS countries, the ROK military

attaché offices were established in Turkmenistan (August 2015), Azerbaijan (September 2016),

Uzbekistan (August 2016) and Kazakhstan (August 2016).

Defense exchanges and cooperation have also been expanded with Mongolia in various

areas, including personnel, education and academic exchanges, and participation in the Khaan

Quest exercise.[11)]

**10) Currently, there are nine CIS member countries including Russia, Belarus, Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan,**

Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, while Turkmenistan is an informal observer (CIS: Commonwealth of Independent States)

**11) This was originally a bilateral exercise involving only the United States and Mongolia, but it became a multilateral exercise in 2006.**

The UN peacekeeping activity guidelines and standards are applied, and the UN standard exercise model is practiced.


-----

**| The Middle East | The Middle East is a critical region for securing energy resources. As**

the importance of cooperation with Middle Eastern countries is increasing, national defense

and defense industry cooperation is being expanded.

To discuss the expansion of military cooperation with MND’s senior-level personnel, Saudi

Arabia’s Assistant to the Defense Minister and the Director General of Public Administration

for Science and Technology of the Saudi Ministry of Defense visited the ROK in January 2015

and May 2015, respectively. The Saudi Arabian Chief of Staff, during a visit to Korea for the

Fourth Security Dialogue in September 2015, spoke with the ROK Vice Defense Minister and

agreed on the necessity of revitalizing military exchanges between the two countries. In April

2016, Saudi Arabia’s Director General of Public Administration for Science and Technology

of the Ministry of National Defense visited the ROK to attend the ROK-Saudi Arabia Defense

Policy Talks and exchanged opinions on overall defense cooperation with MND. In October,

Saudi Arabia’s cabinet advisors visited the Defense Minister and discussed ways of developing

cooperation on national defense between the two countries.

In December 2015, delegates of MND visited Jordan to meet with key military personnel

including the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and to promote national defense cooperation

between the two countries. In July and November of 2016, the Defense Minister of Qatar and

the Defense Minister of UAE visited Korea, respectively, and discussed ways of expanding

national defense cooperation with the ROK Defense Minister.

MND will continue to pay close attention to changes in the security environment in the

Middle East, and will strive to develop national defense and defense industry cooperation with

key countries in the region, such as Saudi Arabia and the UAE, by holding regular meetings

and working-level meetings with their senior-level personnel.

**| Europe | The ROK is developing military cooperation with various countries in the**

European region through exchanges of senior-level military officials while simultaneously

expanding cooperation with the European Union (EU) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organi
zation (NATO).

At the ROK-U.K. Defense Ministerial

Meeting held in January 2015, ministers of

the two countries evaluated the traditional

relationship of amity and cooperation estab
lished between the ROK and U.K. during the

Korean War, and discussed issues pertaining to

national defense, defense industry cooperation,

and future cooperation. In November 2016, the

ROK-U.S.-U.K. Air Force Combined Training (November 2016)

ROK Air Force (ROKAF) and the Royal Air


-----

Force (RAF) participated in the ROK-U.S.-U.K. Air Forces joint training conducted at Osan

Base in the ROK. This drill broadened the horizon of future national defense cooperation

discussed at the meeting between the ROK and U.K. Defense Ministers.

The ROK and Poland agreed to closely discuss the need to expand education and training

exchanges and defense industry cooperation at the ROK-Poland Defense Ministerial Meeting

held in March 2015.

The ROK Vice Defense Minister met with the Vice Defense Ministers of Poland, the Czech

Republic, and Hungary to discuss ways to carry out national defense and defense industry

cooperation in a practical manner with Central European countries, the new growth engines

within Europe.

At the ROK-France Summits held in November 2015 and June 2016, the leaders of the two

countries agreed to strengthen cooperation in the defense and security fields. In June 2016, at

the ROK and France Defense Ministerial Meeting, the ROK and France agreed to strengthen

strategic cooperation in the fields of international peacekeeping activities, cyber security, and

defense industry.

MND concluded MOUs on national defense cooperation with the Czech Republic and

Bulgaria in February and May 2015, respectively. In December 2015, the ROK MND

concluded an agreement on the exchange and mutual protection of classified military infor
mation with Hungary; and it continues to make efforts to establish an institutional basis for

defense cooperation with other European countries

At the first ROK-Visegrad Group[12)] Meeting held in December 2015, the ROK and the

Visegrad Group countries agreed to strengthen national defense and defense industry cooper
ation.

To strengthen cooperation with NATO, MND delegates attended a NATO training exercise

in the crisis management field for the first time in Belgium in March 2015. The ROK Defense

Minister met with NATO’s Chairman at the Asia Security Summit held in May 2015. In

December 2016, NATO strongly condemned North Korea's nuclear and missile development

and provocations and adopted the statement against North Korea at the special meeting on

North Korean Nuclear Weapons at the North Atlantic Council, NATO’S supreme deci
sion-making body.

In order to promote cooperation with the European Union, the EU High Representative for

Foreign Affairs and Security met with the ROK’s Defense Minister during a visit to the ROK

**12) Visegrad stands for the Central European Community comprised of the Czech Republic, Poland,**

Hungary and Slovakia. The first meeting was held in 1991 in the Hungarian city of Visegrad, from
which the name derives.

ROK-U.S.-U.K. Air Force
Combined Training


-----

in May 2015. In September 2015, the first ROK-EU Security Defense Conference was held

to discuss plans for cooperation in the fields of crisis management, cyber security, and other

matters.

MND will continue to cooperate with the European Union and NATO while simultaneously

pursuing to mature bilateral defense cooperation with traditional allied nations such as the

U.K. and France, and promoting national defense cooperation with Central European countries

such as Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary.

**| Central and South America and Canada | With Central and South American countries**

and Canada, the ROK is actively carrying out cooperation in the economic field and based on

this momentum, MND is continuing to pursue ways to vitalize cooperation with these nations

in the defense field through exchanges of high-ranking military personnel and other means.

In July and November of 2013, the Vice Defense Minister of Colombia met with the ROK

Vice Defense Minister and the Defense Minister of Peru met with the ROK Defense Minister,

respectively, to discuss plans for cooperation on defense and defense industry. During the dis
cussions with the Vice Defense Ministers from Peru and Chile who were visiting the ROK

to attend the 3[rd] Seoul Defense Dialogue in October 2014, the ROK Vice Defense Minister

reviewed the ongoing defense industry issues with Peru, and agreed on establishing a regular

consultation body and vitalizing military education exchanges with Chile. The ROK also

signed the “MOU on ROK-Colombia Defense Cooperation” with Colombia at the ROK-Co
lombia Defense Ministerial Meeting held in March 2015.

In April 2015, the Presidents of the ROK

and Peru promoted the excellence of the

KT-1P at its launch and flight ceremony

held in Peru. Also, during the ROK

President Park Geun-Hye’s visit to Chile,

the “ROK-Chile Defense Industry and

Logistics Cooperation Agreement” was

concluded, thus establishing the legal and The flight and launch ceremony of the KT-1P held in Peru (April 2015)

institutional basis for defense industry cooperation between the two countries.

In January 2016, the Paraguay Defense Minister visited the ROK and met with the ROK

Defense Minister to discuss ways of promoting national defense and defense industry cooper
ation between the two countries and concluded the “ROK-Paraguay MOU on Defense Coop
eration.”

Meanwhile, Canada’s Senior Associate Deputy Minister for Defense, during a visit to the

ROK for the 4[th] Seoul Defense Dialogue in September 2015, discussed ways to boost coopera
tion on security and national defense between the two countries.


-----

In the future, MND plans to actively promote defense-related cooperation while maintaining

its friendship by promoting regular exchanges of senior-level personnel with key countries in

Latin America.

**| Africa | Following the ROK-Botswana Summit in October 2015 during President of**

Botswana’s visit to the ROK, the two countries discussed ways to promote defense and defense

industry cooperation. Deputy Chief of Defence Forces of Uganda, who visited the ROK in

October 2015 to attend the CISM World Games, agreed to expand cooperation between the

two countries on national defense and defense industry issues.

In May 2016, the ROK Vice Defense Minister visited Ethiopia and Uganda to conclude

MOUs on national defense cooperation aimed at laying the foundations for cooperation in the

fields of military education, anti-terrorism, and defense industry.

The ROK MND will continue to pursue the establishment of a foundation for mutually

feasible defense exchanges and cooperation plans with key African countries.

**3. Strengthening Multilateral Security Cooperation**

Various multilateral security cooperation activities aimed at establishing peace and stability

in the region are now under way. In order to encourage the participation of the relevant

countries, cooperation activities in the fields of transnational and non-military security threats,

such as terrorism, piracy and natural disasters, are actively being pursued. MND is actively

participating in multilateral security conferences in the Asia-Pacific region to that end, and,

since 2013, it has also been participating in the largest multilateral security consultative body

in the Americas, namely, the Halifax International Security Forum (HISF), in order to expand

the stage for multilateral security cooperation.

Participation in multilateral security consultative bodies contributes to increasing the Inter
national Community’s understanding of the North Korean nuclear and missile threats and to

expanding support for the ROK government’s policy towards North Korea and unification.

Also, through its opportunities to attend multilateral security conferences, MND is able to

engage in bilateral and multilateral talks with a view to developing national defense coopera
tion with major countries. <Chart 5-2> lists the Asia-Pacific multilateral security consultative

meetings in which MND participates.


-----

**<Chart 5-2> Asia-Pacific Multilateral Security Consultative Meetings Participated by MND 13) 14)**

|Track 113) Multilateral Security Forums|Track 1.514) Multilateral Security Forums|
|---|---|
|• ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus) • ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) • Tokyo Defense Forum (TDF)|• Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD) • Asia Security Summit (ASS) • Jakarta International Defense Dialogue (JIDD) • Halifax International Security Forum (HISF) • Xiangshan Forum • Northeast Asia Cooperation Dialogue (NEACD)|



**| Seoul Defense Dialogue | The ROK MND has held the Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD),**

attended by vice-minister level defense officials from the Asia Pacific region, since 2012 to

build military confidence and improve the security environment of the Asia Pacific region,

including the Korean Peninsula. It is becoming a global security cooperation consultative

group as the participants are not just from the Asia-Pacific region but also from America,

Europe, Middle East, and Africa.

The first SSD was attended by representatives from 15 countries and 2 international orga
nizations, and included a seminar for meaningful discussions on “Cooperation for a safer

Asia-Pacific region and solutions.” This successful launch was followed by a second meeting

attended by representatives from European countries and international organizations (20

countries and 3 international organizations), and a third meeting attended by representatives

from 24 countries and 3 international organizations. SDD is gradually becoming more firmly

established, and in particular, the third SDD in 2014 officially launched the Cyber Working

Group Meeting, laying the groundwork for dialogue on the need for multilateral security coop
eration on cyber security.

At the fourth SDD, held in 2015 and attended by representatives from 30 countries and

4 international organizations, the Declaration on the Vision of Defense Dialogue for the

Promotion of Multilateral Defense Cooperation was adopted. Six key agendas were discussed,

and the opening keynote speech explained the efforts of the ROK government to maintain

peaceful cooperation in East Asia and to resolve the security crisis on the Korean Peninsula;

the ROK also asked for further support from other participating countries.

In 2016, the fifth anniversary of the SSD was held on a grand scale, attended by delegations

from 34 countries and 5 international organizations. It was the first time that deputy-level

officials attended the SDD from Uganda and Ethiopia in Africa, and the Czech Republic,

Poland, Hungary and Slovakia in Eastern Europe, all of which have formed close ties with


**13) Multilateral security conferences held between governments to promote regional and global peace and stability**

**14) Multilateral security conferences involving governments, private organizations and scholars to promote regional and global peace**
and stability


-----

ROK; transforming the SDD into a global

security dialogue.

The Secretary-General of the Orga
nization for the Prohibition of Chemical

Weapons (OPCW[15)]) stated in his keynote

speech that North Korea would pose

a threat to the wider world if it did not

Seoul Defense Dialogue 2016 (September 2016)

abandon the development of WMD, and

emphasized the importance of unity and cooperation of the International Community to create

principle-based international norms for the Korean Peninsula and world peace.

Under the theme ‘Complex Security Crisis:

Challenges and Solutions,’ discussions were

focused on the complex security threats that the

International Community is facing, such as the

North Korean nuclear issue, maritime security,

cyber security, and terrorism by extremists.

Notably, in the first plenary session on ‘Denu
clearizing North Korea and international Korea·Visegrad Group Vice Ministerial Defense Dialogue

cooperation’, defense officials and civilian (September 2016)

security experts from ROK, the U.S., Japan, China, and Russia participated in the discus
sions to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue, and agreed that they should carry out their

commitments thoroughly and summon the collective will and capabilities of the International

Community to deliver a decisive and consistent message to North Korea. In addition, in the

bilateral talks with 20 countries including the U.S., Japan, Uganda, and Ethiopia, and during

the ‘ROK-Visegrad Group Vice Ministers’ Meeting, ways to carry out defense cooperation

were discussed and participants’ determination to continue to expand the level of cooperation

was reaffirmed.

The ROK will continue to develop the SDD as a ‘forum for multilateral security cooper
ation’ that will contribute to world peace, stability in Northeast Asia, and unification of the

Korean Peninsula.

**|  ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus) | MND has been attending the**

ADMM-Plus since 2010. At the Third Council Meeting in Malaysia in 2015, the ROK Minster

**15) Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons**

2016 SDD


-----

of National Defense expressed the ROK’s

position on the North Korean nuclear issue and

unification.

Regarding the South China Sea issue, the

ROK has officially expressed its position

that “freedom of navigation and commercial Minister of National Defense attending the ASEAN Defense

Ministers’ Meeting in 2015 (November 2015)

aviation in the South China Sea should be guar
anteed, and that disputes should be settled peacefully in accordance with the relevant agree
ments and the internationally established norms of conduct.”

From 2014 to 2016, the ROK participated in the International Peacekeeping Operations
(PKO) Expert Working Group (EWG), one of the six EWGs of the ADMM-Plus, as co-chair

with Cambodia; from 2017 to 2019, it will participate in the Marine Security EWG as co-chair

with Singapore.

**| Asia Security Summit | Since 2004, the ROK Minister of National Defense has been**

participating in the Asia Security Summit, which is the highest-level defense meeting in the

Asia-Pacific region.

In 2015, at the 14[th] Summit, the ROK Minister of National Defense emphasized the support

of the International Community to deter North Korea's provocations and threats posed by its

nuclear weapons and missiles in his luncheon speech and separate dialogue sessions. In 2016,

at the 15[th] Summit, the plenary speech by the ROK was well-received by the participating

countries, in which ROK asserted that the International Community should faithfully fulfill

the United Nations Security Council Resolution No. 2270 to lead the denuclearization of the

Korean Peninsula.


**| Other Multilateral-Security Cooperation Forums | Since 2003, MND has been partic-**

ipating in the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), and since then, the ROK has been gradually

expanding its role in the ARF as seen through its role as co-chair with the U.S. and Indonesia

in the maritime security domain from 2012 to 2014.

The ROK Vice Defense Minister participated in the Jakarta International Defense Dialogue
(JIDD) in 2014, and shared the ROK’s international efforts to promote maritime security by

introducing the successful rescue operation of the Samho Jewelry crew abducted by Somali

pirates in 2011.

In addition, the ROK annually participates in the Tokyo Defense Forum (TDF), a director

general-level security consultative meeting; and the annual Xiangshan Forum held in China.

It also participates in the Northeast Asia Cooperation Dialogue (NEACD), comprising the

member states of the Six Party Talks, with a view to building military confidence and to


-----

securing peaceful cooperation in Northeast Asia. In 2016, all participating countries of the

NEACD, with the exception of North Korea, agreed on the denuclearization of North Korea

and discussed measures for peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula.

MND will continue to participate in multilateral security cooperation activities to share the

position of the ROK government regarding peace and stability in the Korean Peninsula and

Northeast Asia with the countries concerned, and will continue its efforts to gain support from

the International Community on the ROK’s security policy.

**4. International Nonproliferation and Counter-proliferation**

**| International Non-proliferation Activities[16)] | The International Community is working**

to strengthen the international regulations to prevent the prolif¬eration of weapons of mass

destruction (WMD), conventional weapons, and ballistic missiles. The ROK has been actively

participating in arms reduction and non-prolif-eration agreements and multilateral export

control regimes since its admission to the UN in 1991.

The ROK has been diligently carrying out its responsibilities as a member of the Nuclear

Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) since becoming a member in 1975, and actively participates in

the International Community’s efforts to prevent nuclear proliferation. It is also a member of

the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), and

the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), working to deter the expansion of weapons

of mass destruction (WMD), and is jointly providing international chemical protection courses

with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).

The ROK is also participating in the Wassenaar Arrangement and the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT) and is strengthening its nonproliferation efforts such as controlling the export and

transfer of weapons systems. In April 2013, the Arms Trade Treaty, in which the ROK partici
pated as a signatory, was adopted as the first legally binding regulation regarding the interna
tional trade of conventional weapons.

The ROK chaired the Nuclear Security Summit (2012), the UN Security Council, and the

Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation (HCOC) from 2011 to 2013. In

2016, ROK served as the Chair of the MTCR and the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), greatly

contributing to strengthening of the international non-proliferation regime.

**16) Non-proliferation efforts to prevent the spread of weapons of mass destruction and various types of arms, such as conventional**
weapons.


-----

**| International Counter-proliferation[17)] Activities | The International Community is**

strengthening its activities to prevent the proliferation of WMD, ballistic missiles, and other

threats.

The ROK government officially became a member of the Proliferation Security Initiative
(PSI)[18)] in 2009 to actively participate in the international endeavor to prevent the prolifer
ation of WMDs. In 2010, it joined the Operational Expert Group (OEG), which is a group

of countries leading the initiative. The ROK hosted PSI exercises in 2010 and 2012 and

carried out discussions on preventing WMD proliferation and seizing WMDs while conduct
ing maritime interdiction training. In September 2012, the ROK held the PSI’s Annual OEG

meeting in Seoul. Since 2014, six countries, namely the ROK, the U.S., Japan, Singapore,

Australia and New Zealand, have been orga
nizing annual training programs to prevent

WMD proliferation.[19)]

In 2016, the ROK actively participated in

tabletop exercises and maritime interception

training organized by Singapore for interna
tional cooperation and interdiction activities to

Airborne infiltration drills to block ships carrying weapons of

prevent the proliferation of WMD. mass destruction

**<Chart 5-3> PSI training participation status**

|Year|2009|2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Location|Singapore|ROK|N/A|ROK, Japan|UAE|U.S.|New Zealand|Singapore|


Since 2011, the ROK and the U.S. have conducted the annual “Able Response” exercise
(AR)[20)] to prepare for potential biological weapons threats, inspect the national integrated

response system, and improve their combined biological defense capabilities. Also, the two

countries hold the Countering WMD Committee Meeting on an annual basis to discuss and

develop the readiness posture against North Korea’s nuclear, biological, chemical, radioactive

weapon threats.

**17) Counter-proliferation efforts to protect their territories and peoples by reducing or eliminating actual threats posed by weapons of**
mass destruction or by restraining the enemy's desire to use them.

**18) The Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) was launched in June 2003 as a U.S.-led international cooperation activity to prevent the**
international spread of WMD. It includes the sharing of information between member states, prohibition of the transportation of
WMDs, prohibition of the exportation of illegal weapons, and joint operations

**19) Starting in the U.S. in 2014, it will be held in New Zealand in 2015, in Singapore in 2016, in Australia in 2017, in Japan in 2018, and in**

ROK in 2019.

**20) Combined Biomonitoring Exercise with 200 participants from 40 associated organizations.**


-----

**Section 3 Overseas Deployments and**
**Peace Keeping Operations (PKOs)**

After overcoming the tragedy of the Korean War with the support of the UN and the international

community, the ROK has become a donor country and a middle power that actively participates in

peace¬keeping operations (PKOs) thanks to economic growth and democratization. As of November 2016,

the ROK is participating in various missions[21)] through the deployment of approximately 1,100 troops to

UN PKOs, multinational peace operations, and defense cooperation activities. This has elevated the ROK’s

standing in the world.

**1. UN Peacekeeping Operations**

UN peacekeeping operations began with the establishment in 1948 of the United Nations

Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) in Palestine. Currently, 16 missions[22)] are carrying

out mandates such as monitoring the armistice and providing reconstruction and medical

support in conflict areas around the world.

The ROK which joined the UN in September 1991 has continuously participated in UN

peacekeeping operations since it first deployed an engineering unit to Somalia in 1993. As of

November 2016, there are 647 deployed troops in 8 regions, including Dongmyeong Unit’s 329

troops in Lebanon and Hanbit Unit’s 293 troops in South Sudan.

The information above is reflected in <Chart 5-4>.

**21) Comparison of various missions**

|Category|UN PKO|Multinational(MNF) Peace Operations|Defense Cooperation Activities|
|---|---|---|---|
|Host|Led by the UN|Led by a regional security organization or a particular nation|Led by the sending country|
|Command and Control|PKF commander appointed by the UN Secretary-General|MNF commander|Military commander of the sending country|
|Expenses|Borne by the UN|Borne by each country|Borne by each country|



**22) Currently, there are nine Missions in Africa (Western Sahara, Central African Republic, Mali, Democratic Republic of the Congo,**
Sudan Darfur, Abyei, Liberia, South Sudan and Cote d'Ivoire), three in the Middle East (Lebanon, Syria), two in Europe (Kosovo
and Cyprus), one in South America (Haiti), and one in Asia (India and Pakistan). In total, the Republic of Korea has deployed
approximately 120,000 personnel to 128 countries to date.


-----

**<Chart 5-4> ROK Participation in Un Peacekeeping Operations**


**As of november 2016, unit: persons**

**Lebanon**
**Dongmyeong Unit (329)**
Western Sahara UNIFIL staff (4)
MINURSO staff(4)

India and Pakistan
UNTSO staff(7)

Ivory Coast
UNOCI staff (1)

**South Sudan**
**HanbitUnit (293)**
UNMISS observers and staff (7)

Darfur, Sudan
UNMISS staff(2)


**| Dongmyeong Unit in Lebanon[23)] | The UN deployed the United Nations Interim Force**

to Lebanon (UNIFIL), based on UN Security Council Resolutions,[24)] in 1978. Ever since,

UNIFIL has conducted its armistice monitoring mission in Lebanon. In 2006, as the conflict

between Israel and Hezbollah in the southern part of Lebanon intensified, the UN significantly

increased the number of its peacekeepers from 2,000 to 15,000 thereby requesting greater par
ticipation from member states. In July 2007,

with the consent of the National Assembly,

the ROK government deployed a peacekeep
ing unit (Dongmyeong Unit) of 350 troops to

Tyre in the southern part of Lebanon. Dong
myeong Unit conducts reconnaissance and

surveillance activities to interdict the entry of

illegal weapons and militants into the region.

Surveillance activity at a fixed guard post

In addition, Dongmyeong Unit has carried out

various civil-military operations and humanitarian assistance activities.[25)] To date, more than

90,000 patients have been treated, and through Dongmyeong Unit’s support projects, such as


**23) “Dongmyeong,” means “bright light from the east” and signifies the hope of a bright future and peace.**

**24) UN Security Council resolution 425 and 426 (March 19, 1978).**

**25) it renovated old school buildings, built new roads, improved existing roads, and provided medical**
support activities for local residents.


Overseas deployment


-----

improving the sewage system and school facilities, as well as building libraries, local living

conditions have improved.

Dongmyeong Unit’s successful civil-military operations were well received in Lebanon, and

it has contributed significantly to stabilizing the situation in Southern Lebanon. The major

activities of Dongmyeong Unit are listed in <Chart 5-5>.

**<Chart 5-5> Dongmyeong Unit’s Major Activities**

|Col1|As of November 2016|
|---|---|
|Operational Activities|• Static surveillance operations: 33,190 times • Combined on-foot and vehicular reconnaissance with the Lebanese military: 3,780 times • Independent On-foot and vehicular reconnaissance with EOD reconnaissance: 38,384 times|
|Civil-Military Operations|• Medical support for local residents: 91,627 patients • Treatment of livestock: 22,314 heads • Computer, Korean, Taekwondo, and sewing classes: 5 towns • ‌Local projects for the residents: 284 projects (public facilities, school facilities, sewage facilities, and others) • Lebanese military support: 79 times|



**| Hanbit Unit[26)] in South Sudan | After Sudan gained its independence from the United**

Kingdom and Egypt, a civil war broke out between South and North Sudan in 1955 due to

various political and religious reasons. After two peace agreements, South Sudan became

an independent country in July 2011. The UN installed the United Nations Mission in the

Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) and requested troop contributions from member states.

After receiving the consent of the National

Assembly in September 2012, the ROK govern
ment established an engineering unit called the

South Sudan Reconstruction Support Group
(Hanbit Unit) in January 2013 and deployed

the unit to South Sudan on March 31, 2013.[27)]

Hanbit Unit is successfully conducting recon
struction activities such as the construction and Protective barrier improvement project at the Bor base

repairs of roads, airports, and bridges, while (November 2016)

also carrying out humanitarian assistance missions such as refugee protection as well as the

provision of drinking water and medical support in Bor, which was devastated by the civil war.

In 2014, Hanbit Unit constructed an impermeable embankment extending 17 kilometers

**26) A ‘big bright light that leads the world’ supporting the reconstruction of South Sudan and humanitarian activities.**

**27) Deployment to South Sudan is the ROK’s 7[th] United Nations peacekeeping force deployed after Somalia (reconstruction assistance),**
Western Sahara (medical support), Angola (reconstruction assistance), East Timor (security and border control),Lebanon (armistice
supervision), and Haiti (reconstruction assistance).


-----

along the White Nile; and, in 2015, it repaired 125 kilometers of road from Bor to Mangalla

which serves as the main supply route for the Bor region as well as the UN mission. Hanbit

Unit also operates the Hanbit Agricultural Technology Research Centre (HATRC) and the

Hanbit Vocational School to help farmers to become self-reliant by teaching farming tech
nology suitable to local conditions and supporting professional training. Hanbit unit’s major

activities are shown in <Chart 5-6>.

**<Chart 5-6> Hanbit Unit’s Major Activities**


|Col1|As of November 2016|
|---|---|
|Reconstruction Operations|• Expansion of the Bor Airport parking ramp (410m×110m) • Bor Airport runway repairs (1.8km×45m) • Construction of the Bor Airport heliport (70m×70m), helicopter maintenance area construction (1ea) • Bor~Mangalla road repairs (125km), Bor~Anyidi road repairs (24km) • Construction of landfill treatment (2 sites), sewage treatment (50m×50m, 3 sites) in Jonglei|
|Civil-Military Operations|• Medical support: Approx. 16,000 patients • Construction of Rwaldit Elementary School • Construction of an impermeable embankment along the White Nile River • Construction of a pump site at the impermeable embankment along the White Nile River • Operation of Hanbit farm: planted 600 saplings of mango and guava • Hanbit Agricultural Technology Research Centre: 113 students completed, 4th class in session • Hanbit vocational school (4 areas including civil engineering): 72 students completed, 2nd class in session|
|Refugee Protection|• Construction of a refugee camp • Treatment of gunshot wound patients: 819 patients • Water supply support • Protective wall around the refugee camp, construction of internal roads|
|UN Forces Facility Construction Aid|• ‌Construction of quarters: Eastern command (35), Ethiopia battalion (35), employee lodging (30), Nepal police base (8), Sri Lanka hospital(12), sewage treatment site (4) • ‌Reinforcement of Bor Base Security: protective wall, internal operation roads, guard posts, shelters for UN employees (4 sites, 16 buildings), base field of fire clearance (1.5km) • ‌Improvement of base drainage facilities: construction of receiving reservoirs (4 sites, 525kton), waterway/ road repairs (7.5km) • Pibor base employee lodging, reinforcement of security (protective wall, shelter, incineration plant, etc.)|


**| Activities of Observers and Staff Officers in UN Missions | The ROK government**

has dispatched more than 20 observers and staff officers to UN missions in major areas of

conflict, including Lebanon, South Sudan, Western Sahara, India and Pakistan, as well as

Haiti. Observers monitor armistice violations and conduct diverse missions including patrols,

investigations, reporting, as well as mediation under the control of each Mission HQ. Staff

officers perform their missions in major staff offices such as intelligence, operations, logistics,

and others.


-----

**2. Multinational forces’ Peace Operations**

Multinational Forces’ (MNF) peace operations are peacekeeping activities performed by

multinational forces that have been established and led by a regional security organization

or a particular country based on UN Security Council resolutions. In collaboration with UN

peacekeeping operations, MNF peace operations play an important role in the stabilization

and reconstruction of conflict regions.

In 2010, the ROK government deployed Ashena Unit to support reconstruction and stabiliza
tion missions in Afghanistan.

As of June 2014, Ashena Unit protected the reconstruction activities of the Provincial

Reconstruction Team (PRT) without experiencing any loss or damage during the span of more

than 1,800 escort and surveillance operations. As of November 2016, the ROK has deployed a

total of 311 troops to MNF peace operations. Major MNF activities are shown in <Chart 5-7>.

**<Chart 5-7> Multinational forces’ Major Activities**

**As of november 2016, unit: persons**

Bahrain Combined Maritime Forces
Staff Officers (4)

U.S. Africa Command
Coordination/Staff Officer (1)

U.S. Central Command **Gulf of Aden**
Coordination/Staff Officer (2) **Cheonghae Unit (302)**

Djibouti Coordination Officers (2)


**| Cheonghae Unit in somali Waters | Due to the civil war in Somalia, there was a signifi-**

cant increase in the amount of damages caused by piracy in the waters off the coast of Somalia

beginning from 2004. Consequently, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 1838[28)] and

**28)** ① Urges member nations to dispatch naval vessels and military aircraft; ② allows naval vessels and military aircraft to use all
measures within the scope of international law to combat piracy; and ③ calls for cooperation with the Somali transitional Government
to combat piracy. ④ the mechanism will ensure that food sent under the WFP (World Food Program) is transported safely.


-----

requested its members to deploy military vessels and aircraft to the region. The ROK govern
ment deployed Cheonghae Unit to the Gulf of Aden, off the coast of Somalia in March 2009

with the consent of the National Assembly.

Cheonghae Unit’s major missions are to ensure the safety of the ROK vessels, participate

in the maritime security operations of the Combined Maritime Forces (CMF), and protect the

ROK citizens against all contingencies. It is composed of one destroyer, one helicopter, three

rigid-hull inflatable boats (RIBs), and 302 troops as of November 2016.

Cheonghae Unit successfully executed

“Operation Dawn of the Gulf of Aden” in

January 2011, during which the unit rescued a

ROK ship and its crew from pirates. In March

2011 and August 2014, the unit successfully

executed evacuation operations for the ROK

nationals in Libya by safely evacuating them

as well as other foreign nationals to nearby Rescue operation for Korean nationals in Yemen (April 2015)

countries when the political situation in Libya

became unstable. Such accomplishments raised the stature of the ROK armed forces in the

world.

In April 2015, the first “floating” ROK embassy was opened on the destroyer Wang Geon

to safely evacuate the ROK citizens who were caught in Yemen’s capital Sana’a as well as to

maintain contact with and protect any ROK citizens who remained in Yemen. This is a stellar

example of the ROK’s protection of its overseas citizens through cooperation between MND

and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Piracy in the Gulf of Aden is gradually declining, but as

it is the main transport route for strategic goods such as crude oil and LNG, while 29% of the

total maritime cargo volume of the ROK flows through the Gulf of Aden, maintaining security

in the region is still paramount.[29)]

The major activities of Cheonghae Unit are shown in <Chart 5-8>.

**29) Two Chinese destroyers and one logistics support vessel are participating in anti-piracy**
operations. Japan has committed two vessels and two patrol aircraft since 2009 while also
providing one vessel to the CTF-151 in 2014, and acting as a commander of the CTF-151 in 2015.


Cheonghae Unit
MUSAT training


-----

**<Chart 5-8> Cheonghae Unit’s Major Activities**


|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|As of November 2016|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Convoy||Safe voyage escort||Maritime security operations|Counter-piracy operations|
|ROK vessels|Foreign vessels|ROK vessels|Foreign vessels|||
|476|1,736|11,555|2,842|386 times (783 days)|21 times / 31 vessels|


Protecting people

|Operation Dawn of the Gulf of Aden (2011. 1.)|Rescued all crew including the captain, shot 8 pirates, captured 5 alive|
|---|---|
|Evacuation operation of ROK nationals in Libya (2011. 3.)|37 ROK nationals evacuated to Malta and Greece from Libya|
|Evacuation operation of ROK nationals in Libya (2014. 8.)|18 ROK nationals and 86 foreigners evacuated to Malta from Libya|
|Evacuation operation of ROK nationals in Yemen (2015. 4.)|6 ROK nationals and 6 foreigners evacuated to Oman from Yemen|



**| Staff and Coordination Officers in Multinational Forces | The ROK military has dis-**

patched a total of ten staff and coordination officers to the CMF in Bahrain, the Combined

Joint Task Force-Horn of Africa (CJTF-HOA) in Djibouti, and the U.S. Central Command,

in order to support unit-level multinational force deployment activities. Their major missions

include performing staff duties for the CMF, establishing combined operational plans, sup
porting the rotation and combat services of the ROK military units deployed overseas, and

cooperating with local allied forces.

**3. Defense Exchanges and Cooperation Activities**

At the request of a given country, the ROK military deploys its forces to non-conflict areas,

where their safety can be secured given the low risk of battle, to conduct defense exchanges

and cooperation activities such as education and training, humanitarian assistance, as well as

disaster relief. In November 2013, the ROK government dispatched the Joint Support Group

for the Philippines (Araw Contingent) to support recovery efforts in the Philippines, which had

been hit by severe typhoons. Araw Contingent successfully accomplished its mission of recon
structing the damaged area and withdrew from the site in December 2014. In March 2014,

following the disappearance of a Malaysian aircraft with 239 passengers on board, Malaysia

requested support from its allies and partners to search for the wreckage. Although the ROK

forces did not discover any wreckage of the missing aircraft during the maritime search

operation, they conducted a prolonged, overseas multinational search operation despite a short

preparation time. As of November 2016, a total of 146 ROK troops are engaged in military

support and cooperation activities abroad, which is shown in <Chart 5-9> below.


-----

**<Chart 5-9> Participation in Defense Cooperation Activities**


**As of november 2016, unit: persons**

**UAE**
**Akh Unit (146)**

Sierra Leone
Medical personnel dispatched to fight Ebola (15)
(Returned in March 2015)

**| Akh Unit[30)] in the United Arab emirates | The UAE military requested the deployment**

of a ROK unit in August 2010 to improve their education and training standards as well as to

develop their defense structure by benchmarking the ROK military. In January 2011, the ROK

government deployed the UAE Military Training Cooperation Group (Akh Unit) comprised of

approximately 150 troops to Abu Dhabi in response to the request.

Akh Unit provides education and training to the UAE special

warfare units, conducts combined exercises and training with

the UAE forces, while also protecting the ROK citizens during

contingencies. Akh Unit successfully enhanced the operational

capabilities of the UAE special warfare units by improving

their training mechanisms. Also, through desert training in

a dry environment characterized by very high temperatures

that our troops cannot experience back home and by training

with the high-tech facilities and equipments of the UAE armed

forces, the ROK combined special operations capability in the

Middle East has improved greatly. In particular, high-altitude

and nighttime HALO training, which used to take as many as akh Unit training for special operations


**30) the name “akh” means “brother” in arabic.**


akh Unit special operations training


-----

6-7 years to complete, can now be completed in 6 months; sharing the UAE's state-of-the-art

facilities and equipment has also saved on the required training budget.

The ROK and the UAE have engaged in active exchanges as well as cooperation in many

defense areas since the deployment of the Akh Unit. In particular, through mutual visits by

representatives of special warfare training and other various specialties in the Army, Navy,

and Air Force, the two countries continue to strengthen mutual trust. Their major activities are

as summarized in <Chart 5-10>.

**<Chart 5-10> Akh Unit’s Major Activities**

|Col1|As of November 2016|
|---|---|
|Enhancement of the UAE’s military capabilities|• Contributing to the development of the UAE Armed Forces by improving their special warfare capabilities • Improving the education and training system of the UAE Armed Forces|
|Enhancement of ROK’s military capabilities|• Utilizing the high-tech facilities and equipment of the UAE to enhance special operations capabilities • Training to enhance survivability under harsh conditions (high temperatures above 50℃, desert) • Long-range live fire training and HALO training|
|Expansion of defense exchanges|• UAE observation of major ROK exercises and participation in ROK-UAE combined exercises • Exchanging officers for consignment education by each service of the ROK and UAE armed forces • Medical cooperation including treatment of UAE military patients and families at ROK civilian hospitals • ‌Establishment of a hub for defense diplomacy including defense industry export cooperation in the Middle East|



**| Deployment of Military Medical Personnel**

**to the Ebola Outbreak | Based on the urgent**

need for medical personnel to prevent the

spread of the Ebola virus, the ROK government

decided to send the Korea Disaster Relief Team
(KDRT), a medical team comprised of civil and

military medical personnel, to West Africa.

From December 2014 to March 2015, the Treatment of an Ebola patient in Sierra Leone (February 2015)

ROK military deployed 6 military doctors and

9 military nursing officers along with civilian medical personnel to Sierra Leone, one of many

countries most severely affected by the Ebola outbreak in West Africa.

**4. Expanding the Foundation for PKOs**

**| Establishing a Legal Basis for Overseas Deployments | The overseas deployment of**

the ROK military was based on the ROK Constitution, but there were no laws or regulations

stipulating the details of the deployments. In January 2010, the ROK government enacted the


-----

[United Nations Peacekeeping Operations Participation Act] to establish the legal basis for

efficient deployment of ROK military units to UN peacekeeping operations. However, there

is still no clear legal basis for MNF peace operations and defense cooperation activities. A

legislative bill to establish a legal basis for various overseas deployment activities, the bill

for the [Act on the Armed Forces’ Participation in Overseas Deployment Activities] has been

proposed and is being deliberated by the National Assembly.

The bill stipulates the requirements and procedures for the deployment of troops, as well

as the National Assembly’s democratic control over the deployment of troops, while also

including the legal protection for deployed servicemembers, the National Assembly’s right to

demand the withdrawal of troops, and the mandatory submission of performance reports after

withdrawal. Once enacted, the procedures and contents of the ROK’s overseas deployment

will be more clearly defined. The Act is also expected to increase the transparency and pre
dictability of overseas deployment activities.

**| Operation of a Standing Unit for Overseas Deployment | Since December 2009, a**

standing unit for overseas deployment comprised of approximately 3,000 troops has been on

standby, ready to deploy within one or two months after a PKO mission order is given.

The standing unit consists of a dedicated deployment unit, a designated reserve unit, and a

special designated unit, each of which are approximately 1,000 strong. The dedicated deploy
ment unit is the first to prepare for deployment in the event of an order to deploy. In July

2010, the International Peace Support Standby Force (IPSSF, Onnuri Unit[31)]) was established

as a unit solely devoted to overseas deployment. The designated reserve unit prepares for

the rotation of deployed personnel or additional deployment, and the special designated unit

prepares for various deployment requirements. <Chart 5-11> below shows the structure of

the standing unit for overseas deployment, and <Chart 5-12> shows the number of deployed

personnel.


**<Chart 5-11> Structure of the Standing Unit for Overseas Deployment**

**Joint Chiefs of Staff**

|Standing unit for ov|erseas deployment|
|---|---|
|||


**Dedicated deployment unit (IPSSF)** **Designated reserve unit** **Special designated unit**

*[ ‌Special designated units: Engineering, medical, military police, guard (Marine Corps), transportation (Navy and Air Force, UAVs, helicopters)]


**31) In the Korean name Onnuri, the syllable “On” means ‘holistic’ or ‘whole’ and “Nuri” means the world inhabited by people. Thus the**
name Onnuri signifies a unit that performs its missions all over the world.


-----

**<Chart 5-12> Number of Personnel Deployed from the Standing Unit**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|2010-November 2016|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Dongmyeong Unit|Ashena Unit|Akh Unit|Hanbit Unit|Total|
|1,071(8 rotations)|991(8 rotations)|1,650(11 rotations)|1,758(7 rotations)|5,470|



**| Reinforcing the Functions of the PKO Center | The PKO Center was established as a**

dedicated education organization for PKOs at the Joint Staff College in August 1995. In 2015,

MND changed the affiliation of the PKO Center to the Korea National Defense University

based on the [Act on the Establishment of the Korea National Defense University] and rein
forced its functions of education and research.

The PKO Center is exclusively responsible for providing pre-deployment education to key

officers and staff members of a deployed unit as well as to personnel deploying on individ
ual assignments. It is also advancing its education system by pursuing exchanges and coop
eration with the UN’s Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the UN Division

at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PKO Centers in other countries, police PKO centers, and

other national PKO related institutions. When the deployed units or individuals complete their

missions, the PKO Center publishes and distributes to relevant offices a booklet on the lessons

learned from the deployment while also including post-action reports.

In November 2013, the PKO Center acquired an education certificate for its UN Staff Course

from the UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), thus obtaining universal rec
ognition for its educational expertise. It is now striving for its Military Specialist Course to

be recognized by the UN. The PKO Center will gradually expand its functions and roles to

systematically support research, education, and training for PKOs. The number of personnel

who have been trained at the PKO Center is shown in <Chart 5-13>. As of 2017, the ROK

is preparing to hold military instructors’ training for UN member states in cooperation with

the UN. The ROK has also been selected as the host country of the annual conference of

the Asia-Pacific Peacekeeping Operations Center in 2018. The PKO Center will accordingly

expand its capabilities as a prime PKO education and training center. The number of personnel

trained by the PKO Center is shown in <Chart 5-13>.

**<Chart 5-13> Number of the Personnel Trained in the PKO Center**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|2015-November 2016|
|---|---|---|---|
|UN PKO|MNF Peace operations|Others|Total|
|1,976 (8 programs)|70 (5 programs)|646 (8 programs)|2,692|



**| Co-Chair of Experts Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations of the ASEAN**

**Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus | From 2014 to 2016, the ROK served as the co-chair**


-----

for the Experts’ Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations (PKO EWG)[32)] of the ASEAN

Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus) along with the Kingdom of Cambodia.

In September 2014 and September 2015 as

well as October 2016, PKO EWG conferences

were held in Seoul, during which current issues

faced by the UN Department for Peacekeeping

Operations were discussed.

In March 2016, as the co-chair of the EWG,

the ROK held an international PKO FTX in

India[33)] to share the ROK’s outstanding capabil
ADMM-Plus Expert’s Working Group on PKO (October 2016)

ities in international peacekeeping operations

as well as to gain recognition as a leading country in peacekeeping operations within the inter
national community.

As a co-chair of the EWG, the ROK will continue to work to establish a practical coopera
tion system among the member states. Through multilateral security meetings, the ROK will

further enhance its role in many agendas such as maritime security.

**| Promoting ROK-Vietnam Cooperation for PKO Activities | The ROK is actively**

promoting cooperation on international peacekeeping activities with Vietnam after signing

a Memorandum of Understanding on cooperation with Vietnam in September 2015. In

December 2015 and September 2016, the ROK sent an expert on international peacekeeping

operations to the Vietnamese PKO Center to provide advice on preparations for PKO deploy
ments to overseas missions. The ROK expert passed on the expertise and know-how of the

ROK, based on the ROK’s PKO deployment experiences, to the Vietnamese military and

trained the participants on specific crisis scenarios as well as survival methods necessary for

the protection of military bases.

In September 2016, MND invited Vietnamese officers to the four-week long UN Staff

Program held at the ROK PKO Center to share its know-how in conducting UN peacekeeping

missions as military staff officers, thus contributing to strengthening the Vietnamese mili
tary’s international peacekeeping operations capabilities.


**32) The ADMM-Plus is comprised of Expert’s Working Groups (EWG) on ① peacekeeping operations, ② counter-terrorism, ③ maritime**
security, ④ military medicine, ⑤ humanitarian aid and disaster relief, ⑥ humanitarian mine action, and on ⑦ cyber security.
One ASEAN country and one PLUS country assume co-chairmanship of each EWG. There are 10 ASEAN countries (Laos, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Vietnam, Brunei, Singapore, Indonesia, the Philippines, Cambodia, and Thailand) and 8 PLUS countries (Republic of Korea,
USA, China, Japan, Russia, Australia, New Zealand, and India).

**33) In March 2016, the first joint Field Training Exercise on international peacekeeping operations and humanitarian mine action was**
held in Pune, India with a total of 280 personnel from the 18 countries that participate in the ADMM-Plus. From the Republic
of Korea, 31 instructors and members of Onnuri unit, ROK Peace Keeping Forces, participated in training sessions for on-foot
reconnaissance and checkpoint operation, escort operation, and search and interdiction operations.


-----

###### Chapter
# 6

Military Measures in Accordance with Changing
Inter-Korean Relations


-----

Section 1 ‌Promoting Military Confidence-building Considering

Advancements in Inter-Korean Relations 184

Section 2 ‌Ensuring Inter-Korean Exchanges and Cooperation,

and Providing Humanitarian Assistance 189


-----

**Section 1 Promoting Military Confidence-**
**building Considering Advancements in**
**Inter-Korean Relations**

Although the ROK government has persistently exerted its efforts to build military confidence and reduce

military tension between the two Koreas in order to end the vicious cycle of progress and setbacks in

inter-Korean relations and to induce North Korea to become a responsible member of the international

community, North Korea continues to carry out reckless provocations with its nuclear tests and long-range

ballistic missile tests. Nevertheless, MND is carrying out diverse efforts to establish a sustainable peace

on the Korean peninsula. If North Korea Peninsula to abandon its nuclear project and walk the path of

mutual prosperity, the ministry will gradually pursue military confidence-building measures while providing

military assurance for inter-Korean exchanges and cooperation projects.

**1. Reducing Inter-Korean Military Tension and Pursuing Military Confidence-**
**Building**

In order to establish a sustainable peace on the Korean Peninsula, reducing military tension

and building military confidence are essential, along with making headway in inter-Korean

relations. As part of the struggle to transform the demilitarized zone, which is currently heavily

armed on both sides, into an area of peace and confidence, the ROK government proposed

working together with North Korea to create the DMZ World Eco-Peace Park during the first

inter-Korean authorities talks held from December 11 to December 12, 2015 in Kaesong.

MND has attempted to raise the issue of reducing tension and building military confidence

with North Korea on every occasion they have met. For instance, during the inter-Korean high
level military talks[1)] that took place on February 12 and February 14, 2014 at Panmunjom, the

participating MND delegates actively addressed the ROK’s desire to reduce military tension

and put an end to the mutual slander and defamation. Furthermore, even during the inter-Ko
rean high-level military talks held in October 15, 2014, the ROK once again urged the North to

**1) “High-level inter-Korean military contact” in the “2014 Defense White Paper” has been changed to**
“inter-Korean high-level military talks” in order to prevent overlap and confusion with various other
inter-Korean bilateral talks.

6[th] anniversary
of the shelling of
Yeonpyeongdo Island


-----

cooperate in reducing military tension and building military confidence by accentuating such

matters as respecting and observing the Northern Limit Line (NLL), acknowledging responsi
bility for the sinking of the ROKS Cheonan and the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo Island in 2010,

and establishing a direct inter-Korean military hotline.

In order to resolve the heightened tensions

caused by the land mine and artillery provoca
tions by North Korea in August 2015, the two

Koreas held an inter-Korean high-level talks

through which the “8·25 Agreement”[2)] was

drafted. In the agreement, North Korea clearly

expressed its regret for the provocations and

agreed to work towards effectively preventing High-level talks between the ROK and North Korea

the recurrence of such incidents. (August 2015)

The agreement was especially meaningful in that it not only ended the vicious cycle of retal
iation, but also presented an opportunity to instill the idea that for any type of provocation,

responsibility inevitably follows. During the two days of talks held on December 11 and 12,

it was emphasized that North Korea’s nuclear issues have to be resolved first for continued

advancement in inter-Korean relations.

Despite such efforts, North Korea continues to criticize and threaten the ROK by continuing

its nuclear tests, test firing ballistic missiles, and making impractical demands such as sus
pending the ROK-U.S. combined exercises. The ROK government currently devotes— and

will continue to channel— all its energy and resources necessary to persuading North Korea

to abandon its nuclear program, which gravely threatens both the Korean people and the entire

international community. If inter-Korean relations develop in the way the ROK envisions it,

the ROK government plans to continue with its efforts to establish the DMZ World Eco-Peace

Park and build military confidence. In the event that inter-Korean authorities talks and military

talks take place in the future, MND will demand North Korea to implement those matters that

have already been agreed to, such as non-aggression and the non-use of military force, mutual

cessation of slander and defamation, prevention of accidental conflicts, and the installation of

military hotline, while gradually pursuing measures to reduce military tension and build con
fidence.

**2) Key components include agreeing to host high-level talks in the near future; expressing regret for the ROK servicemembers who were**
maimed; agreeing to cease loudspeaker propaganda broadcasts towards North Korea as long as “abnormal situations” do not occur;
lifting North Korea’s quasi-state of war; reuniting separated family members; and promoting various types of exchanges in the private
sector.


-----

**2. North Korea’s Offensive Towards the ROK and the ROK’s Response**

In order to influence our government’s policies, North Korea is repeatedly making threats

in an attempt to create a division in our society and carrying out deceptive peace offensives.

By launching long-range ballistic missiles on December 12, 2012 and undertaking its third

nuclear test on February 12, 2013, North Korea put pressures on the incoming ROK admin
istration to change its North Korea policy. Moreover, North Korea continued to heighten

tensions by arguing for full abrogation of the Armistice Agreement and the Inter-Korean

Non-Aggression Agreement and nullification of the Joint Declaration of Denuclearization.

In addition, the North cut off the inter-Korean military hotlines and shut down the Kaesong

Industrial Complex, banishing the ROK workers and liquidating our assets in the process.

Military threats and provocations, such as the firing of intermediate and short-range ballistic

missiles, infiltration via miniature UAVs, and the gunning down of propaganda balloons of

civilian organizations using anti-aircraft machine guns, have also persisted.

The military tension between the two Koreas mounted to unprecedented levels amid the

landmine and artillery provocations inside the DMZ by North Korea in August 2015. The

military standoff that resulted from these provocations seemed to abate temporarily after the

signing of the 8·25 Agreement, but it was short-lived as North Korea used the ROK’s distribu
tion of civilian-made propaganda leaflets, the enactment of the North Korean Human Rights

Act, and the ROK President’s speech at the UN General Assembly as pretexts for resuming its

criticisms and threats against the ROK.

Despite emphasizing the need to improve inter-Korean relations and proposing to hold

inter-Korean military talks during his New Year’s address on January 1, 2016, Kim Jong-un

conducted North Korea’s fourth nuclear test on January 6 and test-fired SLBMs as well as

various other types of ballistic missiles. Roughly eight months later, on September 9, Kim

initiated the fifth nuclear test, bringing the numbers of nuclear tests and ballistic missile

launches to three and about 30, respectively, since the start of his regime.

Regarding North Korea’s disregard for warnings given by both the ROK and the international

community, as well as actions that clearly violate the UN Security Council resolutions, such

as carrying out nuclear tests and launching missiles, the ROK government is in the process of

drawing up more powerful measures— on an entirely different scale from those of previous

methods— in a bid to force North Korea to face the consequences and ultimately abandon its

nuclear program. In order to force North Korea into abandoning its nuclear program, greater

emphasis has been placed on diplomatic moves, such as adopting UN Security Council Reso
lution 2270— a much stricter sanction on inspecting cargoes to and from North Korea— and

2321, which placed a cap on North Korea’s coal exports and added new materials to the trade

ban list. Additionally, the ROK government imposed unilateral sanctions of its own including


-----

the total suspension of the Kaesong Industrial Complex.

Following the Seventh Congress of the Workers’ Party of Korea in May 2016, North Korea

continued its deceptive peace offensive in order to evade sanctions and pressure from the

international community. During the congress, North Korea took on a two-faced approach

of clearly stating its resolve to continue the pursuit of its “Byungjin” (Parallel Development)

policy of economic and nuclear developments in the Party’s charter and its threats[3)] against

the ROK, while also stating that it would work toward holding talks and negotiations at each

level and improving inter-Korean relations. Furthermore, North Korea continued its insincere

united front tactics against the ROK by proposing inter-Korean military talks through joint

statements by the government, party, and other organizations and through public letters by the

National Defense Commission, and a great gathering for unification under names of various

agencies, the party, and other organizations.

The ROK government responded by expressing disappointment and concerns that North

Korea had proposed inter-Korean military talks without any mention of its nuclear situation

while stressing that North Korea’s provocative actions, such as conducting nuclear tests and

test-firing missiles, were mainly to blame for the heightened tension on the Korean Peninsula.

Likewise, the ROK government demanded a forthright statement of the North’s position on

denuclearization and reiterated that if they were truly sincere about establishing peace and

stability on the Korean Peninsula, they should first and foremost express their clear intent for

denuclearization and then progress through their actions.

While keeping a close watch on potential changes in the U.S.’ North Korea policy during

the Trump administration, the ROK government will continue to maintain its current policy

tenets, such as the position of not recognizing North Korea as a nuclear state and not accepting

dialogue for the sake of dialogue, and will strive to induce changes in the North Korean regime

through different measures.

**3. Developing Arms Control Policies and Strengthening Arms Control Capacity**
**in Preparation for Unification**


In order to achieve a sustainable peace on the Korean Peninsula, the ROK government is

working to build inter-Korean military confidence and improve its arms control policy.

**3) Persistent threats made against the ROK during the economic debate of the 7th congress of the**
WPK, such as “pursuing ‘military-first’ policies regarding nuclear weapons and uniting their two
‘liberation’ operations – one of Seoul and one of the southern half of the peninsula – into one.”


MND briefing on North
Korea’s 5[th] nuclear test


-----

Although the two Koreas jointly attempted to pursue some military confidence measures such

as mutual non-aggression and the suspension of slandering, North Korea’s violation of the

agreement and its continued military provocations have led to little or no confidence-building

in inter-Korean arms control.

The ROK government is actively participating in major international disarmament and

non-proliferation regimes such as the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), Chemical

Weapons Convention (CWC), and Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) in order to

promote transparency and confidence regarding arms control while also contributing to global

peace and security. Meanwhile, North Korea is not part of any of these regimes and is rejecting

its duties and responsibilities toward peace and security of the international community by

violating UN Security Council resolutions and adhering to its nuclear and missile develop
ment. Until North Korea abandons its nuclear program and becomes a responsible member of

the international community, the ROK government will continue to exert pressure and impose

sanctions on North Korea in concert with the international community.

In spite of the ongoing inter-Korean political and military confrontations, MND is seeking

various new ways to shape the conditions for promoting arms control through such means as

linking the military and non-military domains between the two Koreas. For example, MND

hosted an arms control seminar in order to gather experts’ opinions on arms control policies

and has run an advisory committee since. It has also published various publications such as the

“East Asian Strategic Review” and “Arms Control on the Korean Peninsula.”

Meanwhile, the Korea Arms Control Verification Agency provides a specialized course on

arms control via commissioned education and conducts the ROK-U.S. combined inspection

training. The agency is looking to further strengthen global cooperation through exchanges

and cooperation with other arms control verification agencies in the U.S., Germany, and the

Czech Republic, among others.

MND plans to gradually promote inter-Korean arms control as part of the government’s

larger goal of supporting unification policies and making headway in inter-Korean relations.

The basic plan for improving arms control is to prioritize confidence-building measures to the

extent of gaining North Korea’s cooperation and decide whether to pursue either operational

arms control or structural arms control depending on the progress in inter-Korean relations.

MND will continue to improve the conditions and capacity for arms control in preparation

for unification while maintaining a firm defense posture and stably managing the security

situation on the Korean Peninsula.


-----

**Section 2 Ensuring Inter-Korean**
**Exchanges and Cooperation, and Providing**
**Humanitarian Assistance**

In order to provide military support to the government’s North Korea policy, MND is carrying out military

assurance measures for inter-Korean exchange and cooperation projects such as inter-Korean crossings

and the operation of military hotlines. The ministry is also trying to find humanitarian solutions to issues

pertaining to prison of war (POW). In a similar context, the remains of Chinese soldiers buried in the ROK

soil since the Korean War have been repatriated, and the ministry is planning to pursue the “Inter-Korean

Joint Remains Excavation Project,” provided that appropriate conditions are met in inter-Korean relations.


**1. Military Assurance for Inter-Korean Crossings**

Direct inter-Korean crossings have so far been carried out via land, sea and air routes.

The majority of such crossings occur via land and occasionally by air, but since the May 24

Measure,[4)] navigation by North Korean ship in the ROK territorial waters has been prohib
ited. Land crossings are permitted via roads and railroads that lie within the Joint Administra
tive Areas in the western and eastern corridors; however, railroad crossings remain suspended

since December 2008. Most of the land crossings are for the purpose of entering the Kaesong

Industrial Complex and thus take place through the western corridor while eastern corridor

crossings occur only when they are required for such events as reunions of separated families.

Moreover, the ROK military provides military assurance during land crossings as previously

agreed with the United Nations Command (UNC) and the North Korean military, thereby

providing security and allowing convoys within the DMZ.

Air crossings are generally carried out via a direct route over the West Sea. During the 2014

Incheon Asian Games, North Korean athletes and other high-ranking officials used airplanes

to enter and leave the ROK. In 2015, two ROK members visited the North using the air route—

one being Lee Hee-ho, the widow of the former ROK President Kim Dae-jung, and the other

being members of an inter-Korean workers’ soccer tournament. The ROK military considers

the level of military security that can be provided whenever there is a flight request from


**4) The ROK government’s North Korea policy established in response to North Korea’s attack on the ROKS Cheonan that prohibits North**
Korean ship in our waters, trade and commerce (excluding the Kaesong Industrial Complex), and new investments into North Korea,
and temporarily suspends our North Korean aid and support projects.


-----

North Korea in order to assure the safe passage of aircraft and prepares contingency plans for

emergency situations.

**2. Inter-Korean Military Hotlines**

The ROK and North Korea have long maintained hotlines between their respective military

situation rooms located in the eastern and western corridors. These hotlines do not only aid the

process of inter-Korean crossings, but can also serve as a channel for communication during

emergency. Therefore, the ROK government has always made an effort to ensure that the com
munication lines remain properly functioning and active at all times. Old hotlines have been

upgraded, while other materials and equipment have been reinforced, in order to maintain a

stable communication system.

In spite of such efforts, North Korea continues to occasionally act on its own accord by

cutting the communication lines depending on inter-Korean relations at the time. This has

already happened twice, once in 2013 and again in 2016. Even when it has cut off the military

hotlines, North Korea would send a telephone message if it has a clear agenda for discussions,

such as holding military talks.

The role of the military hotline becomes even more crucial during periods of acute inter-Ko
rean tension. Military hotlines must always be maintained not only to support stable inter-Ko
rean exchanges and cooperation but also to prevent accidental conflicts; the hotlines must not

be disconnected unilaterally by one side.

**3. Resolving the ROK POW Issues**

**| ROK POWs: Whereabouts, Family Reunions and Repatriation | The ROK government**

continues to propose to North Korea peaceful, humanitarian ways of resolving issues pertain
ing to the ROK POW’s survival and repatriation.

As of 2015, the number of surviving POWs that have been confirmed through reunions of

separated families was 52, of whom 18 have so far been reunited with their families.

The ROK government is also working to safely repatriate POWs and their families who

escaped to a third country. Once it is confirmed that a POW and his or her family have

escaped North Korea, a “government-wide ROK Military POW task force” is formed in order

to guarantee their safety, as well as their swift repatriation to the ROK.

In 2015, the Act on the Repatriation and Treatment of the Republic of Korea Armed Forces

Prisoners of War was amended in order to allow legal aid and support by the ROK government


-----

in the process of repatriating POW remains.

From 1994 to 2016, a total of 80 POWs were successfully returned to the ROK, as outlined in

more detail in <Chart 6-1>. Since 2011, however, there has not been any additional repatriation

of the ROK POWs due to the aging of the prisoners and the tougher defector surveillance by

North Korea.

**<Chart 6-1> Repatriated POWs**


**As of November 2016, Unit: person**

|Year|Total|1994|1997|1998|1999|2000|2001|2002|2003|2004|2005|2006|2007|2008|2009|2010|2011~2016|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|POW|80|1|1|4|2|9|6|6|5|14|11|7|4|6|3|1|-|



**| Supporting Resettlement of the Repatriated ROK POWs | Following the repatriation**

of the late Lieutenant Cho Chang-ho in 1994, the ROK government enacted the “Act on the

Repatriation and Treatment of the Republic of Korea Armed Forces Prisoners of War,” which

is designed to support the resettlement of repatriated prisoners of war in the ROK. In addition,

families of the deceased prisoners of war who come to the ROK are registered as family

members of a prisoner of war from the place of detention.[5)] Such persons are not only provided

with support designed for North Korean defectors, but are given additional subsidies as family

members of prisoners of war. In 2013, the related laws were revised to help the repatriated

prisoners of war to adapt to society, and measures such as pensions, housing, and medical

subsidies were introduced.

As of November 2016, the number of surviving repatriated prisoners of war stood at 36. In

total, 80 former prisoners of war have been repatriated. Since 2012, the government has been

supporting the settlement of former prisoners of war through professional civilian organiza
tions. The government also holds meetings and visitations to listen to their needs.

The government will continue to work towards resolving the issues surrounding prisoners

of war, as well as strengthening international cooperation to facilitate their repatriation, and

ensuring the safety of prisoners of war and their families who escape from North Korea.


**5) The term “family members of a prisoner of war from the place of detention” refers to persons who are members of a family that a**

ROK military prisoner of war, who died while being detained or before being registered pursuant to Article 6 or who have returned to
the ROK, had formed in the place of detention, and who have not acquired the nationality of a foreign country since escaping from
the place of detention. (Clause 3 of Article 2 of the Act on the Repatriation and Treatment of the Republic of Korea Armed Forces
Prisoners of War)


-----

**4. Inter-Korean Joint Excavation of Remains of Soldiers, and Repatriation of**
**Chinese Soldiers’ Remains**

During the second inter-Korean ministerial talks held in November 2007, the two Koreas

agreed to cooperate in resolving issues regarding the excavation of the remains of soldiers

who died during the Korean War. However, implementation of the agreement has been stalled

for nearly ten years by North Korea’s refusal to cooperate. As emphasized in the Ministry

of National Defense’s report published in January 2015, the ministry plans to execute the

inter-Korean joint excavation project once the conditions are set.

From humanitarian perspective, the Ministry of National Defense has repatriated the

remains of Chinese soldiers excavated in the ROK on a yearly basis. The repatriation of

soldiers’ remains was suggested by the ROK in June 2013, and so far 541 sets of remains

have been returned to China, beginning with those of 437 soldiers sent to China in March

2014. The nationality of the soldiers whose remains are found is determined by a committee

comprised of civilian experts. Among the criteria considered in determining the nationality of

the remains are forensic anthropological analysis, which looks at such elements as ethnicity,

gender, and age, as well as analysis of battle records, physical remains and articles found at the

site of excavation. In addition, DNA analysis and other scientific methods were added in 2015

to improve the accuracy and credibility of the analysis.

The project to return the remains of Chinese soldiers is considered to have allowed the two

countries to not only consolidate their relationship as “strategic partners” but also to instill a

sense of friendship. “We express our solemn respect upon the return of the souls of Chinese

soldiers,” the spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic

of China stated in a briefing. President of the People's Republic of China Xi Jinping also

expressed sincere gratitude for the ROK’s help in returning the remains at the 2014 Nuclear

Security Summit held in The Hague, the Neth
erlands. Chinese media and the public also

expressed their appreciation at the efforts made

by the ROK government in the course of the

project.

The remains of Chinese soldiers who died

during the Korean War will continue to be

returned to China annually before China’s

The Transfer Ceremony of Chinese soldiers’ Remains

Qingming Festival in early April as agreed (March 2016)

between the two nations.


-----

-----

###### Chapter
# 7

Creating a Proud and Rewarding Environment for
Military Service


-----

Section 1 Barracks Culture Innovation 196

Section 2 Improvement of Welfare for Servicemembers 202

Section 3 Development of the Defense Medical System 211

Section 4 Expansion of Support for Retiring Servicemembers 217

Section 5 Improvement of Benefits for the Public 223


-----

**section 1 Barracks Culture Innovation**

MND is implementing policy initiatives to fundamentally resolve issues such as malicious behaviors in

barracks and relaxation of military discipline and to establish “barracks culture trusted by the people.”

Pursuing “autonomy and discipline,” “safety and communication,” and “human rights and character

building” MND is striving to build barracks that are safe and sound, communicate with the society, respect

human rights, balance autonomy and responsibility, and uphold strong discipline. to this end, efforts have

been directed to amending relevant laws and regulations, raising standards for conscription, cultivating

good character and moral principles, and enhancing junior-level officer leadership.

**1. focus of Policy Implementation**

Under its goal of establishing an “open barracks culture trusted by the people,” MND is

pursuing the values of “autonomy and discipline, safety and communications, and human

rights and character,” and is innovating barracks culture according to the following five

themes: ① safe and sound barracks; ② open barracks that communicate with society; ③

barracks where human rights are guaranteed; ④ barracks where autonomy and responsibility

are harmonized; and ⑤ strong and disciplined barracks.

In 2015, MND laid the foundations for innovation by consolidating the relevant laws and

regulations and, in 2016, established a consensus on these innovations within the barracks, and

continued to expand its effort on this initiative. This has led to the tangible results of reduction

in the loss of life, fewer accidents, and greater public trust towards the military. MND will

continue striving to establish a bright, healthy barracks culture by regularly evaluating the

achievements of the drive to meet the innovation goals.

**<Chart 7-1> Open Barracks Culture Innovation Plan**

|Phase 1 (2015)|Phase 2 (2016)|Phase 3 (2017-2018)|
|---|---|---|
|establishment of a foundation (Laws and system maintenance, budget allocation)|achievement of greater results (On-site focused implementation)|establishment of an open barracks culture (complete goals, stable promotion)|



**2. Implementation by Theme**

**| safe and sound Barracks | MND has amended and improved the relevant laws and**

regulations to create a service environment that allows the parents of the servicemembers to


-----

send their children to the military without concern and ensures the health and safety of ser
vicemembers during their term of service. In order to prevent the enlistment of those who

are unfit for active service, MND has enhanced the system for assessing a person’s fitness

for military service by improving the methods of psychological examination adopted by the

Military Manpower Administration,[1)] employing more personnel specialized in psychological

examinations, toughening the requirements for admission to active duty, and extending the

period during which military service candidates can undergo a physical checkup. Once ser
vicemembers join the military, MND conducts personality tests, suicide prevention education,

socio-metric tests of interpersonal relationships,[2)] and other measures in order to identify

servicemembers early on who cannot adapt

to military service due to personality, family

background, interpersonal relationships or

other problems. Maladjusted servicemembers

are systemically managed through treatment

programs ranging from counseling by profes
sional counselors to admission to the Green

Camp and psychiatric treatment. Suicide prevention education for the rOK air Force

**<Chart 7-2> Plan to Increase the number of Professional Counselors for servicemembers**


|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Unit: person|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Category|2014|2015|2016|2017|
|No. of counselors|246|297|346|383|


*[ Operating 23 professional counselors for sexual harassment since 2015]

The outdated facilities of fourteen Green Camps were renovated throughout 2015 and 2016,

and MND aims to employ one professional counselor for each regimental unit by 2017. MND

is also establishing a support system for the Green Camp program by setting up mental health

centers within eight military hospitals including the Armed Forces Capital Hospital and the

Armed Forces Yangju Hospital.

Remote units and small-scale barracks facilities which can easily escape the commanders’

attention are being integrated into battalion-level camps, and more CCTVs will be installed to

manage units.


**1) a psychological examination that evaluates the degree of illness and mental and physical disability and determines whether**
candidates are suitable for military service.

**2) a psychological examination that complements the limits of the existing self-report test,it is designed to obtain objective information**
on an individual through the evaluation of that individual by other members of the group to which she or he belongs, and to evaluate
the degree of maladjustment to military service and interpersonal interaction within the group.


-----

**| Open Barracks that Communicate with society | The ROK military is fostering an**

open barracks environment that communicates with society to enable servicemembers to

carry out their military service in a productive manner without feeling disconnected from their

parents and friends during their military life.

The military has established more SNS communication channels, and installed receive-only

mobile phones for common use and public video telephones in company- and platoon-level

units, while running Internet cafes in division-, battalion- and higher-level units and regularly

holding open-door events at each post.

In order to create a favorable environment

for servicemembers’ self-development and rec
reational activities, the military has operated

the “Talent Donation Bank for Soldiers” since

2016, which involves civilian groups and

experts from a wide range of fields including

education, culture, arts and craft, and sports.[3)]

The military also provides servicemembers

recycling Craft Club

with access to online learning contents in

diverse areas including language courses and education for certificates.

The military also supports servicemembers’ efforts to overcome the interruption to their

studies caused by military service and to carry out a productive military service. The military

plans to continue its discussions with other relevant institutions such as the Ministry of

Education and universities in a bid to encourage more universities to offer remote learning

courses for the military and award academic credits for completion of the military specialist

curriculum and, eventually, for military service experience.

**| Barracks Where Human Rights are Guaranteed | Based on the awareness that true**

comradeship and the development of a strong military are only possible when servicemem
bers’ human rights are respected, the military is establishing “barracks where human rights

are guaranteed” by providing stronger character- building education, guaranteeing the rights

of servicemembers, and toughening the punishments for those who violate human rights.

In order to cultivate knowledge in the humanities among servicemembers and create a

culture of respect and care for others, more time has been allocated for character building

on officer training courses, while participation-oriented, self-directed character education

for servicemembers are being conducted by civilian experts. The military is also striving to

**3) a program that provides servicemembers with opportunities to learn in classes in various areas such as music, foreign languages, and**
sports with the involvement of civilian groups and experts


-----

establish a reading culture among service
members by expanding the reading coaching

program and setting up book cafes for remote

units. By doing so, the military is creating an

environment where servicemembers learn to

fully respect and appreciate human rights while

building their character.

The military has improved the military

Military book cafe in a remote unit

judicial system for ensuring its independence

and professionalism and reflecting the public’s demands. The general court-martials held

in peacetime at the division level have been abolished, and only corps or higher-level units

are allowed to run a military court. The system that appoints a field officer as a judge has

been restricted to cases that require advanced military expertise and experience, and can be

operated only after approval by the Chief of Staff of each service or the Minister of National

Defense. The relevant laws have been amended so that the jurisdiction authorities can only

reduce the sentence of any given crime to two-thirds of the stipulated sentence. Also, cases

where the fairness of the investigation could be infringed are to be moved to the jurisdiction of

upper units in accordance with the amendments.

In order to eradicate beatings and cruel treatments in barracks, the military criminal law,

which had previously imposed additional punishment only for assaults and threats against

superior officers, sentries, and soldiers on duty, has been revised and a special clause on the

punishment for assaults and threats between servicemembers has been created so that any

such acts of violence occurring in the military can be prosecuted with or without the victim’s

consent.

Furthermore, the involvement of external agencies and civilian experts - such as the police,

the National Forensic Service, and forensic research institutes of university hospitals - in the

early stages of an investigation has been expanded to ensure objectivity, fairness and transpar
ency in the handling of such incidents.

MND has increased the number of counselors at MND Help Call Center to provide 24-hour

counseling on the difficulties experienced during military service. MND is also operating the

Military Human Rights Guard System to enable servicemembers to report human rights viola
tions via the Internet, as well as the National Defense Human Rights Monitoring Group, which

comprises diverse members such as soldiers and soldiers’ parents. The identity of an informant

must be protected since clauses guaranteeing confidentiality for those reporting human rights

violations in the military and prohibiting disadvantages against those who request a grievance


-----

review are now stipulated in the relevant laws.[4)]

The ROK military is constantly striving to eliminate harmful practices in barracks

stemming from wrong customs and to create warm barracks where mutual respect and care is

guaranteed and where servicemembers recognize their subordinates as precious human beings

and colleagues.

**| Barracks Where Autonomy and Responsibility Are Harmonized | In order to create**

“barracks where autonomy and responsibility are harmonized,” and in which servicemembers

act autonomously and take responsibility for their actions, MND has formulated and imple
mented behavioral standards which require them to concentrate on education and training

during their work hours while guaranteeing them sufficient time to spend on self-development

and hobbies after work.

MND is implementing a system that allows soldiers to choose their leave dates, and grants

visits to border patrol units including general outposts (GOPs) on holidays and regular units

on weekdays. Through this system, which is tailored to the specific conditions of each unit,

MND strives to alleviate servicemembers’ feelings of pressure during military service and

their sense of isolation from society.

MND is also making efforts to boost the morale of servicemembers by upgrading small,

outdated military barracks and expanding cultural and sports facilities including indoor

fitness centers, futsal fields and military community centers, while improving working condi
tions for servicemembers by outsourcing unit maintenance works including cleaning, laundry

and facility management to civilian firms.

**| strong and Disciplined Barracks | In order to foster elite forces capable of fighting and**

defeating an enemy, the military is establishing strong and disciplined barracks by strength
ening leadership and military ethics education, rewarding meritorious services and punishing

wrongdoing in accordance with the laws and regulations, and creating comprehensive

measures aimed at eliminating sexual violence.

The military has toughened the criteria for evaluations to screen inapt personnel, such as the

aptitude evaluation for commissioning, to prevent people of poor character from being com
missioned, while cultivating proper values in officers through the expansion of education on

leadership and military ethics.

**4) the Framework act on Military Status and Service (enforced on June 30, 2016)**

holiday visits border
patrol units


-----

The military deals strictly with any acts that disturb harmony and unity within units, such

as disorder in the command system, work-related bribery, and driving under the influence,

in a bid to foster united units characterized by mutual trust between superiors and subordi
nates, strong leadership, and authority. The requirements for the promotion of NCOs based on

years of continuous service and the criteria in screening the inapt for active service have been

toughened to bar in sincere members who lack the qualities required of officers from being

promoted and to retire them early.

The military has established a gender equality center in each service, employed gender

equality officers in division-level units, and implemented comprehensive measures to stamp

out sexual violence in barracks, including the development and utilization of smartphone

applications for reporting sexual abuse. To prevent and eradicate sexual violence in barracks,

education centered on discussions and case studies, and lectures on sexual violence prevention

are held every quarter for field officers and higher-ranking officers. The military will keep

a record of the officers who do not complete the education or fail to pass an assessment, and

reflect it in personnel management. Sexual offenders receive a criminal punishment as well as

disciplinary measures at the same time, while those subject to severe disciplinary actions are

brought before the Active Service Inaptitude Evaluation Board. In addition, the relevant laws

have been revised to restrict those with a sexual abuse criminal record from being appoint
ment as a cadre, and to punish those who condone, or had been negligent in taking action

against, sexual violence.


-----

**section 2 Improvement of Welfare for**
**servicemembers**

Based on the Second Military Personnel Welfare Basic Plan (2013~2017) drawn up in 2013, MND is

enhancing its basic welfare for servicemembers including food, clothing and shelter, modernizing barracks

facilities, and expanding its sports and culture programs. MND has secured additional welfare facilities,

expanded the welfare infrastructure including the enhancement of convenience facilities, and improved

the remuneration system for military personnel. Furthermore, the range of supportive measures for

military families has been expanded to help military personnel focus on their mission of safeguarding the

rOK territory and people.

**1. Implementation of the second Military Personnel Welfare Basic Plan**

MND is pursuing seventy-seven detailed tasks encompassing soldiers’ welfare, housing

security and family welfare under the “Second Basic Plan for Military Welfare” established

in 2013. MND is striving to ensure that delayed projects are carried out according to plan by

securing the required budget in close consultation with the relevant ministries and the National

Assembly and rationalizing the implementation plans.

**<Chart 7-3> Major Details of the second Military Personnel Welfare Basic Plan**



-  Improve the quality of clothing
and personal gear

-  Modernize military barracks

-  Expand sports, cultural programs

servicemembers

-  Vitalize maternity protection system

-  Improve convenience facilities

-  Expand military childcare facilities

-  Enhance the educational environment
for military children


**Improve Military** **Improve Welfare and**
**Remuneration** **Treatment for**
**system** **servicemembers**

**expand support for** **expand Welfare**
**Military families** **Infrastructure**


-----

**2. Improvement of Welfare and Treatment for servicemembers**

**| Increasing the salaries and Allowances of soldiers | For the state to guarantee the**

basic costs needed during military service, the military will double soldiers’ salaries between

2012 and 2017, with a corporal’s monthly salary reaching 195,000 won by 2017.

In order to improve the remuneration of soldiers working in harsh environments such

as remote areas, the special location allowances have been raised by 50 percent. With this

increase, soldiers in GPs are paid 25,000 won/month in special location allowances and 15,000

won in additional allowances, while military personnel such as marines who are dispatched to

carry out special missions are given 3,000 won/day in hazardous duty allowances.

In 2016, services of the Narasarang Card were expanded to include much needed benefits for

barrack life, such as discounts at military supermarkets and on public phone use. In addition,

the free insurance offered to servicemembers provides up to 150 million won of coverage in

the event of an accident during leave or an off-post visit, a significant increase from the previ
ously available amount. Under the newly established “Love Your Fellow Soldiers Insurance”

program, 100 million won in insurance is paid to servicemembers who pass away during

military service, except in cases of suicide. The military has also launched the “Prepare for

Your Dream Fund” program to help servicemembers save up a lump sum for their personal

development after their military service.


**| Improving the Quality of Clothing and Personal equipment | MND has continued to**

enhance the quality of servicemembers’ clothing and personal equipment to help boost their

combat execution capabilities. Since the beginning of 2016, MND has provided functional

winter wear to security and ambush troops, and plans to develop and supply inner and outer

layers of winter jackets and combat uniforms that not only are more comfortable to wear but

also provide better camouflage in combat environments. MND will also improve the quality of

uniforms[5)] that are frequently worn in barracks and gradually distribute them after modifying

the supply standard accordingly.

**5) Uniforms that are closely related to service members’ daily life in barracks or frequently worn by service members.**


-----

**<Chart 7-4> Uniform Improvements**

Functional digital camouflage shirts made with advanced materials (cotton -> polyester)

Scarves made from advanced materials, transformed from simple warmers to neck warmers

a user-friendly toiletry bag made of mesh material and featuring improved storage and hooks
for drying

additional underwear that reflect the preference of servicemembers (3 -> 5 pieces)

-  [drawers-type underwear to be distributed beginning in 2017]

Sneakers with improved design, durability, and cushioning

MND is enhancing the quality of personal equipment by incorporating various functions

designed to improve the survivability of combat personnel, and distributing bulletproof body

armor, bulletproof combat helmets, personal tents, combat backpacks, combat vests and other

equipment as a package. New personal gear was supplied to the GOP divisions in 2015, and

will be distributed to all combat supporting units by 2020.

**| safe and Healthy Meals | The ROK military offers safe and nutritious meals to ser-**

vicemembers to help them maintain their health and combat capability. The military provides

3,100 kcal (which is considerably higher than the recommended daily amount of calories for

civilians) of nutrition in the daily menus for servicemembers, who are generally required to

perform strenuous physical activities in their training. MND has also continuously increased

the basic meal allowances for servicemembers in an effort to provide a diverse diet options

along with high-quality snacks and desserts attuned to the preferences of young servicemem
bers.

**<Chart 7-5> Basic Meal Allowance[6)] (per diem)**

|Category|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Unit price (won)|5,820|6,155|6,432|6,848|7,190|7,334|
|increase rate (%)|3.0|5.8|4.5|6.5|5.0|2.0|
|average increase rate (%)|4.5||||||



*[ the average inflation rate for food in the last three years (2013]~[2015) according to Statistics Korea is 0.87% ]

**6) Net food material cost, including the cost of main meals, snacks and desserts.**


-----

The military also conducts an annual survey on servicemembers’ satisfaction regarding their

meals and reflects the results in its menus in order to provide them with delicious meals which

take into account their preferences. In addition, the employment of civilian cooks in military

kitchens in units of various levels will be expanded to the kitchens of all company-level units

by 2020.

**<Chart 7-6> Plan to Increase the number of Civilian Cooks**

|Category|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|total number (person)|1,767|1,841|1,989|2,140|2,223|
|Supply rate (%)|79|83|89|96|100|


The military thoroughly manages the safety and hygiene in all stages of meal preparation

from the signing of food supply contracts to the serving of meals, as the meals are consumed

by many people at the same time.

The military gives preference to the Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HAC
CP)[7)]-certified companies when signing food supply contracts, and conducts a joint hygiene

inspection of the contractors with the Ministry of Food and Drug Safety (MFDS) twice each

year. In the event that any problems with food supplies are detected, the military reports the

facts to the MFDS and the relevant local governments so that the defective materials can be

retrieved and disposed of, while the suppliers involved are excluded from participating in any

future military meal service contract biddings. Since 2014, the “mothers’ military meal mon
itoring group” has been paying regular visits to military cafeterias where meals are served

to servicemembers, as well as conducting inspections of the meal service quality; in 2015

the military introduced a system for displaying potential food allergens.[8)] The military has

continued to improve the safety of meals for servicemembers and strengthen hygiene manage
ment by launching modernized military food distribution centers in Jangseong (for the Jeolla

region), Daejeon (for the Chungcheong region), and Daegu (for the Gyeongsang region).

**7) evaluation of hazards in each production process to prevent the contamination of food by hazards.**

**8) this system displays the ingredients of a meal when foods and additives containing allergens, such as buckwheat, peanuts, crab, pork**
and peach, are used as ingredients


-----

Mothers’ military meal monitoring group Food distribution center for the Chungcheong region in Daejeon

**| Modernizing Military Barracks and Reducing Inconveniences during Barrack Life |**

Since 2003, the military has been carrying out a project to modernize small and outdated

barracks in a drive to improve living conditions for servicemembers and ensure they have a

pleasant life in their barracks. The large platoon-sized (30-50 members) floor-type sleeping

space has been transformed into a smaller squad-sized (8-10 members) structure equipped

with proper beds, and the living space per person has been enlarged from 2.3㎡ to 6.3㎡.

Sanitary and convenience facilities - including washrooms, toilets, libraries and fitness centers

-  have been incorporated into the interior space of the barracks. The modernization of the

barracks structure from floor-type to bed-type is significant in that it has transformed the

overall concept of the barracks from a simple accommodation space into a fully integrated

living space for servicemembers.

**<Chart 7-7> Comparison between Before and After Modernization of Barracks**

|Category|Col2|Before modernization|After modernization (Integrated barracks)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Space allocation within barracks||• (soldiers) barracks • (officers) company commander’s room, company administration section|• (soldiers) barracks, sanitary, convenience facilities, etc • (officers) company commander’s room, company administration section, office of battalion staff, etc|
|Space for soldiers|Barracks|• platoon-sized (30-50 members) floor-type structure • 2.3㎡ per person|• squad-sized (8-10 members) bed-type structure • 6.3㎡ per person|
||Sanitary facilities|• Located in separate buildings outside barracks • No shower room or facilities for washing combat boots|• Modernized washrooms, toilets and bathes inside barracks • Shower room, facilities for washing combat boots newly installed|
||Convenience facilities|• Located in separate buildings outside barracks • No cyber knowledge information facilities, fitness centers, table tennis facilities, etc|• Libraries, cyber knowledge information facilities, fitness centers and other convenience facilities newly installed or expanded inside barracks • Kiosks inside barracks|
|Space for officers|administration, operations and training facilities|• Only company commander’s room and company administration section are inside barracks • Battalion administration facilities are in separate buildings outside barracks|• Commander’s room, office of staff section, command and control room, communications office, meeting rooms inside integrated barracks|


-----

In addition, the military has established military community centers equipped with a wide

range of convenience facilities such as libraries, cyber knowledge-information facilities,

karaoke rooms, kiosks and barber shops, for units where modernization projects are not imple
mented or units scheduled to be shut down or relocated, so that the members of such units can

still spend their spare time in a healthy and sound atmosphere.

The military is also striving to address inconveniences experienced by servicemembers in

their barracks. To that end, kitchens and water supply facilities have been renovated,[9)] the hot

water supply in summer[10)] has been increased, and vacuum cleaners have been distributed to

all platoon- and higher-level units.

Starting in 2013, cyber knowledge-information facilities in remote units such as GPs and

GOPs were opened to servicemembers free of charge. Meanwhile, the usage fees for other

units will continue to be reduced, and all servicemembers will be able to use the facilities free

of charge by 2017 when the related project, funded by private sector investment, comes to an

end.

**| expanding sports, Cultural Programs | The military supports servicemembers’ par-**

ticipation in sound and healthy leisure activities by installing various sports facilities such as

indoor gymnasiums and futsal fields, purchasing more books, and organizing more culture

and arts programs for servicemembers.

In order to improve the physical training environment for servicemembers, the military has

built 495 indoor fitness centers and distributed exercise equipment based on the supply plan

according to the size of units. For units in forward and remote areas, 496 futsal fields and 355

small-size basketball courts have been installed.

The military is also providing opportunities for servicemembers to experience various kinds

of culture and arts by constantly hosting performances by civilian artists and organizing the

Barracks Culture and Arts Experience Project in which civilian instructors visit military bases

and teach servicemembers about theater, musical instruments, and magic.


**3. expansion of Welfare Infrastructure**

**| expanding Welfare facilities | MND has expanded welfare facilities in consideration**

of the unique characteristic of military service, i.e. long periods of standby duty, and specific


**9) Proportion of renovated kitchens: 74.3%(2016) → 86.9%(2021), proportion of improved water supply facilities: 46.7%(2016) →**
52.2%(2021).

**10) Starting in 2017, hot water will be available six times a week (181 days), an improvement from five times a week (168 days).**


-----

environmental conditions as most units are located on islands and in mountainous areas.

In 2010, the independent welfare agencies of the Army, Navy and Air Force were merged

into MND Welfare Agency, which has streamlined the management of welfare facilities and

carried out various welfare projects to allow servicemembers to receive more welfare benefits.

MND has improved welfare and living conditions for servicemembers by acquiring welfare

facilities and residential buildings in Wirye New Town, including MND Culture and Research

Center, dormitories for servicemembers’ children, and military apartments. MND also plans

to construct an integrated welfare center in Baengnyeongdo Island to enhance the living con
ditions of servicemembers and their families in this deprived area.

Furthermore, MND will reconstruct the Korean Army Hotel, an outdated welfare facility

in Seoul, into a culture and welfare complex equipped with rooms exclusively for soldiers, in

order to provide them with a space where they can relax and enjoy cultural activities.

**| Improvement of Convenience facilities | MND has implemented a number of projects**

to renovate outdated welfare centers and military supermarkets. MND renovated 26 welfare

centers in 2014 and another 20 in 2015, as well as 241 military supermarkets in 2014 and 137 in

2015, creating a pleasant environment for servicemembers.

**4. Improving the Remuneration system for servicemembers**

MND is improving the remuneration system for servicemembers to reflect the distinct char
acteristics of military service, such as rank, mission and working environment, in the system.

In order to boost the morale of soldiers working under harsh conditions and motivate them to

do their best, MND has been raising the amount of allowances for servicemembers who carry

out core combat missions involving special warfare, aircraft and vessels to a realistic level in

line with the degree of expertise required and the difficulty of the missions.

Starting in 2015, the military has been paying additional hazardous duty allowances to

staff sergeants and above dispatched to carry out special missions, including members of the

Special Warfare Command, and has doubled the additional special locations allowances paid

to soldiers who are stationed in the five islands in the West Sea so as to maintain a military

posture capable of combat at any time.

In 2016, MND raised the air crew allowances for fighter pilots, the additional submarine

mobilization allowances for submarine crews, and the hazardous duty allowances for para
troopers.


-----

**5. expansion of support for Military families**

**| Implementing an effective Military Residence support Program | Guaranteeing stable**

housing conditions is extremely important for soldiers who are required to move frequently

and work in remote areas. Since the establishment of the legal grounds for housing support

for soldiers with the enactment of the Basic Military Welfare Act, the military has continu
ously improved small military residences and provided loans for leasing private residences to

families that cannot move into military residences.

MND has also implemented various policies designed to boost the number of career service
members that own houses. These include revision of the relevant laws to offer opportunities

for priority and preference in special housing to servicemembers who do not own a house and

have served in the military for at least ten years.

In 2016, MND established the “comprehensive plan for the development of military housing

policies” to ensure stable housing conditions for servicemembers, while reducing its financial

burden at the same time. MND plans to utilize private housing to a greater extent, moving

away from the traditional system of the military building its own residences, and to manage

military residential accommodations more efficiently by managing them by region in an inte
grated manner rather than by units.


**| Vitalizing the Maternity Protection system | MND has implemented policies related**

to pregnancy, childbirth and childcare policies to help career servicemembers attain a good

work-family life balance. Starting in 2015, leave of absence due to infertility and subfertility is

guaranteed, and both male and female servicemembers can take leave. The duration of leave

has also been extended to up to two years, and the portion of salary[11)] paid during leave has

been raised. In 2016, MND expanded the eligible members for exemption from night duty due

to pregnancy and childbirth to include female military civilians, while raising the allowance

paid during maternity leave to 200,000 won. The military will maintain its efforts to foster a

family-friendly military culture by continuously improving the relevant systems together with

the related publicity activities and education.

**| expanding Military Childcare facilities | MND has secured childcare facilities by phases**

in conjunction with the military residence construction plan to improve the military’s chal
lenging childcare environment. The military now operates 105 military daycare centers (as of

October 2016), and plans to build an additional 172 by 2021. The military is striving to reduce

childcare blind spots in forward areas by adjusting the requirements for the installation of a


**11) 70% of salary in the first year of leave, 50% in the second year.**


-----

daycare center. Daycare centers were previously available to units with 100 or more military

households, but are now available to units with 15 or more children who require daycare. In

areas where childcare centers cannot be installed, MND has established the “cooperative

childcare space” concept in coordination with the Ministry of Gender Equality and Family and

private-sector firms. MND opened the first cooperative childcare space in Cheolwon, Gang
won-do in December 2013, and is now operating 18 of them (as of the end of 2016).

**| enhancing the educational environment for Military Children | Career servicemembers**

have long faced the challenge of providing good quality education for their children as they

frequently relocate and often work in remote areas. In order to assist the education of children

who face challenges stemming from the frequent relocations of their parents, the military

provides support when children transfer to a school that has reached full capacity and helps

them to participate in academic activities outside school, such as the “Dream Class Vacation

Camp.” The military also builds dormitories for servicemembers’ children and provides infor
mation related to university admissions as well as assistance for their applications to univer
sities’ special admissions programs. Furthermore, the military offers them scholarships and

interest-free loans for university tuition fees. MND has established the Hanmin High School,

a boarding school which provides a stable study environment to military children. The foun
dation of a boarding school has boosted the morale of career servicemembers and helped the

military to secure talents, as children who are admitted to the Hanmin High School can focus

on their studies without having to transfer to another school because of their parent’s reloca
tions, while their parents can focus on their military career thanks to the alleviated educational

burden.


-----

**section 3 Development of the Defense**
**Medical system**

the rOK military strives to prevent and diagnose diseases early on and provide the best treatment for

all manner of injuries and diseases to help healthy servicemembers who join the military to stay healthy

during their term of service. in order to establish a medical system that is trusted by servicemembers and

the public alike, the military will advance its medical service by acquiring skilled medical personnel and

pursuing the establishment of the armed Forces trauma Center while actively cooperating with the private

sector.


**1. Implementation focus**

Under the goal of establishing a “military medical service that servicemembers can easily

access and trust,” MND has focused on prevention and the early diagnosis of diseases, swift

transportation of patients, and provision of the best medical treatment in accordance with the

“Development Plan of the Armed Forces Medical System (2017-2021).” MND has improved

servicemembers’ access to health and medical services by conducting regular medical

checkups for every service member to help diagnose diseases early on, and by boosting the

survivability of emergency patients with the opening of the medical operations command

center and the formation of MEDEON dedicated to the transportation of patients by air. Under

the Development Plan of the Armed Forces Medical System (2017-2021), MND will focus on

setting the goals for the military medical system, restructuring the military medical system,

acquiring more medical personnel and improving services for customer satisfaction.


**2. Disease Prevention and early Diagnosis**

**| Tailored Control of Infectious Diseases | The ROK military administers national immu-**

nization program vaccinations and eight types of preventive vaccines in consideration of the

characteristics of infectious diseases that tend to be prevalent in the military. Four kinds of


-----

preventive vaccines[12)] are administered to all newly enlisted servicemembers, and all service
members are vaccinated against influenza in the winter season. Three additional preventive

vaccines[13)] are given to servicemembers who work in areas at risk of outbreaks of infectious

diseases.

The number of outbreaks of infectious diseases within the military has decreased signifi
cantly thanks to the enhanced conditions of the barracks and the expansion of the vaccination

program. To systemically manage the record of vaccines administered in the military, MND

will set up a vaccination data management system, which will enable servicemembers to

utilize their vaccination records after being discharged from military service.

**| Projects to Improve servicemembers’ Health | MND offers health counseling to**

privates and checkups to corporals so that illnesses can be prevented or diagnosed before any

symptoms appear. The health counseling program for privates was launched in 2012, giving

new recruits an opportunity to receive a one-on-one consultation from a medical officer.

The health checkup program for corporals has been fully implemented since 2013, offering

screenings that meet the standards of the National Health Insurance. Through these programs,

71 servicemembers received an early diagnosis of serious diseases including thyroid cancer

in 2014, and 124 were diagnosed with diseases including leukemia in 2015. They received

medical treatments with the support of the military.

In 2016, MND launched an anti-smoking campaign in cooperation with the Ministry of

Health and Welfare (MOHW) and began systematically managing servicemembers’ health

based on the body mass index (BMI).[14)]

**| Remote Medical Treatment | MND has adopted a telemedicine system for remote units**

stationed at guard posts (GPs) and islands, allowing servicemembers to receive treatments

from medical officers 24 hours a day via videoconferencing and improving those units’ access

to medical services. MND commenced a telemedicine pilot project for GP units in 2014, and

carried it out at 63 locations in 2016. It plans to extend the project to 76 locations in 2017.

**12) tetanus, mumps, meningococcal meningitis, hepatitis a**

**13) hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome, malaria, typhoid fever**

**14) Body mass index (BMi), i.e.a person’s weight (kg) divided by their height (m).**


-----

**<Chart 7-8> Remote Unit Video Telemedicine**

**Telemedicine equipment**

-  Patient-Monitoring Equipment

-  Electronic Stethoscope

**Treatment Request**


-  Medical Scope

-  Blood-Sugar Measurement


**Details on Telemedicine**

-  Minor ailment treatment

-  health Counseling and education, etc.

-   Face-to-Face treatment and Patient
evacuation decisions


**Remote Diagnosis/Counseling**


**3. Improvement of evacuation and Medical Treatment Capabilities**

**| strengthening the Patient Transportation system | The Emergency Patient Support**

Center, established under the Armed Forces Medical Command in 2012, was expanded as a

medical operations command center in 2015. The command center has assumed the role of

an active control tower for military emergency patients as it performs first-aid at the site of an

emergency incident, dispatches available resources such as ambulances and evacuation heli
copters, and helps secure the “golden time” for treating emergency patients by ensuring that

the available military and civilian hospitals are ready to receive patients.

MND has built the best domestic emergency

patient evacuation system by cooperating with

the MOHW and other relevant ministries to

share evacuation helicopters. Additionally,

in 2015, by establishing the MEDEON unit

dedicated to evacuating emergency patients

by helicopter, MND was able to shorten the

time necessary for evacuation and boosted the Medical evacuation helicopter

number of emergency flights.


**| Building an efficient, elite Military Medical system | Based on the principle of**

“selection and concentration” and the future direction of the reorganization of military

structure, the military is reducing the number of military hospitals but significantly reinforcing

their capacity, while redefining the functions of each military medical institution according to

the level of the medical services it offers.


-----

First of all, the number of hospital-level

medical institutions will be reduced to 13 by

2020, the year in which the reorganization of

the military structure will be completed. The

13 hospitals will secure adequate facilities,

equipment and personnel so that all of them

can be certified[15)] as medical institutions under

the Medical Service Act. The Armed Forces aerial view of the armed Forces trauma Center

Trauma Center will also be established under

the Armed Forces Capital Hospital and begin operating in 2020. Through the new trauma

center, the Armed Forces Capital Hospital, as the principal hospital in the military medical

system, will secure the highest level of medical treatment capabilities for the most common

illnesses and injuries occurring in the military, such as external wounds as well as mili
tary-specific gunshot wounds.

In addition, the functions and sizes of the military hospitals scheduled to be shut down

will be trimmed, but they will remain open as “outpatient centers” in the regions they serve.

Despite the absence of hospitals nearby, this will allow servicemembers to receive treatments

that do not require hospitalization, surgery or a health checkup without having to travel a long

distance. Lastly, medical units and medical offices at division-level or lower will continue to

offer treatments to outpatients and first aid for simple illnesses, with unnecessary hospitaliza
tion minimized. This will help patients who need treatments receive the proper treatment in a

timely manner at a large medical institution.

**<Chart 7-9> Military Hospital Reorganization Plan from the ‘Development Plan of the Armed forces Medical**

|system (2017~2021)’|Col2|Col3|Unit: ea|
|---|---|---|---|
|Category||Present|After reorganization|
|Military hospital|total|17|13|
||armed Forces Capital hospital|1|1 (established armed Forces trauma Center inside)|
||hospitals in the forward area|8|5 (Cheongpyeong, Wonju, Gangneung hospitals closed)|
||hospitals in the rear area|4|3 (Busan hospital closed)|
||Specialized hospitals|4|4|
|Outpatient centers||-|3 (Cheongpyeong, Busan, Gangneung)|


**15) a program operated by the Korea institute for healthcare accreditation to encourage the**
improvement of safety of patients and quality of medical care. the institute evaluates applicant
institutions in 500 criteria covering the whole aspects of the institutions ranging from facilities
and equipment to personnel and systems and certifies them if they meet the standards.


Necessity of building armed
Forces trauma Center


-----

**| Increasing the number of Military Medical Personnel and enhancing Professional-**

**ism | MND will gradually replace “unlicensed medics” with licensed officers to stop the**

problematic practices of medics without medical licenses assisting with military medical pro
cedures. Also, efforts will be made to ensure that servicemembers who enlist with medical

licenses perform their duties in their field of expertise.

MND will structurally improve the proficiency of military medical personnel by nurturing

each year some 15 to 20 long-term serving medical officers and around 20 medical non-com
missioned officers with professional qualifications, such as medical technologists. MND will

outsource the necessary training and education to universities.

**| strengthening Capabilities for Military Medical Research | The Armed Forces Medical**

Research Institute conducts various military medicine studies related to the unique circum
stances the military faces, such as preventing infectious diseases and responding to biolog
ical warfare. The Institute has acquired the capabilities to examine and diagnose infectious

diseases that are more prevalent in communal settings such as influenza and Middle East

Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), and has applied for a patent for a method of diagnosing

diseases related to the Ebola virus, an original technology recently acquired by the military.

In addition, the Institute has elevated the status of the ROK military’s medical research by

establishing mutually cooperative relationships with various relevant agencies. Examples of

such collaborative work include the sharing of test equipment and facilities with a municipal

health and environment institute; joint research on the diagnosis of zoonoses and related

research techniques with the National Institute of Food and Drug Safety Evaluation; as well as

mutual cooperation on vaccine research with the Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency.


**4. Improvement of support Associated with Civilian Medical Care**

**| expanding support for Medical expenses at Civilian Hospitals | The Military Pension**

Act has been revised so that the state covers the medical expenses of career servicemembers[16)]

until their full recovery[17)] in the event that they become ill or are injured on duty but have to

be treated in a civilian hospital because the necessary treatments are unavailable in a military

hospital. Under the revised law, they will receive the equivalent support when an aftereffect


**16) When service members on active duty become ill or are injured on duty and are treated in a civilian hospital because they cannot**
receive treatment in a military hospital, the state will cover their medical expenses regardless of the duration of the treatment under
the law on military health care. after retiring from military service, under the National Merit reward System, they are eligible to
receive treatment at a veterans’ hospital free of charge as well as reimbursement of medical expenses incurred at civilian hospitals.

**17) Prior to the revision of the Military Pension act, the military only covered medical expenses for up to 30 days of treatment.**


-----

occurs or an illness recurs, and will be supplied with the very best prosthetic arms or legs

regardless of the cost, provided that their needs related to physical disabilities are approved in

the relevant reviews.

**| Improving the Medical expenses Payment Procedure | The medical expense payment**

review procedure has been simplified[18)] so that servicemembers who are injured on duty can

be swiftly reimbursed for medical expenses incurred by treatment at a civilian hospital. MND

has also introduced a post-treatment payment system[19)] in which civilian hospitals do not

charge servicemembers for treatment, but the military directly pays the hospitals when it is

clear that the servicemembers have been injured on duty.

**| strengthening support for Patients | Servicemembers may become ill or injured on**

duty but may not be able to receive proper support because they are unaware of the procedures

regarding support for civilian medical care or have not been informed at the right time. In

order to avoid such situations, the Medical Operations Command Center provides professional

counseling services 24 hours a day while operating a “team dedicated to referred patients” that

can provide patients and their guardians with tailored guidance on medical treatments, reim
bursement, and the related administrative support procedures.

**| Vitalizing Civilian-Government-Military Cooperation on Medical Treatment | MND**

has signed mutual agreements with the Ministry of Public Safety and Security, the Korean Red

Cross, and Gangwon-do to cooperate on emergency patient transportation, first-aid training,

emergency treatments, and infectious disease management in vulnerable areas.

Military hospitals and division-level medical units of each Service have also concluded

agreements on medical treatment with civilian hospitals in the nearest areas, and have

responded effectively and promptly to emergency incidents. MND will continue to improve

the conditions under which servicemembers receive medical care by expanding its agreements

on medical treatment with civilian and public medical institutions.

**18) in the past, the medical expenses review processes consisted of four stages (military hospital → each service → armed Forces**
Medical Command → MND). it has now been reduced to three stages (military hospital → armed Forces Medical Command →
MND).

**19) in July 2016, MND signed an agreement with the Korean hospital association on the settlement of medical expenses incurred by**
service members who have been injured on duty and treated in civilian hospitals.


-----

**section 4 expansion of support for**
**Retiring servicemembers**

the best welfare for servicemembers planning to retire after years of dedication to national security is

ensuring their employment after military service. Providing national support for retiring servicemembers’

seamless transition to civilian careers for veterans is important not only for boosting the morale of active
duty servicemembers, but also for attracting new talents. MND has strengthened its outplacement

education and job search support for all servicemembers retiring after serving their mandatory term

or beyond in order to assist their smooth return and integration into society, while operating a military

pension system that guarantees a stable life for career servicemembers who have retired after devoting

their lives for the defense of the nation.


**1. enhancing Outplacement and Career Transition services and expanding Job**
**Opportunities**

**| establishment and Operation of MnD Outplacement**

**Training Institute | A considerable number of retired**

servicemembers find it difficult to adjust to civilian life

because they retire at a stage in their careers when the level

of living expenditures is the highest after a long period of

service under unique conditions. In January 2015, MND

established MND Outplacement Training Institute to

provide retiring military officers with well-planned transi
tion programs to assist their outplacement. MND Outplacement training institute

(established in January 2015)

MND Outplacement Training Institute conducts various

kinds of outplacement education such as career education, consulting and training courses

tailored to corporate needs. The Institute also provides various employment support programs

including job fairs, a dual on-the-job training system, and an employment academy in cooper
ation with companies and recruitment agencies.

Since the establishment of the Institute, outplacement and careers transitions services

benefits, previously limited to long-term servicemembers, has been extended to short- and

mid-term servicemembers. The Institute provides mainly career education to short-term


-----

servicemembers while mid-term servicemembers are provided with professional education

necessary for a stable livelihood. On the other hand, long-term servicemembers receive

education to begin a new career that will help them contribute to society. The Institute also

conducts research on military expertise associated with various jobs outside the military

such as professional defense-related licenses. With the amendment of the relevant laws and

regulations, MND will begin recognizing the training period of mid-term servicemembers

as qualified service, starting from 2017. Furthermore, MND will carry out an educational

program to help them design their lifelong career paths while serving in the military.

By improving the way in which it operates, as well as developing diverse support programs

and establishing cooperative relationships with the relevant agencies, MND Outplacement

Training Institute is striving to become an organization that can provide practical assistance

for retiring servicemembers returning to society.

**| securing Jobs for Retiring servicemembers | In order to guarantee stable living con-**

ditions for retiring servicemembers, MND has worked to secure 50,000 jobs for servicemem
bers who have retired or will retire between 2013 and 2017.

MND searches for jobs for retiring servicemembers in two categories, i.e. jobs within the

military that can utilize their military-related experiences and expertise, as well as employ
ment in the public and private sectors. As a result of these efforts, MND has secured a total

of 45,528 positions as of September 2016, including 9,626 within the military, such as profes
sional evaluators for education and training, reserve force managers and civilian employees in

the military, as well as 35,902 in the public and private sectors including emergency planning

officers and instructors for the Reserve Officer Training Corps.

MND will create more jobs within the military and the public sector, such as civilian

employees in the military and emergency planning officers, while continuously securing

positions in the private sector by signing cooperative agreements with companies and recruit
ment agencies and providing job information to servicemembers.

**<Chart 7-10> status of secured Job Positions for Retiring servicemembers**

**As of september 2016, Unit: ea**

|Category|Total|secured job positions|Col4|Col5|Plan|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||subtotal|- 2015|september 2016|subtotal|October- December 2016|2017|
|total|50,000|45,528|38,053|7,475|4,472|1,410|3,062|
|Military positions|10,500|9,626|8,896|730|874|480|394|
|Public and private positions|39,500|35,902|29,157|6,745|3,598|930|2,668|


-----

**2. A Pension system that Reflects the Characteristics of Military service**

**| Characteristics of the Military Pension system | The military pension system aims to**

contribute to stable living conditions for career servicemembers and improve welfare benefits

for them. The military pension provides them and their families with proper monetary com
pensation when they retire after years of faithful service, when they have to retire or pass away

due to physical or mental disabilities, or when they have to receive medical treatment due to

diseases or injuries acquired on duty.

Servicemembers perform duties which pose a risk to their lives, such as participating in

battles and dangerous training exercises. Furthermore, most live and work in remote or forward

areas under harsh working conditions that involve missions and long periods of standby duty.

As they have to retire at the age set for each rank, most retire between the ages of 45 and 56,

when the level of living expenses tend to be the highest. The military pension system, which

reflects these unique circumstances of military service, not only serves the basic purpose of a

pension system as a social insurance that ensures income for one’s later years, but also works

as a national program that guarantees a stable livelihood for servicemembers retiring early and

compensates those who sacrifice themselves for the country.

The military pension has an important role in helping career servicemembers to focus on

their duties without having to worry about life after retirement. Developed countries provide

more preferential benefits to military pension funds compared to other public pension

programs in consideration of the specific characteristics of a military pension.[20)]


**| efforts toward financial stability for the Military Pension | The military pension**

was first paid out in 1961, during the very early stages of its introduction, when the military

pension system had not yet had the opportunity to accumulate sufficient funds, and so the

state has been making up for the shortfall in the military pension fund. MND has revised the

relevant laws and continuously improved the related systems in order to stabilize the fund. In

2013, the Military Pensions Act was modified to raise contributions borne by individuals and

make servicemembers who have served for 33 or more years to continue paying contributions

while reducing pension payouts by setting an upper limit for pension payments.

**| Improving Compensation for Accidents and Injuries | MND has modified the criteria**

for determining whether cases of disease, injury or death have occurred on duty, and now

allows compensation for accidents to be paid when the causes of suicides and injuries are


**20) Servicemembers’ pension contribution rate is lower than that of government employees in the U.S. the U.K. and australia, while the**
pension payment rate for servicemembers is higher than that for government employees in the U.S., australia and Japan.


-----

reviewed and verified. MND plans to reorganize the accident review system and adjust the

amount of accident compensation to a realistic level by enacting the “Military Accident Com
pensation Act.”

**3. strengthening the Privileges and social Compensation for serving in the**
**Military**

**| Recovering Korean War Remains[21)] | In 2007, MND founded MND Agency for KIA**

Recovery and Identification (MAKRI), a special organization dedicated to recovering the

remains of troops killed during the Korean War, paying tribute to these brave men who

had sacrificed their lives for the country, all the while elevating their honor and addressing

the bereaved families’ long held wishes. Approximately 200 personnel are working in five

divisions, including planning, investigation, recovery, identification and international coopera
tion, with a total of eight recovery teams in action.

As of 2015, a total of 10,314 sets of human remains[22)] were recovered, while DNA samples

were taken from 32,160 bereaved family members. By additionally confirming the identities

of KIAs, 109 sets of remains have been returned to bereaved families. In order to recover more

remains while Korean War veterans and bereaved families are still alive, MND has reinforced

the organization and personnel and is carrying out a systematic recovery project under the

“Five-year Plan for the Recovery of Remains.”

**<Chart 7-11> Remains Recovery status**

**As of December 2016, ( ): Mil·police**

|Total|2000~2006|2007|2008|2009|2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|10,904|1,504|534|837|1,278|1,443|1,387|1,042|731|921|637|590|
|(9,436)|(1,183)|(378)|(673)|(1,137)|(1,331)|(1,300)|(990)|(666)|(817)|(580)|(381)|



*[ total number of remains recovered: 10,904 (mil·police 9,436, UN forces 15, enemy 1,254, processing 128, no DNa info 71) ]

**<Chart 7-12> status of DnA sampling and Identification Confirmation of Korean War KIAs**

**As of December 2016, Unit: person**

|Category|Total|2000~2006|2007|2008|2009|2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|DNa sampling|36,143|1,923|1,455|2,282|4,524|3,388|4,252|4,765|4,005|2,645|2,921|3,983|
|identification confirmation|118|22|9|13|10|6|8|11|5|7|8|9|



**21) a national project to search for the unfound remains of about 130,000 troops who died during the**
Korean War, in order to return them to their bereaved families.

**22) 9,055 Korean soldiers, 15 from the United Nations Forces, 703 North Korean soldiers, 541 Chinese soldiers.**

Korea War
remains recovery


-----

In November 2015, at the 47[th] ROK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting (SCM), the two

countries discussed ways to cooperate on the recovery of Korean War remains. During the

meeting, MND and the U.S. Defense Prisoner of War/Missing in Action Accounting Agency
(DPAA) signed a memorandum of agreement.[23)] In 2016, the two countries exchanged 15 sets

of remains of Korean KIAs kept in the U.S. and two sets of remains of American KIAs kept

by the ROK.

As the experiences and techniques accumulated by the Korean War remains recovery

project have reached a level that is globally recognized, the agency assisted Libya’s project

to recover and identify missing people for two years between 2012 and 2014.[24)] In September

2015, the Vietnamese Deputy Minister of Defense and his delegation visited the ROK to learn

the remains recovery expertise of the ROK military’s advanced program, including identifica
tion, detection, recovery and follow-up management[25)].

The circumstances of the Korean War remains recovery project are becoming increasingly

challenging. The number of witnesses and informants has decreased year by year, while land

development has resulted in geomorphic changes.

The Agency has collected and analyzed the outcomes of basic surveys for the locations of

remains and materials about domestic and foreign KIAs. Based on these findings, the Agency

organized a team that traces bereaved families, and is actively investigating the areas they

may live in. The Agency will do its utmost to return more remains of KIAs to their bereaved

families by pursuing a scientific and systematic remains recovery project that utilizes a “com
prehensive remains location analysis map”[26)] and the Killed in Action Total Information

System (KIATIS).[27)]

**| Verifying non-military Participation in the Korean War | MND registers non-mili-**

tary personnel who took part in the Korean War as meritorious individuals through the

“deliberation committee for verification of participation in war.” MND helps these individu
als to receive various benefits including an honorary allowance for participating in the war, a

support fund from local governments, placement in national cemeteries, reduced medical costs


**23) an agreement to ① mutually provide policy support related to the recovery of remains, ② cooperate on the provision of data to help**
find the locations of those who died and went missing during the Korean War, ③ conduct joint investigation and remains recovery,
and ④ hold an annual meeting to discuss common interests and ensure cooperation.

**24) a support team for the identification of missing persons in Libya, consisting of seven MaKri personnel, was deployed to Libya from**
July 2, 2012 to July 28, 2014.

**25) Fifteen representatives from Vietnam including the Deputy Defense Minister Nguyen thanh Cung visited Korea from September 29**
to October 4, 2015.

**26) a comprehensive analysis map that is continuously updated with the suspected burial locations of Korean War Kias: the locations**
are estimated based on testimonies from Korean War veterans and survivors who lived in the areas during the war.

**27) the Killed in action total information System (KiatiS) was developed by MaKri in December 2010. it incorporates digital maps, on**
which the geographic coordinates of sites can be added in real time, and allows users to store data on investigations, recovered
remains, conditions of remains, and depth of burial in a database and manage them.


-----

at veterans’ hospitals, and free entrance to palaces and national parks.

Since 1996, MND has issued a confirmation letter of participation in the war to about 36,000

individuals.

**<Chart 7-13> non-military Personnel War Participation Confirmation Letter status**

**As of December 2016, Unit: persons**

|Category|Total|student Volunteer Army|Laborer|national Guard|Civilian component|Ranger|Volunteer police|Railway official|Ganghwa Youth Guerrilla|Youth corps|Others|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|total|36,008|1,172|4,172|1,577|1,520|8,541|6,466|6,018|2,403|572|3,567|



In order to enhance the efficiency of confirming the participation of non-military personnel

in the Korean War, MND is establishing a database of war records and conducting an evalua
tion of evidential materials concerning participation in the war led by Scientific Investigation

Laboratory under MND’s Criminal Investigation Command (CIC). MND also holds a regular

advisory session with war history experts of the Institute for Military History Compilation,

and is establishing a system of utilizing the collections of the National Assembly Library and

the National Archives of Korea.

In building the database of records on non-military personnel’s participation in the war,

MND is incorporating materials acquired or created since 1996 into the database so that they

can be searched and provided immediately upon request by the relevant agencies including the

National Patriots and Veterans Review Commission. MND also scientifically analyzes photo
graphs and documents, having previously been dependent solely on visual verification. MND

is also striving to verify the details of testimonies by those who participated in the war, by col
lecting various materials including historical records of battles, situation logs produced during

the Korean War, records of the police and the Ministry of Justice, and materials kept by the

U.S. National Archives and Records Administration (NARA).

In addition to these efforts, MND continues to modify laws and systems in cooperation with

relevant agencies such as the Ministry of Patriots and Veterans Affairs, and supports various

ceremonies to commemorate veterans of the war and transmit their patriotic spirit to future

generations.


-----

**section 5 Improvement of Benefits for**
**the Public**

MND is committed to improving the military service system to prepare for the time when military

resources become scarce, and is striving to improve the system of fairness in fulfilling the duty of military

service. to ensure convenience and benefits for the public, the military has improved the methods of and

environment for reserve force training, identified regulations that need to be amended, and devoted efforts

to cleaning up the environment. the military is also planning to carry out various public relations activities

to communicate and establish an understanding with the public.


**1. Advancing the Military service system**

**| stable Recruitment of Military Resources | The rise in the birthrate between 1990 and**

the early 2000s has led to a temporary increase in the number of people waiting to enlist in the

military. It also led to the problem of military service candidates not being able to enlist when

they wish to. This situation is expected to continue until the early 2020s. After this period,

however, a shortage of military resources caused by low birthrate is expected. Regarding the

waiting period to enlist in the military, MND is considering various measures including tempo
rarily allowing more people to enlist and adjusting the standards for military duty assignments,

for example, by toughening the criteria for draft physical examination for determining the type

of military service.[28)] In preparation for the shortage of military resources, MND will fine-tune

the requirements for military duty assignments and increase the utilization of female cadres.

MND will also look into ways to gradually downsize the number of switchover and alternative

service personnel and comprehensively take into account various factors in doing so.

The military has long operated secondment and alternative service programs[29)] that allow

people to fulfill their military service obligation outside the military to the extent that it does

not disrupt the recruitment of military resources. However, a shortage of military resources


**28) the term “criteria for physical checkups for conscription” was changed to “criteria for draft physical examination” according to the**
revision of the Military Service act which took effect on November 30, 2016

**29) the secondment service system allows active duty service candidates to fulfill their military service obligations as enlisted police**
officers, enlisted coast guard personnel or enlisted firefighters. Under the alternative service system, active duty service candidates
are allowed to work in jobs with public purposes such as public health doctors or to remain as civilians and work in companies
designated by the Military Manpower administration as industrial technical personnel or in other roles for a set period of time, in
lieu of actual military service.


-----

caused by low birthrate is expected from the early 2020s, so the number of switchover and

alternative servicemembers will have to be cut down gradually over time. MND is devising

the best possible measures through close consultation with the relevant ministries by compre
hensively taking into account various elements including proper maintenance of the defense

posture, fairness in fulfilling the duty of military service, and efficient utilization of talents.

**| Operating and Improving the Recruitment system | While conscription is the standard**

system of enlistment in Korea, the military also operates a recruitment system where volun
teers are recruited in the areas required by the military. A certain percentage of the Army

soldiers and all enlisted personnel of the Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force are recruited

through this system.

Anyone who has a degree associated with certain skills or has a relevant license can apply

to serve as volunteers, and the relevant laws have been revised so that the military pays travel

expenses incurred by applicants during the recruitment process, including transportation,

accommodation and meal costs. Currently, fifty-five percent of all enlisted personnel are vol
unteers, and the military plans to continue expanding the system in order to make the best use

of individuals’ qualifications and improve the outcomes of military service that are linked to

society.

**| Job-tailored specialist Program | Since 2014, MND has operated the “job-tailored spe-**

cialist program” for military service candidates with a high school diploma or lower educa
tional qualifications to help connect their military service with employment.

Anyone eligible for active duty aged between 18 and 24 with a high school diploma or lower

education is eligible to apply for the program. Applicants can participate in the Successful

Employment Package program of the Ministry of Employment and Labor to receive technical

training that corresponds to their aptitudes and enlist in the military as technical specialists.

After being discharged from military service, they will receive support and assistance in

finding employment related to their military experience. If they are hired within three months

of retirement, they will be awarded successful employment allowances based on the length of

continuous service.

**2. Improvement of Military Administration**

**| Creating an environment for fair Military service fulfillment | MND has implemented**

various policies aimed at improving transparency and fairness in fulfilling the duty of military

service and at establishing a social atmosphere in which those who faithfully fulfill their duties


-----

are respected.

MND is implementing the “intensive military service records management system for

military service candidates of public interest” in order to alleviate public distrust surround
ing the fulfillment of military service by those who attract a great deal of social and media

attention, such as high-ranking public officials and their children, celebrities and athletes.

Under the Military Service Act which was revised in December 2015, the military records of

high-ranking public officials and their children are categorized and managed separately, and

MND is now pursuing a similar measure for the records of celebrities and athletes.

Since 2004, MND has implemented the “renowned military service family honors

program.” Renowned military service families selected from among those with three gener
ations of active military service are awarded an official commendation by the military and a

certificate attesting to their status as a ‘renowned military service family,’ and are offered such

benefits as discounts and fee waivers when using national, public and civilian facilities.

**<Chart 7-14> number of selected Renowned Military service families**


**As of september 2016, Unit: family**

|Category|Total|2004|2005|2006|2007|2008|2009|2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|applied|5,938|234|357|337|227|253|251|398|498|485|928|695|585|690|
|Selected|3,431|40|84|92|73|132|147|192|302|301|545|497|466|560|



**| Improving the Physical examination system for Determining the Type of Military**

**service | MND has continuously improved the physical examination system for determin-**

ing the type of military service[30)] in order to enhance fairness in military duty assignments

and recruit talented individuals. MND has acquired more advanced medical equipment and

professional medical personnel to ensure precise physical and psychological checkups, and

is strengthening the psychological examination system by increasing the number of clinical

counselors and expanding the number of questions included in psychological tests. MND will

continue to improve the physical examination system by adopting a comprehensive psycholog
ical examination system.


**| Improving Accuracy in the Determination of Military service Type | When people who**

have been determined as active-duty candidates or replacement personnel based on the results

of the physical examination system postpone their enlistment for a long period of time, they

will be obliged to undergo another physical examination five years after the initial determina
**30) With the enhancement of military administration vocabulary, the term “checkup for conscription” was modified to “draft physical**
examination.”


-----

tion and fulfill their military service according to the result.

When a physical re-examination is required, people can choose the date and location of the

re-examination. In this way, MND is promoting an atmosphere in which people can fulfill

their military duty on their own accord, and is improving conveniences for military service

candidates.

**3. Improvement of Reserve force Training Methods and Conditions**

MND conducts reserve force training for all reservists except training-deferred reservists.[31)]

The reserve force training is divided into mobilization training, supplementary mobilization

reserve training, and homeland defense basic training. The training schedule categorized by

reservist and training types is shown in <Chart 7-15>.

**<Chart 7-15> Reserve force Training schedule**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|As of 2016|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Category|||Mobilization training|supplementary mobilization reserve training|Homeland defense basic training|Homeland defense operations training|Roll Call|
|Soldiers|1-4th year|Designated for mobilization|2 nights and 3 days|-|-|-|-|
|||Non- designated|-|24 hrs|-|12 hrs||
||5-6th year|Designated for mobilization|-|-|8 hrs|6 hrs|4 hrs|
|||Non- designated|||8 hrs|12 hrs||
||7-8th year||Organized without training|||||
|Officers and NCOs|1-6th year|Designated for mobilization|2 nights and 3 days|-|-|-|-|
|||Non- designated||2 nights and 3 days||||
||7th year and up||Organized without training|||||
|Volunteers||||||6 hrs||



**31) those whose training has been deferred or processed as completed under the establishment of homeland reserve Forces act.**
they are chosen from certain groups of occupations, or according to qualifications and standards to be determined when deemed
necessary. they include police officers and firefighters.


-----

Since 2015, MND has implemented the voluntary reserve force training system to provide

benefits for reservists who voluntarily participate in and pass the planned training. For

homeland defense training, which is an assessment-based form of training, the pass system

and early release program have boosted the effectiveness of the training.

Mobilization training, which used to be carried out in a separate training area, has been

improved such that reservists camp in the mission execution area of each unit and receive

training for realistic situations. Some standing divisions and regiments have been testing

simultaneous integrated training, thereby improving the speed of mobilization.

Scientific regimental-level reserve force training units have been formed within the forward

corps and homeland defense divisions for realistic reservist training; and 208 battalion-level

reservist training sites will be merged into 44 brigade-level training units by 2024. MND also

plans to install up-to-date combat training facilities, such as imagery firing simulation training

equipment and reservist battle training equipment at the training sites and to establish the

smart reserve force training management system, which evaluates and manages all training

stages from entrance to release in real time through a network. The reserve force training

sites will be made community-friendly by opening them up to local residents on weekends to

support their recreational and sports activities.

**<Chart 7-16> smart Reserve force Training Management system**


① Report to training ② Autonomous training ③ Training evaluation ④ Meals

-  ID check, automatic confirmation of -  Autonomous squad organization -  Real-time evaluation, -  Evaluate food service supervisor
attendance (training controlled by squad leader) comprehensive analysis and degree of satisfaction

Scan ID Fingerprint check wearable Provide Squad registration DID monitor (war game) Tablet for evaluation Hold meetings to improve menu

devices

**Training control room**

⑤ Release **(Comprehensive control)** ⑥ Training site management

-  Provide training results (individual training -  Weather, facilities, training aids
analysis, workrate) management, training camp power control

Individual training level workrate

Real-time analysis / establish BIG DATA


The military is trying to improve the conditions for participation in reserve force training.

Training is held on weekends for reservists who struggle to attend on weekdays due to their

livelihood and other reasons, while the period from which reservists can choose training

dates when registering online has been extended from 3 days to 15 days to help them receive

training according to the schedule of their choosing.

Three major inconveniences in the reserve force training system related to meals, trans

-----

portation, and training site convenience facilities have also been improved. The military is

striving to improve the quality of reservists’ meals by reflecting their tastes in the menus

and organizing surveys and reservist meal contests. The training allowance for a participant

was raised to 12,000 won in 2016, and will increase annually to around 30,000 won by 2021.

In addition, starting in 2015, reservists can receive medical treatment and compensation for

accidents that occur on their way to and from reserve force training. Since May 2015, safety

facilities at shooting ranges have been reinforced and safety measures have been established to

ensure that reserve force training is held in a safe environment.

MND will replace outdated reservist cafeterias and security education centers with new

facilities and continue improving the conditions and environment for reserve force training to

help reservists to concentrate exclusively on their training.

**4. Improvement of national Defense Regulations and normalization of Abnor-**
**mal Practices**

**| Improving Regulations Pertaining to national Defense | MND is implementing regula-**

tory reforms regarding military facilities, the military industry, and mobilization to guarantee

as many conveniences and benefits for the public as it can to the extent that national security

and public safety are not affected.

Model examples of regulatory reforms from each year are as follows. In 2013, MND Welfare

Agency improved its military supply system, giving outstanding companies opportunities to

supply goods to the military, and thereby securing the supply of excellent commercial products

to the military. In the same year, MND expanded the weekend reserve force training to

accommodate 35,000 reservists (up from 25,000), alleviating the inconveniences experienced

by small business owners.

In 2014, MND abolished the upper age limit for those taking an examination to become

civilian employees of the military, and helped vitalize the exports of Korean-made compo
nents by enhancing the “Quality Certification Program for Parts Localization” by which the

government guarantees the quality of export goods.

In 2015, MND expanded opportunities for ordinary companies to participate in the defense

industry by allowing non-defense companies to participate in projects to localize parts or

projects to develop domestic maintenance capabilities for those items that require mainte
nance abroad. It also helped the heads of single-parent families with low income to focus on

childcare and their livelihood by exempting them from reserve force training obligations.

In 2016, MND adopted a ten-percent limit on the penalties imposed on delays in R&D

projects for weapons systems or core technologies, in a bid to boost fairness for domestic and


-----

foreign vendors and promote R&D in the sector. MND has also made sure that students who

have participated in reserve force training do not suffer disadvantages caused by their par
ticipation in the training. When MND plans to add or reinforce defense-related regulations

pertaining to various laws, MND Regulatory Reform Review Committee evaluates the appro
priateness of the regulations. MND is constantly improving regulations by collecting opinions

from the public through the Debate with the Public (2014), the Defense Regulatory Reform

Challenges Contest (2015), surveys on local governments’ needs, and a platform through

which people can make suggestions on regulatory reforms. MND will continue to implement

the “win-win defense regulatory reforms for civilians and the military” with creative measures

to resolve any inconveniences experienced by the public.

**| normalization of Abnormal Practices | MND has pursued three tasks in line with**

the government’s implementation of the “Normalization of Abnormal Practices” policies:

“improving reliability in the handling of fatal accidents in the military,” “improving the unau
thorized occupation of private and public land and utilizing unused military land,” and “eradi
cating sexual violence in the military.”

MND established within the ministry the Central Distinguished Service Mortality Evalua
tion Committee, the majority of whose members are civilian experts. The Committee actively

ensures the participation of bereaved families in the process of handling fatal accidents in a

bid to handle deaths in the military fairly and transparently. Furthermore, MND amended the

relevant laws to increase the possibility of those categorized as ordinary deaths being buried in

national cemeteries, and strengthened the respectful treatment of servicemembers who made

the ultimate sacrifice for the country. MND now grants to servicemembers who have died

during military service, but who cannot be buried in national cemeteries, funerals and cere
monial procedures equivalent to those offered to servicemembers who have died in the line

of duty. Through these efforts, 113 of 191 sets of remains and bodies left unclaimed for a long

time were taken home by the bereaved families.

With regards to “improving the unauthorized occupation of private and public land and

utilizing unused military land,” the military has taken such measures as buying, leasing or

returning private and public land that the military has occupied without permission, as well

as selling, exchanging and transferring to the government those military reservations that are

not required. As of October 2016, around 32.75 million ㎡ of public and private land occupied

without permission and around 21.69 million ㎡ of unutilized military reservations were

processed.

In order to eradicate sexual violence in the military, MND has established the zero tolerance

principle of kicking out sexual offenders from the military while guaranteeing the victims of

sexual violence the right to transfer to their desired location so as to protect their rights. In


-----

addition, MND continues to cooperate with the Ministry of Gender Equality and Family in

strengthening gender sensibility training to prevent sexual violence in advance.

MND will continue to make efforts to identify normalization tasks and fundamentally

correct abnormal practices and systems that have become entrenched in the defense sector

over a long period.

**5. streamlining Regulations related to Military Installation Protection Zones**

**| Reasonable Management of Military Installation Protection Zones | In order to**

guarantee the general public’s property rights and contribute to the development of local com
munities, the military is adjusting and reducing its military installation protection zones to the

extent that it does not disrupt military operations.

In 2008, the range of Civilian Control Line was adjusted from 15 km less than to 10 km

away from the Military Demarcation Line (MDL). As of 2016, a total of 402.37 million ㎡

of land has been removed from the list of military installation protection zones, while a total

of 307.3 million ㎡ of controlled protection zones[32)] had been eased to restricted protection

zones.[33)]

**<Chart 7-17> Area of Military Installation Protection Zones that Have Been Removed or eased**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Unit: 10,000 ㎡|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Category|Total|Before 2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|
|removed|40,237|25,093|4,954|159|2,779|2,672|2,036|2,544|
|eased|30,730|24,333|570|625|76|4,653|451|22|
|total|70,967|49,426|5,524|784|2,855|7,325|2,487|2,566|



For the development of local communities and the convenience of the local residents, the

military has expanded the land entrusted to local governments to 1.51126 billion ㎡ (as of

2016), so that local governments may approve of activities within industrial complexes in rural

areas with a minimal impact on military operations, without having to consult the relevant

military units.

**32) Protection zones adjacent to the MDL requiring a high level of security for military operations, and protection zones requiring that**
the functions of important military bases and installations be preserved.

**33) Protection zones necessary for the smooth execution of military operations, and protection zones requiring the protection of military**
bases and installations or the safety of local residents.


-----

**<Chart 7-18> Area of Land entrusted to Local Governments**


|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Unit: 10,000 ㎡|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Category|Total|Before 2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|
|area|151,126|87,339|5,524|4,056|9,349|4,723|34,417|5,718|


In parallel with the cancellation and downgrading of military installation protection zones,

MND is striving to streamline its administrative procedures and improve fairness in its review

processes. In 2015, MND shortened the consultation period for construction works within

military installation protection zones from 30 days to 20 days if consultation with relevant

military units were made in advance. The military has also improved the public’s right to

know and the transparency of its review processes by disclosing the operability review criteria,

which had remained closed to the public, and by inviting officials from the relevant govern
ment institutions to participate in the military base and military facility protection deliberation

committee in the event of a second review.

The military will continue to actively ease regulations that cause inconveniences to the

exercise of public property rights by improving the relevant regulations and systems and ratio
nally adjusting the military installation protection zones to the extent that it does not disrupt

military operations.


**| Adjusting the Ammunition safety Distance and Relocating Ammunition facilities | For**

areas near ammunition facilities, MND has set a minimum safety distance to protect local

residents and their property, while researching the Korean-style ammunition and explo
sives safety standard for the development of safe ammunition storage techniques. MND will

continue its active efforts to guarantee the people’s safety and property rights. MND is also

devising mid- and long-term measures to reduce the safety distance, with the possibility of

building new tunnel-type ammunition storages being considered.

**6. Relocation of Military Airbases and noise Prevention Measures**


The Special Act on the Relocation of and Support for Military Airports was enacted in 2013

to alleviate public inconveniences, including the constraints on development projects caused

by the presence of military airbases in city centers and noise pollution. Under the law, the

Military Airbase Relocation Bureau can start a relocation project after reviewing the validity

of the relocation petition submitted by the head of a local government that hosts a military

airbase and choose a site to relocate to. In the review, the Bureau considers such factors as


-----

operation execution efficiency, degree of damage caused by noise, and funding methods

among others.

MND is operating an advisory committee that formulates policies/plans related to the relo
cation of military airbases and evaluates relocation petitions. In order to handle conflicts that

may arise during the implementation of a relocation project, MND runs a conflict manage
ment council composed of representatives from MND, the Armed Forces, and the local gov
ernment as well as local residents. Regarding the relocation petitions submitted by Suwon City,

Daegu Metropolitan City and Gwangju Metropolitan City, their validity has been approved,

and MND is in the process of selecting candidate sites for relocation.

The military is continuously trying to minimize the harm caused to local residents by noise

from military airbases and shooting ranges by installing noise prevention facilities, improving

flight procedures, altering flight routes, restricting night flights and firearms/weapons

training, and avoiding flights over highly populated areas.

**7. eco-friendly Military Management**

**| Operating and Improving Military Pollution Prevention facilities | The ROK military**

has installed and operated environmental contamination prevention facilities in order to

prevent pollutants generated by the military, including wastewater, from contaminating neigh
boring areas. The military is cooperating with local governments to have domestic sewage dis
charged from the military treated by the local governments’ public sewage treatment facilities.

In addition, by upgrading the relevant facilities and establishing a water contamination preven
tion system, the military is creating a pleasant barracks environment as well as contributing to

improvement of the surrounding environment.

To preserve the soil environment, MND has been carrying out soil environment restoration

activities, including examinations of soil contamination and decontamination works. MND is

also upgrading aged pipes, installing pipes above ground, and improving soil contamination

prevention facilities in order to prevent leakage accidents at oil storage facilities.

**| Cleaning Up and Utilizing Returned UsfK Bases | Returned USFK bases are thoroughly**

inspected for possible soil pollution. When soil contamination is detected, MND handles the

case according to the Soil Environment Conservation Act and the Special Act on Support for

Areas, etc. Adjacent to Districts Granted to the United States Armed Forces in Korea. By

2016, 54 of the 80 USFK bases scheduled to be returned had been handed over, and 24 of 25

returned bases that did not meet domestic environmental pollution standards have since been

cleaned up, while the one remaining location is currently undergoing the purification process.


-----

When soil decontamination works are completed, the sites have to undergo an inspection by an

organization certified by the Ministry of Environment and receive local government approval

of completion of decontamination so that the public can use them with confidence.

**| Pursuing eco-friendly Defense Installation Projects | MND carries out a strategic**

environmental assessment and an environmental assessment based on the Environmental

Assessment Act whenever it plans and implements a defense and military installations project.

During the early stage of planning, MND reviews the feasibility of the site and the adequacy of

the land use plan; and in the subsequent implementation planning stage it establishes measures

to reduce a project’s potential impact on the environment by forecasting and analyzing the

impact in advance. During the construction and operation phases, MND conducts a survey on

the impact of a project on the environment. In 2016, it conducted a survey on the Jeju Naval

Base.


**8. strengthening Communications with the Public**

**| national Defense 3.0 | MND is implementing National Defense 3.0,[34)] which reflects the**

unique characteristics of national defense in the basic concept of Government 3.0.[35)]

In order to incorporate the core values of “openness,” “communications,” “cooperation” and

“unity” into the public’s way of life, MND is providing integrated services tailored to each

policy user and strengthening defense policy capabilities through cooperation and communi
cation. MND is also expanding the amount of public information available to the public, and

is realizing scientific administration by utilizing big data and information and communication

technology (ICT).

The greatest achievement of National Defense 3.0 is that employees of MND think about

and perform their duties from the viewpoint of the public and servicemembers. Using mobile

phone applications, for example, member of reserve forces can freely register for reserve force

training or postpone their training schedule, and check height restrictions in flight safety zones

before commencing the construction of a building. Transparency in the defense business sector

has been significantly improved thanks to the active disclosure of information on defense

business, while any member of the public can help improve the quality of military supplies by


**34) a new paradigm by which the defense administration will strive to effectively attain the national defense goals of strengthening**
national security by innovating the way of working with the focus on the public and of consolidating the capabilities of civilians and
the military.

**35) a paradigm of transparent, competent service-oriented government that provides tailored administrative services to the public**
through the active disclosure and sharing of public information, and communication and cooperation among agencies.


-----

submitting suggestions to the military supply improvement proposal bulletin board on MND

website. Servicemembers can access integrated records of all physical checkups received

during their military service, while telemedicine has enabled them to receive treatment from a

specialist at any time even when they are stationed at remote units.

MND has also actively participated in cooperative efforts among ministries including the

responses to national-level and natural disasters such as railway strikes, the MERS crisis,

droughts and floods. Furthermore, MND is helping to accelerate the implementation of sci
entific administration based on the adoption of cutting-edge technologies. MND, for example,

has created a smart trainee management system for the Korea Army Training Center that

utilizes wearable devices, and developed a salary prediction model based on big data analysis.

MND will continue to generate tangible, visible outcomes for the public by actively imple
menting National Defense 3.0 under the banner of “Strengthening national security to make

the people’s life convenient.”

**| Promoting national Defense Policies | MND is staging various public relations activ-**

ities to communicate and to establish an understanding with the public by actively utilizing

visual media and social networking services (SNS).

MND strives to convey positive images of the military by using visual media familiar to

the public, such as renowned domestic and international film festivals and entertainment

programs. The “Korea Armed Forces 29 Second Film Festival” (March 2015) and the “Korea

Armed Forces Image Advertising Idea Contest” (September 2016) held in collaboration with

the Seoul International Extreme-Short Image & Film Festival helped the general public to

understand the ROK military and the newly reformed barracks culture.

MND is also expanding opportunities for the public to suggest policies for the advance
ment of national defense, such as the Creative National Defense Ideas Contest (2015-2016) and

the Regulatory Reform Ideas Contest. MND is focusing

public attention on the military by organizing diverse

events based on public participation such as the “Back

to the Reservists” event, in which members of the public

can experience the advanced reserve force system; MND

slogan and calligraphy contest; and the “Come & Play

ROK Armed Forces” interactive event.

In 2016, the military launched “Thank You, Soldiers,”

a “love servicemember campaign” designed to convey

the public’s gratitude and respect to servicemembers and

provide them with real benefits. During this campaign, Ceremonial first pitch event in June 2016 with the

service members injured in the land mine

MND organized the “Heart Project” to cheer on service- provocation


-----

members in cooperation with companies, as well as the “ceremonial first pitch” event which

involved the servicemembers who were injured in the landmine provocation by North Korea

and servicemembers who returned home from overseas deployment. Furthermore, MND

appointed LABOUM, a popular girl group, as the celebrity cheerleader to visit forward units

and boost morale.

The Korea Defense Daily, which has a daily circulation of 150,000 copies, is being used as a

Newspaper In Education (NIE ) on military science courses in universities across the country.

In addition, the military is delivering defense news to servicemembers as well as ordinary

citizens through various culture, current affairs and entertainment programs of Defense TV

and Defense FM, including Visiting Train, the nation’s longest running television show.

thank you! Soldiers!
(encourage sevicemembers injured
in the landmine provocation)


-----

###### Appendix


-----

**special Appendices**

1. interdiction of illegal Fishing by Chinese Boats in the hangang river

estuary

2.  North Korean Landmine and artillery Provocations and the rOK

Military’s response

3. adjustment to the Korea air Defense identification Zone (KaDiZ)

and Follow-up Measures

4. USFK thaaD Deployment

5. rOK-Japan General Security of Military information agreement

(GSOMia)

6. Mungyeong Korea 2015 6[th] CiSM World Games

**Appendices**

1. Military Power of Neighboring Countries

2. Comparing Defense Budgets around the World

3. Yearly Defense Budget Comparison

4. Comparing Military Strengths of the two Koreas

5. Comparing the economic indicators of the two Koreas

6. Discussions on the North Korean Nuclear issue

7. Progress in North Korea’s Ballistic Missile Development and

Specifications

8. United Nations Security Council (UNSC) resolutions on Sanctions

against North Korea

9. Chronicle of inter-Korean Military relations

10. North Korea’s infiltrations and Local Provocations against the rOK

11. Combined and Joint exercise and training

12. international Defense industrial Cooperation agreements

13. Joint Communiqué of the 47[th] rOK–U.S. Security Consultative

Meeting

14. Joint Communiqué of the 48[th] rOK–U.S. Security Consultative

Meeting

15. Defense Cooperation agreements with Other Countries

16. international Disarmament, Non-proliferation agreements, and

Organizations

17. rOK Overseas Deployments

18. Changes in enlisted Servicemembers Salaries

19. alternatives to Military Service by type

20. Defense Organization Chart

21. Modifications of Laws and regulations under the Jurisdiction of

the Ministry of National Defense

22 Composition and Major activities of the National Defense


238

242

248

251

255

259

264

266

267

268

269

270

271

272

273

288

290

291

292

296

300

301

303

304

305

306

308


-----

**special Appendix 1**

**Interdiction of Illegal fishing by Chinese Boats in the**
**Hangang River estuary**

**1. Background**

the hangang river estuary is an area controlled by the United Nations Command Military armistice Commission (UNCMaC),[1)] bordering the City of Gimpo and Ganghwado on the rOK side and the southern section
of hwanghae-do Province on the North Korean side. While the two Koreas closely face each other across
the hangang river estuary, both sides have practically stayed out of the sensitive zone since the signing of
the armistice agreement over six decades ago, except on a few special occasions. in 2011, Chinese boats
started to exploit this fact and began entering the waters for illegal fishing. initially intermittent, illegal fishing
in the hangang river estuary has become much more frequent thereafter. the number of unauthorized
Chinese boats entering this area has sharply increased since 2015, prompting countermeasures.

|Col1|Pyoksong Chiya Changpung Military Paechon Demarcation Chongdan Line Kangryong Hwanghaedo Hangang River Estuary Munsan Gyodongdo Northern Limit Line (NLL) Island Geumchon Ganghwado Island Yeonpyeongdo Island Udo Boleumdo Island Island Gimpo|Col3|
|---|---|---|


**Pyoksong**

**Chiya** **Changpung**

**Military**

**Paechon**

**Chongdan** **Demarcation**

**Kangryong** **Line**

**Hwanghaedo**

**Hangang River Estuary**

**Munsan**

**Gyodongdo**

**Northern Limit Line (NLL)** **Island** **Geumchon**

**Ganghwado**
**Island**

**Yeonpyeongdo**
**Island** **Udo** **Boleumdo**
**Island** **Island**

**Gimpo**

hangang river estuary


**2. Measures Undertaken**

to stop illegal fishing in the hangang river estuary by Chinese boats, MND took a series of preliminary
steps before proceeding with the crackdown.
Given that the hangand river estuary is an area governed by the armistice agreement, MND began by
closely conferring with the United Nations Command (UNC) about the deployment of civil police. as part of
the approval process for deploying civil police, MND assisted in the creation and operation of the UNCMaC

1) Organization that implements the armisitce agreement, discusses the observance of the agreement, and resolves issues pertaining to
the agreement.


-----

Special investigation team (Sit)[2)] to determine whether the illegal fishing activity by Chinese boats indeed
constituted a violation of the armistice agreement.
through the Sit, UNCMaC confirmed onsite that the Chinese fishing boats were in violation of the
armistice agreement and declared that the Chinese fishing boats were “unauthorized by UNCMaC for
entry.” it subsequently approved committing the civil police to control the activities of the Chinese fishing
boats. however, the civil police had never been employed in the hangang river estuary since the signing of
the armistice agreement—they had operated only within the Demilitarized Zone. hence, the exact details
of their employment had to be consulted with the UNC. the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) and the UNC formed
an Operational Planning team (OPt) to define operational concepts, personnel assignment, command
structure, and the framework for employing the civil police through a series of working-level consultations.

Civil police in operation

Measures to prevent civil police operations from causing accidental conflict between the two Koreas were
simultaneously pursued. Considering the real possibility of an unforeseen military conflict in the jointly-man-
aged waters with no visible border, North Korea was notified of the operation ahead of time through the
UNC channel.
however, in order to fundamentally resolve the issue of illegal fishing by Chinese boats, China’s own law
enforcement efforts were needed to stop them from entering the rOK territorial waters. the rOK govern-
ment signaled the need for the Chinese government’s involvement through various diplomatic channels.
First, the government strongly protested against China’s illegal fishing activities by summoning the Chinese
ambassador and consul-general to the rOK. through diplomatic routes, the rOK embassy in China took
relevant measures to convey the reality of illegal Chinese fishing to Beijing. MND made active use of its
defense diplomacy channels, including the “Working-level Consultation between MND and the Office of the
Chinese Defense attaché to the rOK” as well as the rOK Office of the Defense attaché to China, to commu-
nicate the rOK government’s strong determination to resolve the issue. the Chinese government responded
by expressing sympathy with the concerns raised by the rOK government and showed a keen interest in
resolving the issue. the Chinese government requested evidence needed for undertaking practical actions
against illegal fishing. the conclusive photographic evidence provided by the rOK government played an
important role in swaying the Chinese government to take a more proactive stance on the issue.

2) a fact-finding team investigating potential violations of the armistice agreement that occur in the DMZ and the hangang river estuary


-----

**evidence Provided to the Chinese Government**

Chinese vessels conducting illegal fishing Chinese fishermen violently resisting a Chinese fishing boat operating with no
using pair-trawl equipment arrest with a shovel name to escape crackdowns

Organic cooperation with relevant government agencies was also essential for the successful crackdown
on illegal fishing by Chinese boats. the Ministry of Public Safety and Security (MPSS) and MND formed the
civil police team with the Coast Guard, which is highly experienced with cracking down illegal Chinese fishing
boats, and conducted the “Military-Coast Guard Joint Working-level Meeting” and the “Field Operation Dis-
cussions,” which maximized the operational capabilities of the civil police. MND also closely consulted with
the Ministry of Foreign affairs (MOFa) and the Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries (MOF) concerning legal
issues related to handling Chinese fishing boats captured by the civil police. MND also held a global con-
ference as well with all relevant government agencies including the MOFa, MOF, and MPSS to increase
efficiency of operations.

**3. Major Accomplishments**

in June 2016, the rOK military deployed civil police to the hangang river estuary for the first time since the
armistice agreement was signed 63 years ago on July 27, 1953. through active enforcement of measures
such as interdiction, expulsion, and capture, the civil police put an end to illegal fishing by Chinese boats
in the hangang river estuary.[3)] the interdiction operation on illegal fishing by Chinese boats had important
implications for rOK-China relations. the rOK government minimized diplomatic tensions with China by
notifying in advance its firm commitment to its enforcement operations, coupled with explanations about the
special characteristics of the hangang river estuary as a militarily sensitive zone. also, Chinese fishermen
were made to clearly understand once and for all that the hangang river estuary is a restricted zone, and
that any illegal fishing activity in this area will be met with a vigorous crackdown. the Chinese government
also took active measures to rein in the situation, including providing guidance to, and educating fishermen
and increasing the deployment of its coast guard vessels. these measures appear to have influenced the
sharp reduction seen this year in illegal fishing by Chinese boats in waters near the West Sea Northern Limit
Line (NLL).
the series of measures taken also sent a strong message to North Korea regarding observance and imple-
mentation of the armistice agreement. On their way to the hangang river estuary, Chinese trawlers were
never checked or controlled in the waters north of the NLL. through the crackdown operation by the civil
police, the rOK government unambiguously conveyed that North Korea should not allow or condone the
entry by Chinese boats into the hangang river estuary. Not flustered by rhetorical threats unleashed by

3) Operational accomplishments: 2 boats captured, 54 expelled and 10 interdicted while attempting re-entry and fishing equipment
seized.


-----

North Korea upon the deployment of the civil police, the rOK military made known its resolute stance[4)]
and left no excuses for armed provocations, thereby ensuring the success of the interdiction operation and
providing another reminder that the terms of the armistice agreement should be observed and respected in
this sensitive zone.
these measures also prevented depletion of maritime resources in the rOK terriotiral waters and the des-
olation of the rOK fishing grounds due to reckless fishing by Chinese boats conducting illegal fishing activ-
ities, thereby contributing to income growth in fishing households in the five Northwest islands and guar-
anteeing stability in their livelihood activities. the operation received tremendous support from the public
for the timely, proactive measures implemented to protect their lives and property and for its remarkable
outcome, which renewed the public’s confidence in the government and the military.

**4. Way Ahead**

although the number of Chinese fishing boats entering the hangang river estuary fell significantly
following the deployment of the civil police, illegal fishing activities could resume any time unless a watchful
eye is kept on this area. the rOK military will, therefore, continue to take all necessary actions until illegal
Chinese fishing is completely eradicated in the hangang river estuary while engaging in diplomatic efforts to
encourage the Chinese government to rein in the situation.

4) the military countered the rhetorical threats by North Korea (June 20, 2016/ Korean Central News agency) by indicating its intention
to respond with vigor to any provocations or attack.


-----

**special Appendix 2**

**north Korean Landmine and Artillery Provocations and**
**the ROK Military’s Response**

**1. Overview**

at around 07:35 on august 4, 2015, several wooden
box mines planted by North Korean soldiers detonated
in the DMZ, in an area just south of the Military Demarcation Line (MDL) in Paju, Gyeonggi-do, severely injuring
two rOK soldiers. the Combat readiness Posture inspection team of MND and the UNCMaC Special investigation
team (Sit) were dispatched to the site to investigate the
incident. the investigation confirmed that the wooden
box mines were intentionally laid by North Korean soldiers
who illegally crossed the MDL. Such a provocative action
was not only a direct violation of the armistice agreement
and non-aggression pact between the two Koreas, but
was also a cowardly, atrocious act. in retaliation for this

Wooden-box mine

vile act, the rOK military issued an official warning to
North Korea and resumed loudspeaker psychological warfare broadcasts. On august 14, North Korea denied
all responsibility in the mine blasts through an official statement. North Korea declared a quasi-state of war
in frontline areas and warned of impending strikes through loudspeaker broadcasts to the South, escalating
tensions. in the afternoon of august 20, North Korea fired artillery shells across the MDL twice, and the rOK
military returned fire in self-defense.
During an inter-Korean high-level meeting held at the Peace house located in Panmunjeom, which
lasted from 18:30 on august 22 through 24, North Korea expressed regrets about the mine provocation
and promised to lift the quasi-state of war, facilitate reunions of separated families, and promote civilian
exchanges between the two sides.

**2. DMZ Landmine Provocations by north Korea and the ROK Military’s Re-**
**sponse**

**| synopsis | the North Korean military continuously carried out provocative actions near the MDL, such**
as close reconnaissance, intentional crossing of the demarcation line, and mine laying.
in 2015, the rOK military set up a scientific guard system across all GOP areas of frontline divisions,
inspected the summertime readiness posture and conducted situation response training. in the DMZ, the
rOK military was conducting normal DMZ operations such as patrol and ambush operations, and warning
broadcasts and shots to North Korean troops who got too close to the MDL.

**| Measures Taken | at 07:28 on august 4, 2015, a patrol operations team of the rOK military on a**
mission to patrol the DMZ arrived at the gate of a barbed wire fence. the deputy team leader went through
the gate first and was guarding the forward area from a position 5m west of the gate. When the army


-----

surgeon was about to follow him through the gate, a mine laid by North Korean soldiers detonated about
40cm north of the barbed wire fence.

|Col1|Search path Enemy Deputy l et ae da em r D Army E Direction Surgeon Gate Medic F G P lel aa dto eo rn B Team A leader C H Command sergeant Communication major officer Signal corpsman|Col3|
|---|---|---|



Situation during the 1[st] blast

at 07:40, the second blast occurred 25cm south of the barbed wire fence as the deputy team leader,
medic and the command sergeant major were evacuating the wounded army surgeon on orders from the
team leader, injuring the deputy team leader.

|Col1|Enemy A Team leader Direction D Deputy team leader Command sergeant major H E F Medic Communication officer B G Platoon leader C Signal corpsman Army surgeon|Col3|
|---|---|---|



Situation during the 2[nd] blast

the JCS Joint investigation team recovered
several pieces of evidence, including three
metal springs, three detonating hammers
and wood fragments that appeared to be
remnants of the wooden box mines. the
re-investigation conducted by a joint team

a wood fragment from a detonating hammer

that included members of the UNCMaC the wooden box mine of the wooden-box mine
Sit between august 6 and 7 found that
the remants of the explosives were identical to those of North Korean wooden box mines, and that two
mines had detonated during the first blast with one mine going off during the second blast. the investigators
assessed that given the blast site was sloped from south to north, it was improbable that these mines had


-----

been laid on the North side and were later swept across the MDL due to heavy rain[5)] and that the careful,
precise manner in which they were positioned and camouflaged in the forward and rear areas of the gate
suggested that they had been laid intentionally.

re-enactment of the laying of the wooden-box mine Correspondents touring the site of provocation

Presentation by the joint investigation team tOD image of the detonation

On august 10, the Joint investigation team presented its findings, concluding that the mine incident was
a “provocation by North Korea.” the JCS released the thermal observation device (tOD) images of the blast
site to the media and announced the decision to heighten the military readiness posture and resume psy-
chological warfare broadcasts.
On august 11, UNCMaC sent a proposal to North Korea for high-level talks to prepare for a general offi-
cer-level discussion about the DMZ landmine provocation. however, on august 14, the Policy Bureau of
North Korea’s National Defense Commission issued a statement denying its involvement in the incident
while promising to punish the rOK for the psychological warfare broadcasts. the Joint Chiefs of Staff
responded to this statement by notifying North Korea of its intention to retaliate mercilessly, should another
provocation occur.

**| Assessment | the initial actions undertaken by the military on the North Korean landmine provocation**
in the DMZ were both prompt and precise. the field unit was able to assess and respond to the situation

5) Furthermore, the blast site, sloped from south to north, has no groove or furrow allowing the passage of water. also, if the mines had
indeed drifted across the MDL, there should have been deposits of dirt or plant debris near the barbed wire fence, but no trace of such
deposits was found.


-----

quickly and accurately, as seen in their swift, calm emergency care to the victims and their collection of
evidence, such as the tOD images of the second blast. the prompt, accurate response from the rOK servicemembers would not have been possible without the regular realistic education and training and the high
level of coordination within the unit.
MND and JCS formed and operated the integrated Crisis Management task Force and developed an integrated response strategy, shaping conditions necessary for a consistent response from the government and
the military.
Starting on august 5, the rOK and the U.S. consulted bilateral response options through meetings
between the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Commander, Combined Forces Command, and the
Bilateral Operational Planning team (OPt). Moreover, the UNCMaC Special investigation team conducted a
joint inquiry into the incident with the JCS Joint investigation team, each sharing their results with the other.
these measures helped to establish the facts objectively and irrefutably before the international community
that North Korea is responsible for the landmine provocation.
at a time when the resumption of loudspeaker broadcasts to the North on august 10 caused inter-Korean
tensions to mount to a fever pitch, the military went ahead with the Ulchi Freedom Guardian (UFG) exercise
as planned between august 17 and 27, displaying the strong determination of the rOK-U.S. alliance to firmly
respond to North Korean provocations.

**3. DMZ Artillery Provocations by north Korea and the ROK Military’s Response**

**| synopsis | after maintaining silence over the landmine blasts in the DMZ, in their immediate aftermath**
on august 15, the North Korean military strongly denied responsibility in the affair and protested against the
psychological warfare broadcasts by the rOK, threatening to launch indiscriminate strikes and reduce the
country to ashes unless the broadcasts stopped.
Starting on august 4, the rOK military had stepped up the level of alertness in anticipation of additional
provocations by North Korea and made its intention clear to firmly respond to any further provocations while
maintaining a heightened readiness posture for units positioned near GOPs.

**| Measures Taken | at around 15:53 on august 20,**
the counter-battery radar system of the rOK military
captured the ballistic trajectory of a projectile originating from the area where North Korea’s 122mm multiple
rocket launchers were positioned on a path toward the
imjin training Ground on the rOK side.
at around 16:12, an explosion was heard again, with
the tOD showing smoke rising on the rOK side. the
analysis of the tOD images confirmed that the smoke
was from the projectile launched by the North Korean Servicemembers pledging to voluntarily postpone their

discharge

military, to which the rOK military returned fire in
self-defense.
North Korea sent a telegram signed by the Central Committee of the Workers’ Party of Korea, denying its
responsibility in the artillery provocation and expressing its willingness to make efforts toward improved
inter-Korean relations. at the same time, in another telegram, this time signed by the General Staff Department, North Korea demanded suspension of psychological warfare broadcasts and the complete removal of


-----

broadcasting equipment within 48 hours, threatening to take tough military actions unless this demand was
met, in what appeared to be an ultimatum.
During an emergency National Security Council (NSC) meeting convened on the same day, the rOK gov-
ernment once again made known its intention to mercilessly and firmly respond to North Korean provoca-
tions and retaliate immediately, should North Korea conduct additional provocations.
On august 21, in a statement to the nation, the Minister of National
Defense vowed to sever the vicious cycle of North Korean provocations and
protect the lives and property of the citizens through decisive and resolute
responses.
On august 22, North Korea proposed to hold an inter-Korean high-level
meeting, which was accepted by the rOK government. the high-level meeting
was convened on the same day at 18:30 at the Peace house in Panmunjeom. inter-Korean Joint Press Statement

issued (august 2015)

the tense military situation prompted a large number of the rOK service-
members to voluntarily extend their service periods. as demonstrated by the patriotism and determination of these
servicemembers for the defense of their country, the North Korean provocation also provided an opportunity for the
entire nation to come together as one.
On august 25, the rOK government issued a joint press statement from the inter-Korean high-level
meeting.

**Inter-Korean Joint Press statement**

an inter-Korean high-level meeting was held from 22 to 24 august 2015 at Panmunjom.

From the South, Kim Kwan-jin, Director of National Security, and hong Yong-pyo, Minister of Unification, participated in
the meeting, while hwang Pyong So, Director of the General Political Bureau of the Korean People’s army, and Kim Yang
Gon, Secretary of the Central Committee of the Korean Workers’ Party from the North, participated.

the two sides discussed issues aimed at defusing military tensions between the two Koreas which had escalated
recently, as well as at advancing inter-Korean relations, and agreed as follows:

1.  the South and the North agreed to hold meetings between government authorities at an early date, either in Seoul or
in Pyongyang, that are aimed at improving inter-Korean relations, and to conduct dialogue and negotiations on a range
of areas in the period ahead.
2. the North expressed regret over the injuries of the soldiers of the South caused by the recent landmine explosions
that took place in the southern area of the Demilitarized Zone along the Military Demarcation Line.
3.  as long as no abnormal incident occurs, the South agreed to suspend all loudspeaker broadcasts along the Military
Demarcation Line, effective 12:00p.m. august 25.
4. the North agreed to lift its quasi-state of war.
5. the South and the North agreed to arrange reunions of separated families on the occasion of Chuseok and continue
such reunions in the future and, to this end, to hold working-level red Cross meetings in early September.
6. the South and the North agreed to boost non-governmental exchanges in a wide range of fields.

Panmunjom, august 25, 2015

**| Assessment | Using the counter-battery radar system and tOD, the rOK military accurately detected**
the North Korean projectile as well as the smoke it produced and quickly reported the findings. the field unit
returned fire in a manner appropriate to the nature and scale of the North Korean provocation, demonstrat-


-----

ing the rOK military’s intention to respond in kind. through close rOK-U.S. cooperation, the military was
able to deter additional provocations and alleviate public anxiety about the security situation.
in the immediate aftermath of the North Korean artillery provocation in the DMZ, the rOK and the US
consulted bilateral response options through 10 telphone conversations between the JCS Chairman and the
CFC Commander, and a bilateral Operational Planning team (OPt). the rOK-U.S. combined shows of force
on the waters and in the air also helped considerably in easing the public’s security concerns.
the Minister of National Defense personally addressed the nation through a speech titled “Statement to
the Nation regarding the recent North Korean Provocations” to seek public understanding and support for
the firm response planned by the government and the military. this also helped to generate public confidence in the rOK military. By informing the media in a timely manner about the movement of the North
Korean military and actions underway by the rOK military in a timely fashion, the minister’s address ensured
that the public’s right to know was respected, garnering broad support from the people in the process.
the military helped strengthen the rOK’s negotiating clout from the early stages. During preparatory steps
for the inter-Korean high-level meeting, the military developed a negotiation strategy, defining the direction
of negotiations in the military sector and drafting responses to each of the anticipated agenda items.
Meanwhile, MND representatives with extensive experience in negotiating with North Korea on military
issues participated in the inter-Korean working-level meeting, helping the rOK to secure the initiative in concluding the 25 august agreement.

**4. significance**

in the aftermath of the landmine and artillery provocations in the DMZ, North Korea continued with its rhetorical threats and actions through expressions such as “indiscriminate strike operations,” “burn down the means
of psychological warfare,” “1 million military enrollment petition campaign,” and “decision to declare a state of
war/quasi-state of war,” escalating fear and anxiety within the rOK.
the government responded by reaffirming its firm, consistent position as well as expressing its strong
resolve. the military heightened its surveillance and alert levels to respond to any additional provocations and
concentrated on the stable control and management of the situation through close alliance collaboration.
through these measures, the government and the military were able to sever the vicious cycle of North
Korean provocations and seize the initiative in inter-Korean military relations, earning public’s confidence in
national defense in the process.
While the military responded firmly to the North Korean landmine and artillery provocations, the rOK as a
whole, including its government, armed forces and citizens at large, calmly handled the situation, consistent
with the basic direction of the North Korea policy. the public showed confidence in the government’s response
as well as the military’s readiness posture and continued to lead their normal day-to-day activities, even going
so far as to demand bold countermeasures against North Korean threats.
North Korea eventually expressed their regret over the landmine provocation through the joint press
statement from the inter-Korean high-level meeting. Furthermore, North Korea agreed to arrange reunions of
separated families and engage in dialogue, shifting the tone toward de-escalation.
the calmness with which the rOK public responded to the North Korean provocations and the military
spirit and grit demonstrated by the injured troops were testimony to the strong national vision and patriotism of the citizenry and the military alike.


-----

**special Appendix 3**

**Adjustment to the Korea Air Defense Identification Zone**
**(KADIZ) and follow-up Measures**

**1. establishment and Adjustment to KADIZ**

the Korea air Defense identification Zone[6)] (KaDiZ) was set up by the U.S. Pacific air Forces (PaCaF)
during the Korean War on March 22, 1951 against air strikes by Chinese forces and as a means to reinforce
the rOK air defense network. the KaDiZ initially left out ieodo with its southern boundary limited to 6.5
nautical miles (NM) south of Marado island in consideration of air operation capabilities of the Chinese and
North Korean militaries at the time.
in September 1969, the Japan air Defense identification Zone (JaDiZ) was set up, and it encompassed the
waters near ieodo at its western edge. this posed problem when a maritime accident happened in an area
within the rOK’s flight information region (Fir)[7)] but outside the KaDiZ. in such cases, search and rescue opera-
tions taking place within the rOK’s Fir would have to be pre-authorized by Japan. a section of the rOK airspace
over Marado island and the southern part of hongdo island was also included in the JaDiZ.
to resolve this issue, the Park Geun-hye adminis- **KADIZ and Incheon fIR before adjustment**
tration consulted with the U.S. and Japan to synchro-
nize KaDiZ precisely with the incheon Fir. however,
the U.S. maintained the position that this was an issue that had to be resolved between the rOK and **Shenyang** **North Korea** **KADIZPyongyang FIR**
Japan without its involvement. Meanwhile, Japan **Shanghai FIR**

**FIR** **East Sea**

was downright unwilling to discuss the matter with **Dokdo**
the rOK, hindering any real progress in the rOK gov- **Republic of Korea**

**Incheon FIR**

ernment’s efforts to adjust KaDiZ. **West Sea**
On November 23, 2013, China unilaterally **South  Sea**
declared its “east China Sea air Defense identifi-

**Legend**

cation Zone” which partially overlapped with the **Ieodo** **KADIZ (previous)**

**Fukuoka** **Incheon FIR**

KaDiZ and included the waters near ieodo, without **FIR** **JADIZ**
discussing the affair with the rOK government in **Shanghai FIR** **China’s ADIZ**
advance. this prompted the government to com-
prehensively re-examine the issue of adjusting the
KaDiZ in a manner that conforms to international norms and practices and best serves the national interest
of the rOK, all the while promoting mutual trust and cooperation among the interested parties.
On November 27, 2013, the government decided to adjust the KaDiZ and explained its position to stake-

6) the air Defense identification Zone (aDiZ) is an airspace, over land and sea, in which identification, location and control of aircraft is
required for the purposes of national security. the aDiZ was first established by the U.S. in 1950 in consideration of the seriousness of
threats posed by unidentified airborne objects. aDiZ is currently set up and maintained in 30 countries around the world, including the
U.S., U.K., Japan and China.

7) refers to a specific region of airspace, based on the division of global airspace by the international Civil aviation Organization (iCaO),
in which information necessary for the safe and efficient flight of aircraft and aircraft search and rescue operations is provided by the
country having jurisdiction in the region.the incheon Fir, controlled and managed by the rOK, was set up in May 1963 and stretches
to 451km south of Jejudo island (255km from ieodo).


-----

|such as the U.S., Japan, and Chin subsequently finalized an executive by jointly deliberating with MND cember 8. after a phase-in period lacing the old zone which had bee|a ahead o bill on ad and other of seven d n in place f|
|---|---|

|Col1|History of Adjustment to KADIZ|
|---|---|
|March 22 1951|U.S. Pacific air Forces established the KaDiZ|
|September 1 1969|Japan established the JaDiZ (including ieodo)|
|July 28 2008|“act on the Operation, etc of Military aircraft” went into effect Legal grounds in domestic laws prepared for KaDiZ|
|November 23 2013|China declared the “east China Sea air Defense identification Zone”|
|December 15 2013|the new KaDiZ took effect|


holder countries, such as the U.S., Japan, and China ahead of the official announcement of the decision.
the government subsequently finalized an executive bill on adjusting the KaDiZ during a National Security
Council meeting by jointly deliberating with MND and other relevant government agencies, and officially
unveiled it on December 8. after a phase-in period of seven days, the new KaDiZ took effect at 14:00 on
December 15, replacing the old zone which had been in place for 62 years.

**KADIZ after adjustment**

**History of Adjustment to KADIZ**

March 22
U.S. Pacific air Forces established the KaDiZ **Pyongyang**
1951 **FIR**

**North Korea**

September 1 1969 Japan established the JaDiZ (including ieodo) **Shanghai FIRShenyang FIR** **NLL** **NLL**

**Dokdo**

“act on the Operation, etc of Military aircraft” **Republic of Korea**

July 28 went into effect
2008 Legal grounds in domestic laws prepared for

KaDiZ

November China declared the “east China Sea air Defense **Legend**
23 2013 identification Zone” **Ieodo** **KADIZ (previous)**

**Incheon** **Fukuoka** **KADIZ (adjusted)**

December 15 2013 the new KaDiZ took effect **Shanghai FIR** **FIR** **FIR** **Incheon FIRJADIZChina’s ADIZ**

**2. significance of the Adjustment to KADIZ**

the adjustment to KaDiZ 62 years after its initial establishment is significant in three ways:
First, the adjusted KaDiZ includes the airspace over territorial islands such as Marado and hongdo and the
waters surrounding ieodo. the adjustment to the KaDiZ contributed to the national interest of the rOK by
reinforcing control over its territory and territorial sea south of the MDL.
Second, KaDiZ extended southward has provided an air defense buffer zone, which is required for the
defense of the airspace in the area south of Jejudo island, and allowed for protecting southern sea lanes and
navigation routes.
third, as the southern boundary of the new KaDiZ coincides with that of the Fir, the risk of interfering
with the international flight order or the safe flight of civilian aircraft has been eliminated, giving the rOK the
potential for building greater confidence with its neighbors.
By prudently proceeding with this project, all the while demonstrating an unwavering resolve to defend the
national interest in the face of unforeseen changes in security conditions, the rOK government enhanced
the nation’s stature within the international community and earned the renewed public support and confi-
dence in the principles and vision for its security policy. the government’s calm and methodical approach
to a sensitive issue related to national security has also helped to strengthen the nation’s autonomy and
cement a relationship of trust with the neighboring countries.

**3. follow-up Measures after the KADIZ Adjustment**

to validate the new KaDiZ and effectively manage it, a series of follow-up measures were implemented:
First, to officially validate the new KaDiZ in and outside the rOK, on December 10, two days after


-----

announcing the adjustment to KaDiZ, MND **Ministry of national Defense notification 2013-449**
published a NOtaM (Notice to airmen) and,

The Korea Air Defense Identification Zone (KADIZ) is amended and announced as follows in

on December 12, issued “Ministry of National accordance with Article 2(2) of the Enforcement Decree of the Act on the Operation of Military
Defense Notification 2013-449.” the Ministry Aircraft. December 12, 2013
of Land, infrastructure and transport (MOLit) Minister of National Defense
released a revised version of the aeronautical 1. The range of the KADIZ is as follows:
information Publication (aiP) with the updated a. Zone: 39° 00’ N. Latitude, 123° 30’ E. Longitude - 39° 00’ N. Latitude, 133° 30’ E. Longitude
information on KaDiZ to inform aviation com- -  37° 17’ N. Latitude, 133° 00’ E. Longitude - 36° 00’ N. Latitude, 130° 30’ E. Longitude- 35° 13’ N. Latitude, 129° 48’ E. Longitude - 34° 43’ N. Latitude, 129° 09’ E. Longitude
munities in the rOK and abroad about changes -  34° 17’ N. Latitude, 128° 52’ E. Longitude - 39° 00’ N. Latitude, 127° 30’ E. Longitude

-  32° 30’ N. Latitude, 126° 50’ E. Longitude - 39° 00’ N. Latitude, 125° 25’ E. Longitude

to its boundaries. -  30° 00’ N. Latitude, 124° 00’ E. Longitude - 39° 00’ N. Latitude, 124° 00’ E. Longitude
Second, an explicit legal basis was created -  Start Point
for the new KaDiZ. the “act on the Operation, b. Altitude: From the surface of the earth to infinity
etc of Military aircraft” was amended to place Addendum <No. 2013-449, December 12, 2013>
further emphasis on the importance of the Article 1 (Enforcement Date) This Notification takes effect as of 14:00 on December 15, 2013.
KaDiZ for national security and to provide legal
basis that can be applied for military operations and conflicts with neighboring countries.
third, a set of measures are underway to effectively manage the expanded KaDiZ. MND is increasing the
inventory of detection equipment, including long-distance radar systems, and repositioning datalink-based
remote communication stations to ensure that military operations are smoothly carried out in the new-
ly-added section of the KaDiZ, all the way to its southern boundary. the operational frequency of airborne
early warning and control aircraft (e-737) has been increased in this area. Moreover, military capabilities
have been doubled by regularly conducting search and rescue exercises in an outward manifestation of the
intention and cabilities to effectively manage the expanded KaDiZ.
Fourth, discussions are on-going with China and Japan to prevent accidental military conflict that may
occur in the overlapping areas of their respective aDiZs. in March 2014, the rOK and Japan agreed on
concrete measures to prevent accidents in the overlapping area of the two countries’ aDiZs, including the
exchange of flight information when entering into the overlapping area and tactical procedures for uniden-
tified aircraft in this area. the two countries continue to improve these measures by conferring with each
other through defense dialogues.
the rOK and China also agreed to share flight information with each other and established a direct
telephone line between the two countries’ defense ministries. Direct telephone lines were also added
between the rOK and Chinese navies and air forces. talks for preventing accidental military conflict in the
overlapping area of the two countries’ aDiZs and within their respective aDiZs are also in progress.

an airborne early warning and control aircraft (e-737) and F-15Ks in a navy frigate and a P-3C anti-submarine patrol aircraft in a
formation for air patrol over the waters south of Jejudo island maneuver and search operation in their assigned waters near ieodo


-----

**special Appendix 4**

**UsfK THAAD Deployment**

**1. What is THAAD?**

terminal high altitude area Defense (thaaD) is a ballistic missile defense system capable of directly
shooting down short to intermediate-range ballistic missiles with a range of 3,000km or less, during their
descent, at an altitude of 40-150km. thaaD, which is a terminal-phase, low-tier defense system intercepting
ballistic missiles at an altitude of 20km and covering mainly key infrastructures and facilities, is a gigantic
nuclear umbrella far surpassing the coverage area of the Patriot system currently operated by the rOK and
the U.S.

**THAAD**

**Patriot**

thaaD system Patriot and thaaD compared in terms of area of coverage

**2. THAAD Timelines: Deployment Decision and site selection**

**| Decision to Deploy THAAD | On February 2,**
2016, the Commander of the rOK-U.S. Combined
Forces Command officially proposed the deployment
of thaaD to MND, on behalf of the U.S. Department of
Defense. On February 7, the rOK and the U.S. jointly
announced the start of official talks. On March 4, the
rOK-U.S. joint working group was launched. During
the preliminary phase that lasted until July of the same
year, various analyses based on pre-selected evalua-
tion criteria were conducted, along with several onsite Launching of the rOK-U.S. joint working group for the

deployment of thaaD (March 2016)

inspections. Joint conferences between the rOK and
the U.S. were regularly held, as well as independent strategy meetings by each country. On July 4, a meeting
was convened with relevant government agencies to discuss the military effectiveness of the deployment of
thaaD and availability of a suitable site for the installation of the system. this was followed by the discus-
sion by the Standing Committee of the rOK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) on July 7. On July 8,
the rOK and the U.S. decided that thaaD will be deployed by the U.S. Forces Korea and announced this
decision to the media.


-----

**| site selection | On July 13, the joint working group proposed Seongju, Gyeongsangbuk-do as the site**
for the deployment of thaaD. the proposed site was approved by the rOK Minister of National Defense
and the U.S. Secretary of Defense and was officially announced. On august 22, the County of Seongju,
prompted by the demand by county residents, submitted an official request to the MND, asking a site other
than the initially selected site to be considered for the installation of the thaaD system. Per this request,
the rOK-U.S. joint working group evaluated the new site for its suitability through cooperation with the local
community and with the help of experts in relevant fields. On September 29, a final decision was made to
select Dalmasan Mountain in Seongju (Seongju CC) as the site for the deployment of thaaD.

**3. Military effectiveness of the Deployment of THAAD**

**| The Best Missile Defense system in existence | thaaD, which successfully passed all eleven flight**
and interception tests conducted in the U.S. since 2005, is considered the best missile defense system
with the highest interception rate of all existing systems of its kind. Of the eleven tests, eight tests were
conducted with short-range missiles such as SCUDs, and three tests with medium-range missiles like the
rodong. By satisfactorily performing with these missiles, thaaD has proved that it is well adapted to the
goal of deployment.

**| Interception of north Korean Missiles at High Altitudes | as thaaD is capable of intercepting North**
Korean nuclear warheads and missiles at a high altitude of over 40km, the system can prevent casualties
and damage on the ground. By forming a layered defense system along with the Patriot system currently
in operation by the rOK and the U.S., and medium-range surface-to-air missiles (M-SaM) and long-range
surface-to-air missiles (L-SaM) under development, thaaD can dramatically increase the rate of interception
and provide protection for a significantly broader area (from one half of the rOK territory to two-third).

**| Increasing Capital Defense Capabilities by expanding and strengthening the Patriot system |**
North Korean ballistic missiles that pose particular threats for the capital area are SCUD-class missiles
with a low flight altitude and short flight distance. therefore, for the defense of the capital area, the Patriot
system is more useful than thaaD. Capital defense capabilities can be further strengthened by repositioning
some of the Patriot systems currently deployed in south of the central part of the rOK to the capital area.

**4. safety of THAAD Radar**

**| Installed at Mountain Tops to Detect and Track north Korean Missiles, emitting Beams toward**
**the sky | the operation of the thaaD radar is controlled under strict safety distance rules. electromag-**
netic waves emitted by the radar system have no harmful effect whatsoever on the human body outside the
100m range which is considered the safety distance from the ground. as radar beams are emitted upward
at an angle of 5 degrees or more, from inside the base, at a distance of at least 500m from the fence, they
cause no adverse effect on residents and crops outside the fence.


-----

**Safety zone**

**Safety distance of 100m from ground**

Safety distance from thaaD’s radar transmitter

**| THAAD Radar Proven safe Repeatedly at safety Distance Range | in front of andersen air Force**
Base in Guam where thaaD was deployed in april 2013, famous tourist resorts (Coco Palm Garden Beach,
ritidian Beach) lie at a distance of just 2-3km from the thaaD battery. the safety of electromagnetic waves,
as used by the thaaD radar system, has been well established, with the surrounding area becoming desig-
nated as a wildlife conservation zone. When the amount of radiation emissions was actually measured in the
Guam base, it was a mere 0.007% of the level considered safe for humans. also, the test performed on the
Green Pine radar and the Patriot radar within access-restrict zones found that the strength of radiation was
very moderate at about 0.33-5.38% of the maximum level considered safe for human exposure. the military
has never previously experienced ill effects of radiation, and this will continue to be the case even after the
deployment of thaaD.

**Bathing beach (Ritidian Beach),**
**wildlife sanctuary**

**Bathing beach**
**(Coco Palm Garden Beach)**

2~3km

1.6km **THAAD installations**

**Facilities including barracks and**
**training grounds, accommodating**
**some 200 people including THAAD**
**operating staff**

andersen air Force Base in Guam where thaaD is deployed.


-----

**5. Tasks Ahead**

in view of the deployment of thaaD, the Status of Forces agreement (SOFa) negotiations will take place
on the provision of land at the planned site in Dalmasan Mountain in Seongju. this will be followed by
design and construction work. the rOK and the U.S. will make their best efforts to complete the deploy-
ment of thaaD and make it operational before the end of 2017. During the process of the deployment of
thaaD, MND plans to continuously communicate with the area’s residents to allay safety fears by providing
objective and scientific explanations on the effects of radar beams on human health, answering questions
and addressing concerns.

Forces that protect us
USFK thaaD Deployment


-----

|Concluded (33 countries +1 international organization)|Col2|In negotiations9) (10 countries)|
|---|---|---|
|Agreed (20 countries)|Contracted (13 countries +1 organization)||
|U.S., Canada, France, russia, Ukraine, Spain, australia, UK, Sweden, Poland, Bulgaria, Uzbekistan, New Zealand, Greece, india, romania, Philippines, hungary, Jordan, Japan|Germany, italy, Netherlands, Malaysia, indonesia, israel, Pakistan, Norway, North atlantic treaty Organization (international organization), Uae, Denmark, Colombia, Belgium, Vietnam|Germany, indonesia, China, republic of South africa, Saudi arabia, Peru, Mongolia, turkey, thailand, Czech republic|



**special Appendix 5**

**ROK-Japan General security of Military Information**
**Agreement (GsOMIA)**

**1. What Is GsOMIA?**

**| General security of Military Information Agreement | the General Security of Military information**
agreement (GSOMia) lays down the methods of sharing and exchanging military information between two
countries and protecting and managing the information that has been shared and exchanged. the scope of
the agreement includes the channels through which military information is shared and exchanged, ranks and
capacities of offices handling the shared and exchanged information, allowed uses, the duty of protection,
management methods and discarding procedures. information shared under a GSOMia is not unlimited or
unrestricted. Based on the principle of reciprocity, two countries exchange information of an equivalent clas-
sification level after carefully reviewing the type and nature of information on a case-by-case basis.

**| Current status | the diversity of sources being paramount to the accuracy and reliability of intelligence,**
most countries across the world, including the U.S., have entered into a GSOMia or a similar arrangement[8)]
with other countries to share military intelligence.
the rOK government is currently under a GSOMia or other forms of military intelligence sharing arrange-
ments with 33 countries and one international organization and is in negotiations for a GSOMia with ten
other countries including China and Mongolia.

**status of GsOMIA with Other Countries (As of December 2016)[9)]**

**Concluded (33 countries +1 international organization)**
**In negotiations[9)]**

**(10 countries)**
**Agreed (20 countries)** **Contracted (13 countries +1 organization)**

U.S., Canada, France, russia, Ukraine, Spain, Germany, italy, Netherlands, Malaysia, indonesia, Germany, indonesia, China,
australia, UK, Sweden, Poland, Bulgaria, israel, Pakistan, Norway, North atlantic treaty republic of South africa, Saudi
Uzbekistan, New Zealand, Greece, india, romania, Organization (international organization), Uae, arabia, Peru, Mongolia, turkey,
Philippines, hungary, Jordan, Japan Denmark, Colombia, Belgium, Vietnam thailand, Czech republic

**2. Timeline**

the rOK-Japan GSOMia was initially proposed by Japan, in 1989. however, at that time, the two sides
failed to reach a common ground regarding the necessity or usefulness of a GSOMia. Later, faced with
repeated provocations from North Korea, in 2006 and 2009, in the forms of nuclear tests and long-range
missile launches, the two countries started to show renewed interest in the GSOMia.

8) Unlike an agreement, which is a formal treaty between two countries usually in written form and governed by international law, an
arrangement is most often between a government institution and its foreign counterpart with the same or similar area of
responsibility. an arrangement has no binding force, and its scope depends on the level of authority and area of duties of the parties
thereto.

9) With two of them, Germany and indonesia, the rOK entered into a military intelligence sharing arrangements. Plans are currently
underway to elevate these arrangements to the status of a GSOMia.


-----

in 2011, the two countries’ defense ministers agreed to start talks on a GSOMia, and in June 2012, a
rOK-Japan GSOMia was adopted at a Cabinet meeting. however, the process was aborted in its final stage,
just before the agreement could be signed, as objections were raised related to the procedural aspects of
the GSOMia negotiations.
in 2016, North Korea carried out consecutive nuclear tests, coupled with some twenty test launches of
missiles including a submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM). Confronted by this grave security situation,
MND conducted a comprehensive review of capabilities against North Korean nuclear and missile threats,
examining the need for reinforcing the response posture of the rOK armed forces. the rOK military, as it
engaged in efforts to improve the capacity to implement the rOK-U.S. joint deterrence strategy and carried
on with the project of building the three-axis system, came to the realization that a GSOMia with Japan was
necessary to enhance its intelligence capabilities.
after necessary working-level reviews and discussions between relevant government agencies, a decision
was reached to resume GSOMia talks with Japan on October 27, 2016, during a National Security Council
meeting. the negotiations between the rOK and Japanese government lasted between November 1 and
9. During the third talks, held on November 14, the two countries finalized the text of the agreement and
initialed it.
On November 23, after the completion of the required review process including deliberation by the
Ministry of Government Legislation, Council of Deputy Ministers, and the Cabinet meeting, the Minister of
National Defense and the ambassador of Japan to the rOK signed the GSOMia. the rOK-Japan General
Security of Military information agreement took effect when the two countries notified each other of the
completion of their respective internal ratification procedures through diplomatic channels.

**3. Highlights of the ROK-Japan General security of Military Information Agreement**

this agreement stipulating procedures for ensuring the security of military intelligence shared between the
rOK and Japan comprises 21 articles.
Under this agreement, each country, when receiving secret military information from the other country, is
required to mark it with an appropriate level of classification (article 4). Military secrets may not be leaked
or disclosed to, or accessed by, a third party without a written pre-authorization by the country sharing the
secrets, must be protected through security procedures equivalent to those used by the providing country
and must not be used for purposes other than intended purposes (article 6). the agreement otherwise sets
out specific rules and procedures related to the exchange and protection of military secrets including the
requirement of use of government-to-government channels to communicate military secrets (article 9),
security requirements to be met during their transmission (article 12) and dispositions to take in the event
of their loss or damage (article 17).

|Category|Details|
|---|---|
|Purpose|Protection of military secrets|
|Secret Classification|Mark classification level for each country (rOK: secret/confidential, Japan: secret/confidential)|
|Protection rule|Military secrets may not be leaked or disclosed to, or accessed by, a third party without a written pre- authorization by the country sharing the secrets, and must not be used for purposes other than intended purposes|
|access|execute procedures to ensure access qualification of military secrets (government official who needs them for official duties and has been granted permission in accordance with a valid domestic law)|


-----

|exchange|Government to government exchange|
|---|---|
|Facility security|responsibility for security of government facility that stores military secrets|
|Security requirements|Security requirements and procedures when exchanging via paper·media, device, or electronically|
|Destruction|Destruction instructions (incineration, shredding, pulping, or other means to prevent restoration)|
|Loss or damage|immediate notification to the providing country and investigation in regards to all possibilities of loss and damage|
|Settlement|Can only be settled by agreement between parties concerned|
|revision|Can be revised by mutual written consent of both countries|
|term/expiration|Valid for a year and automatically extended unless a party provides written notice of termination to the other party at least 90 days prior to the end of the term|




exchange Government to government exchange

Facility security responsibility for security of government facility that stores military secrets

Security requirements Security requirements and procedures when exchanging via paper·media, device, or electronically

Destruction Destruction instructions (incineration, shredding, pulping, or other means to prevent restoration)

immediate notification to the providing country and investigation in regards to all possibilities of loss and
Loss or damage
damage

Settlement Can only be settled by agreement between parties concerned

revision Can be revised by mutual written consent of both countries

Valid for a year and automatically extended unless a party provides written notice of termination to the other
term/expiration
party at least 90 days prior to the end of the term

**4. necessity and expected Benefits**

North Korea is concentrating on upgrading its missile capabilities, including nuclear and subma-
rine-launched ballistic missiles, and is poised to conduct more nuclear tests and test missile launches at
any time. By signing the GSOMia with Japan, the rOK government expects to be able to more effectively
respond to mounting North Korean nuclear and missile threats, which have become more lethal and real
than ever, using Japanese intelligence capabilities.
Japan devotes a larger share of its national budget to defense than the rOK[10)] and possesses large,
high-quality surveillance and detection assets including reconnaissance satellites, aegis ships, airborne early
warning and control aircraft. hence, sharing video and other data with Japan, which possesses advanced
intelligence-gathering and analyzing capabilities, can assist the rOK military in tracking and analyzing the
trajectories of North Korean ballistic missiles and conducting technical analysis of its nuclear capabilities.
Furthermore, the east Sea bordering Japan’s territorial waters is within the reachable range of its intelli-
gence assets. therefore, information exchange with Japan will give the rOK military access to better and
broader intelligence related to the activities of North Korean submarines and submarine-launched ballistic
missiles in this sea area.
Moreover, this agreement, which allows direct access to intelligence gathered by Japan,[11)] is likely to
improve the speed of intelligence-gathering by the rOK and enhance the accuracy and reliability of intelli-
gence. the improvement of surveillance capabilities is expected to deter North Korean nuclear and missile
threat activities more effectively.
Under the rOK-Japan GSOMia, only selective sets of information are shared and exchanged on a case-by-
case basis. therefore, this agreement is unrelated to and has no bearing on Japan’s bid to become a regional
power and will not lead to the deployment of the Japanese Self-Defense Forces in the Korean peninsula or
the integration of the rOK into the regional MD system.

10) in 2016, the national defense budget of Japan amounted to JPY 5.541 trillion (approximately USD 48.9 billion), while that of the rOK
was KrW 38.7995 trillion (approximately USD 33.9 billion).

11) in December 2014, responding to the repeatedly-evoked need of exchanging information with Japan, the government signed the
GSOMia with its Japanese counterpart, modeled on the pre-existing rOK-U.S. and U.S.-Japan GSOMia. the two countries thereafter
shared information related to North Korean nuclear and missile threats through the intermediary of the U.S.


-----

**5. Tasks Ahead**

the government will deal with Japan’s territorial claims on Dokdo island and distortion of history with a
stern hand and only exchange intelligence with it insofar as this serves the national security interests of
the rOK. Meanwhile, the military will make its best efforts to protect the lives of the people of the rOK and
defend the security of the nation.


-----

**special Appendix 6**

**Mungyeong Korea 2015 6[th] CIsM World Games**

**1. Mungyeong Korea 2015 6[th] CIsM World Games**

the 6[th] CiSM World Games took place between
October 2 and 11, 2015, in Mungyeong and
seven other cities and counties in Gyeonsang-
buk-do, including Pohang and Gimcheon.[12)] the
CiSM World Games is an international military
sporting event organized by the international
Military Sports Council (CiSM)[13)] to promote
peace. Under the motto of ‘Friendship through
Sports,’ the CiSM World Games are held every
four years. Being the de facto Military Olympics,
this multi-sport event, participated by members Opening ceremony of the 6[th] CiSM World Games (October 2015)
of the armed forces of 134 countries, is the third
largest after the Olympic Games (204 countries) and the Universiade (167 countries). in 2015, 7,045 armed
forces members from 117 countries, one of the largest participation in the history of the CiSM World Games,
competed in 24 events.[14)]

For the first time since the inception of the
CiSM World Games, 54 disabled veterans
marched together in the Parade of Nations during
the opening ceremony and participated in events
such as archery and athletics.
15 non-member nations were also invited as
an emphatic message of peace and friendship
through sports.
Supporter groups were formed and assigned to
each of the participating national teams to cheer
for the athletes. Between competitions, there Disabled veterans in the parade of nations
were performances by K-pop artists, hand-held
fan dance performances, and taekwondo demonstrations, offering a taste of local culture and helping to
promote pro-Korean sentiment in the world community and further spread the Korean wave.

12) Mungyeong, Pohang, Gimcheon, andong, Yeongju, Yeongcheon, Sangju and Yecheon.

13) Conseil international du Sport Militaire.

14) Military pentathlon, nautical pentathlon, aeronautical pentathlon, orienteering, parachuting, basketball, football, golf, handball,
volleyball, archery, cycling, marathon, modern pentathlon, sailing, shooting, swimming, athletics, triathlon, boxing, judo, taekwondo,
wrestling and fencing.


-----

|Games|Year|Host|Venue|nations|events|Top country on medal table|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1|1995|italy|rome|84|17|russia|
|2|1999|Croatia|Zagreb|80|18|russia|
|3|2003|italy|Catania|81|11|China|
|4|2007|india|hyderabad|101|15|russia|
|5|2011|Brazil|rio de Janeiro|113|20|Brazil|
|6|2015|rOK|Mungyeong|117|24|russia|



**2. event Preparations**

in May 2011, during the 66[th] General Meeting of the international Military Sports Council, the rOK was
selected as the host of the 6[th] CiSM World Games. in January 2012, a preparation committee for the estab-
lishment of the CiSM World Games Organizing Committee was formed. in august of the same year, the Games
Organizing Committee was established and proceeded to select the official mascot and drafting a basic plan
while preparing for marketing activities.
Under the slogan of ‘Cost-efficient, alluring First-Class event,’ the Games Organizing Committee made
great efforts to create an event that befits the nation’s growing international status and role.
in particular, by successfully hosting the 61[st] CiSM World Military Pentathlon Championship between
October 8 and 16, 2014 as pre-games, the Games Organizing Committee demonstrated its ability to
organize and host major international events.

emblem Mascot

the Prime Minister touring the event venues
(September 2015)

**3. Accomplishments and significance**

**| Results | the rOK participated in all 24 events of the Mungyeong Korea 2015 6[th] CiSM World Games**
(19 general events, 5 military events) and finished fourth in total medals, its best result thus far.

**History of CIsM World Games**

**Top country on**
**Games** **Year** **Host** **Venue** **nations** **events**
**medal table**

1 1995 italy rome 84 17 russia

2 1999 Croatia Zagreb 80 18 russia

3 2003 italy Catania 81 11 China

4 2007 india hyderabad 101 15 russia

5 2011 Brazil rio de Janeiro 113 20 Brazil

6 2015 rOK Mungyeong 117 24 russia

*[ Most records set in history (49 CiSM records, 3 Korean records) and 162 athletes qualified for 2016 rio Olympic Games]

the 2015 CiSM World Games in Mungyeong were especially significant in that they were held in the


-----

world’s last divided country in the 70[th] anniversary year of its division to celebrate the friendship between
nations and pray for peace.
the event set a record as one of the most economical international sporting events, costing nearly KrW
109 billion less than the expected budget requirement. it was also one of the safest events of its kind in
which not a single instance of injury was reported. Meanwhile, in spite of the participation of athletes from
MerS-affected regions, the event was free of health hazards from infectious illnesses thanks to thorough
prevention efforts.


**| An International sporting event Hosted in a small**
**City | the event was successfully carried out through**
close communication and cooperation with the City of
Mungyeong, a town with 80,000 inhabitants. to ensure
the optimal success of the Games, a province-wide
rally was held, along with a formal launch ceremony for
supporter groups. the integrated operation and management of all accommodation facilities and the active
assistance and hard work of supporters and volunteers
also played a key role in its success.


Mungyeong athletes’ Village opening ceremony


**| A new Model for Low-cost, High-efficiency Inter-**
**national sporting event | the 6[th] CiSM World Games**
in Mungyeong cost 165.3 billion won (about USD 145
million) in total (50% contributed by the government,
30% by the local administration, 20% covered through
marketing revenues), less than one-tenth of USD 1.75
billion spent to host the 5[th] Games in Brazil. the Games
Organizing Committee was able to keep the costs down
by minimizing the construction of new facilities and
making most of existing infrastructures and assets. in Camping cars used for accommodation in the Mungyeong

athletes’ Village

fact, the Municipality of Mungyeong constructed no
new facility, as it instead used the facilities of the Korea armed Forces athletic Corps (KaFaC), which was
recently relocated to the area, and spread out events across eight towns in the vicinity. athletes’ villages
were set up inside the Korea army academy at Yeongcheon and the army Cadet Military School in Goesan,
and camping cars and caravans were used for accommodation, drastically reducing facility-related costs.

**| Opening and Closing Ceremonies with the**
**Athletes | the 6[th] CiSM World Games were organized**
in a manner to fully and emphatically embody the motto
of ‘Friendship through Sports.’ the opening and closing
ceremonies were designed as events in which both
athletes and spectators took part in rather than just
watching.
‘Soldiers’ Dance,’ inspired by soldiers’ movements,
was performed by athletes wearing a full-dress uniform,
to the traditional Korean tune ‘Kwaejina chingch- tug of war during the opening ceremony


-----

ing-nane,’ and members of the audience joined the cast to dance along. tug of war games were played
by athletes of 117 countries, donning their countries’ military uniforms, in a display of friendship between
nations and a resounding message of peace.

**| Harnessing state-of-the-Art IT | During the 6[th]**
CiSM World Games which took place in eight towns
in the environs of Mungyeong, all constraints due to
the distance separating event venues were eliminated
thanks to an event information system based on cut-
ting-edge it, including the time and score (tNS) system.
From the central situation room, the Games Organizing
Committee monitored the situations in different event
venues, morning and evening, in real time, using a system
linking the venues, athletes’ villages, hotel where the Central situation room during the CiSM World Games
event headquarters are located, and the airport. real-time
event information was also made available to the public through wireless and wired networks. all information
on athletic delegations was comprehensively managed for the entire duration of their stay, from their entry into
the country to their departure, including entry and departure records, event participation records and athletes’
village and car service management records.

**| spreading the Korean Cultural Wave | Supporters, supporting manpower dispatched by the armed**
forces of participating countries, and volunteers played a tremendous role in making the 2015 CiSM World
Games a genuinely participatory event that brings hearts and minds together; 100 to 200 supporters were
grouped into a team and were assigned to each national delegation, a first in the history of the CiSM World
Games. the supporter teams, headed by a retired general or diplomat, assisted athletes throughout their
stay to make their experience more pleasurable and comfortable by welcoming them upon their arrival,
cheering for them during competitions and arranging for them the opportunities to experience Korean
culture.
33,800 supporters,[15)] 4,800 armed forces members and 2,300 general volunteers helped to make the
event a success through their assistance. international athletes participating in the Games were pleased
with the warm hospitality shown by the volunteers. Feel-good moments abounded throughout the duration
of the Games thanks to the detailed attention and dedication of volunteers.
Meanwhile, music and dance performances and other
cultural events held across the various venues made
the Mungyeong Games a platform of cultural exchange.
in the three athletes’ villages in Yeongcheon, Goesan
and Mungyeong, K-pop and handheld fan dance per-
formances and taekwondo demonstrations took place
every evening. international athletes had the opportu-
nity to discover the beauty and flavor of Korean culture
in the Korean Culture Center and the CiSM Club.
tailored tourism programs for various destinations in Korean culture program in the athletes’ village

15) 21,360 local residents, 1,890 servicemembers, 7,900 student, 2,700 from private enterprises, etc.


-----

Gyeongsangbuk-do and elsewhere also contributed to improving international athletes’ understanding of
Korea and Korean lifestyle.


-----

**Appendix 1**

**Military Power of neighboring Countries**

**number of Troops**


Unit: persons

|Category|Col2|U.s.|Russia|China|Japan|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total army Navy air Force Others||1,381,250|798,000|2,333,000|247,150|
||army|509,450|240,000|1,600,000|151,000|
||Navy|326,800|148,000|235,000|45,500|
||air Force|319,950|145,000|398,000|47,100|
||Others|Marine Corps 185,050 Coast Guard 40,000|airborne 34,000 Strategic 80,000 Command/support 151,000|rocket Forces 100,000|Joint Staff Office 3,550|

|Army|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Category|U.s.|Russia|China|Japan|
|Divisions/Brigades|10/45|4/89|23/128|9/6|
|tanks infantry combat vehicles reconnaissance vehicles armored vehicles|5,884 6,559 1,900 24,377|20,200 13,900 2,200 12,000|6,540 3,950 650(light tanks) 4,150|687 68 162 792|
|towed artillery Self-propelled guns Multiple launch rocket systems Mortar|1,242 1,469 1,205 2,483|13,165 6,120 4,070 4,130|6,140 2,280 1,872 2,586|422 166 99 1,103|
|anti-tank guided weapons|SP 1,512|SP N/a|SP 480|SP 37|
|Ground-to-air missiles|1,207|1,520|312|700|
|helicopters|4,200|1,278|760|412|
|aircraft|222|-|8|8|


-----

|navy|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Category||U.s.|Russia|China|Japan|
|Submarines Strategic nuclear submarines aircraft carriers Cruisers Destroyers Frigates Patrol and coastal combatants Mine sweepers amphibious vessels Landing craft auxiliary ships Fighters helicopters||57 14 10 22 62 4 57 11 30 245 71 956 720|49 13 1 6 18 10 89 45 19 30 625 72 195|61 4 1 - 19 54 199 49 50 73 171 346 111|18 - - - 38 9 6 27 3 8 28 - 131|
|Marine Corps|Marine division|3|3 brigades|2 brigades|-|
||tanks reconnaissance vehicles amphibious assault aPC Personnel transport aPC Cannons anti-tank missiles UaV/iSrs aircraft helicopters|447 252 1,311 2,467 1,506 95 139 445 455|250 60 1,000 400 365 - - - -|73 - - 152 40 - - - -|- - - - - - - - -|


|Air force|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Category|U.s.|Russia|China|Japan|
|Strategic bombers Bombers reconnaissance aircraft Command and control aircraft Fighters transport aircraft tankers aWaCS trainers helicopters Civil reserve air Fleet eW aircraft|157 - iSr·UaV·CiSr 454 4 Ftr·FGr·atK 1,890 686 461 aWe&C·eW 45 1,128 161 553 eLiNt 33|139 - 85 8 872 432 15 18 204 669 - 32|- 120 51 5 1,468 325 11 8 950 53 - 13|- - 17 - 348 61 5 17 245 46 - 3|


*[ Source: the Military Balance 2016 (international institute for Strategic Studies, February 2016) and Defense of Japan 2016 (annual White ]
Paper) (august 2016)


-----

**Appendix 2**

**Comparing Defense Budgets around the World**

As of 2015

|Country|GDP (UsD 100 million)|Defense Budget (UsD 100 million)|Defense Budget- GDP Ratio (%)|Troops (thousand)|Per-capita Defense Budget (one dollar)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|rOK|15,000|364|2.40|625|681|
|U.S.|180,000|5,975|3.33|1,381|1,859|
|Japan|41,200|410|1.00|247|323|
|China|114,000|1,458|1.28|2,333|106|
|russia|12,400|516|4.18|798|362|
|taiwan|5,190|103|1.98|215|438|
|UK|28,600|562|2.05|155|878|
|France|24,200|468|1.93|209|702|
|Germany|33,700|367|1.09|179|454|
|israel|2,990|186|6.22|177|2,310|
|egypt|3,000|64|2.13|439|72|
|Saudi arabia|6,320|819|12.95|227|2,949|
|australia|12,400|228|1.83|57|1,001|
|turkey|7,220|83|1.16|511|105|
|Malaysia|3,130|47|1.51|109|155|
|thailand|3,740|54|1.44|361|79|
|Singapore|2,940|97|3.29|73|1,705|
|Canada|15,700|140|0.89|66|399|



*[ Source: relevant materials, including ‘the Military Balance 2016’(international institute for Strategic Studies, February 2016) ]

*[ troops: as of 2016]


-----

**Appendix 3**

**Yearly Defense Budget Comparison**

|Year|Defense Budget (billion won)|Defense Budget-GDP Ratio (%)|Defense Budget- Government finance Ratio (%)|Defense Budget Increase Rate (%)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|1980|2,246.5|5.69|34.7|46.2|
|1981|2,697.9|5.47|33.6|20.1|
|1982|3,120.7|5.49|33.5|15.7|
|1983|3,274.1|4.85|31.4|4.9|
|1984|3,306.1|4.25|29.6|1.0|
|1985|3,689.2|4.23|29.4|11.6|
|1986|4,158.0|4.08|30.1|12.7|
|1987|4,745.4|3.95|29.6|14.1|
|1988|5,520.2|3.83|30.0|16.3|
|1989|6,014.8|3.68|27.3|9.0|
|1990|6,637.8|3.36|24.2|10.4|
|1991|7,476.4|3.13|23.8|12.6|
|1992|8,410.0|3.08|25.1|12.5|
|1993|9,215.4|2.97|24.2|9.6|
|1994|10,075.3|2.75|23.3|9.3|
|1995|11,074.4|2.58|21.3|9.9|
|1996|12,243.4|2.54|20.8|10.6|
|1997|13,786.5|2.60|20.7|12.6|
|1998|13,800.0|2.63|18.3|0.1|
|1999|13,749.0|2.38|16.4|0.4|
|2000|14,477.4|2.28|16.3|5.3|
|2001|15,388.4|2.24|15.5|6.3|
|2002|16,364.0|2.15|14.9|6.3|
|2003|17,514.8|2.16|14.8|7.0|
|2004|18,941.2|2.16|15.8|8.1|
|2005|21,102.6|2.29|15.6|11.4|
|2006|22,512.9|2.33|15.3|6.7|
|2007|24,497.2|2.35|15.7|8.8|
|2008|26,649.0|2.41|14.8|8.8|
|2009|28,980.3|2.52|14.2|8.7|
|2010|29,562.7|2.34|14.7|2.0|
|2011|31,403.1|2.36|15.0|6.2|
|2012|32,957.6|2.39|14.8|5.0|
|2013|34,497.0|2.41|14.3|4.7|
|2014|35,705.6|2.40|14.4|3.5|
|2015|37,555.0|2.41|14.3|5.2|
|2016|38,842.1|2.40|13.9|3.4|



*[ GDP: recalculated based on the 2010 national accounts of the Bank of Korea, and based on the revised supplementary budget]

*[ 2015 is based on the nominal GDP preliminary estimates of the Bank of Korea, 2016 is based on the nominal GDP estimates of the Ministry ]
of Strategy and Finance


-----

**Appendix 4**

**Comparing Military strengths of the Two Koreas**

As of December 2016

|Category|Col2|Col3|Col4|south Korea|north Korea|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|troops (peacetime)|army|||490,000|1,100,000|
||Navy|||70,000 (including 29,000 Marine Corps troops)|60,000|
||air Force|||65,000|110,000|
||Strategic Force|||-|10,000|
||Total|||625,000|1,280,000|
|Major Forces|army|Units|Corps|12 (including Special Warfare Command)|17|
||||Divisions|43 (including Marine Corps)|82|
||||Maneuver Brigades|15 (including Marine Corps)|74 (reserve Military training Brigade not included)|
|||equipment|tanks|2,400 (including Marine Corps)|4,300|
||||armored Vehicles|2,700 (including Marine Corps)|2,500|
||||Cannons|5,700 (including Marine Corps)|8,600|
||||MLrS/MrLs|200|5,500|
||||Ground-to-ground missiles|60 launchers|100 launchers (Strategic force)|
||Navy|Surface Vessels|Combatants|110|430|
||||amphibious ships|10|250|
||||Mine warfare vessels (mine sweeping boats)|10|20|
||||Support and auxiliary vessels|20|40|
|||Submarines||10|70|
||air Force|Combat aircraft||410|810|
|||Surveillance & control aircraft||60 (including those belonging to the Navy)|30|
|||transport aircraft (including aN-2)||50|330|
|||trainers||180|170|
||helicopters (army/Navy/air Force)|||690|290|
|reserve troops||||3,100,000 (including officer candidates, wartime labor call, and secondment and alternative service personnel)|7,620,000 (including reserve Military training Unit, Worker-Peasant red Guards, and red Youth Guard)|



*[ Units and equipment of the Marine Corps are included in the number of units and equipment of the army to compare military strength ]
between the two Koreas.

*[ North Korean cannon numbers do not include 76.2 mm guns that are infantry regiment-level artillery.]

*[ the table above is a result of quantitative comparisons based on disclosable data, as qualitative assessments are limited.]


-----

**Appendix 5**

**Comparing the economic Indicators**
**of the Two Koreas**

|Category|south Korea|Col3|north Korea|Col5|Comparison (south Korea/north Korea)|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||2014|2015|2014|2015|2014|2015|
|Nominal GNi (trillion won)|1,490.8|1,565.8|34.2|34.5|43.7|45.4|
|Per-capita GNi (ten thousand won)|2,956|3,094|139|139|21.3|22.3|
|economic Growth rate (%)|3.3|2.6|1.0|-1.1|-|-|
|trade Volume (USD 100 million)|10,981.8|9,632.6|76.1|62.5|144.3|154.1|
|Population (thousand)|50,424|50,617|24,662|24,779|2.0|2.0|



*[ Source: the Bank of Korea]

*[ GNi (Gross National income): Since 1993, major countries and international organizations such as the UN and iMF have replaced GNP with ]
GNi (GNi≒GNP)


-----

**Appendix 6**

**Discussions on the north Korean nuclear Issue**

**(December 1. 2014 - December 3. 2016)**

|Date|Major Developments|
|---|---|
|May 20, 2015|• Statement by Spokesperson for the Policy Bureau of North Korea’s National Defense Commission - Claims North Korea “has the ability to miniaturize and diversify nuclear warheads, and has improved the precision of a number of long range missiles”|
|December 10|• Comments by Kim Jong-un regarding nuclear states and hydrogen bombs - Claims North Korea is a “strong nuclear power capable of loud, explosive hydrogen bombs and nuclear warheads for self-defense”|
|January 6, 2016|• North Korea’s fourth nuclear test|
|March 2|• UN Security Council resolution No. 2270 - Mandatory cargo inspections; arms embargo; public and private sanctions; prohibitions on rare materials; financial sanctions|
|March 8|• rOK government announces unilateral sanctions against North Korea - tougher financial sanctions, regulations on maritime transport and trade restrictions|
|March 16|• U.S. executive Order No. 13722 - Prohibiting sending North Korea workers; Prohibiting certain investment and transactions with respect to North Korea; both public and private additional sanctions.|
|September 9|• North Korea’s fifth nuclear test|
|November 30|• UN Security Council resolution No. 2321 - Sanctions on North Korean coal (with exception of exports to the Member States not exceeding USD 400 million or 7.5 million metric tons per year); cutting off trade and closing financial accounts; expanding both public and private sanctions|
|December 2|• rOK government announces unilateral sanctions against North Korea - expanding sanctions against financial operations; strengthening the conditions for port entry of foreign vessels that made calls at North Korea ports; limiting the entry/exit of foreigners who visited North Korea|
|December 2|• U.S. treasury announces unilateral sanctions against North Korea - includes sanctions on 16 entities related to WMDs, 7 North Korean officials and air Koryo (North Korea’s sole commercial airline)|


-----

**Appendix 7**

**Progress in north Korea’s Ballistic Missile**
**Development and specifications**

|Progress in north|Korea’s Ballistic Missile Development and specifications|
|---|---|
|Date|Major Developments|
|March 2. 2015|• two SCUD missiles launched toward the east Sea|
|May 8|• Showed a footage of one SLBM test launch toward the east Sea|
|January 8. 2016|• Showed a footage of one SLBM test launch toward the east Sea|
|February 7|• Launched a long-range missile (taepodong-2, North: insists it was a satellite called “Kwangmyongsong”)|
|March 10|• two SCUD missiles launched toward the east Sea|
|March 15|• Conducted re-entry technology (ablation technology) simulation test|
|March 18|• two Nodong missiles launched toward the east Sea|
|March 25|• Conducted solid fuel rocket engine test|
|april 9|• Conducted a ground test for a new iCBM engine in Dongchangri|
|april 15|• Launched one Musudan missile toward the east Sea (failed)|
|april 24|• Showed a footage of one SLBM toward the east Sea|
|april 28|• two Musudan missiles launched toward the east Sea (failed)|
|May 31|• One Musudan missile launched toward the east Sea (failed)|
|June 22|• two Musudan missiles launched toward the east Sea (1 failed, 1 partially successful)|
|July 19|• One SCUD missile and two rodong missiles launched toward the east Sea|
|august 3|• two rodong missiles launched toward the east Sea|
|august 25|• Showed a footage of one SLBM test launch toward the east Sea (partially successful)|
|September 5|• three SCUD missiles launched toward the east Sea|
|September 20|• Conducted stationary satellite engine test in Dongchangri|
|October 15|• One Musudan missile launched toward the east Sea (failed)|
|October 20|• One Musudan missile launched toward the east Sea (failed)|



**specifications**

|Category|sCUD-B|sCUD-C|sCUD-eR|nodong|Musudan|Taepodong-1|Taepodong-2|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|range(km)|300|500|1,000|1,300|Over 3,000|2,500|Over 10,000|
|Warhead weight(kg)|1,000|700|500|700|650|500|650~1,000 (estimate)|
|remark|Operational deployment|Operational deployment|Operational deployment|Operational deployment|Operational deployment|test launch|test launch|



*[ SLBM, KN-08/14: under development]


-----

**Appendix 8**

**United nations security Council (UnsC) Resolutions**
**on sanctions against north Korea**

|Category|Resolution 1695 (July 15, 2006)|Resolution 1718 (October 14, 2006)|Resolution 1874 (June 12, 2009)|Resolution 2087 (January 22, 2013)|Resolution 2094 (March 7, 2013)|Resolution 2270 (March 2, 2016)|Resolution 2321 (november 30, 2016)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Background|North Korea’s long-range missile launch (July 5, 2006)|North Korea’s first nuclear test (October 9, 2006)|North Korea’s second nuclear test (May 25, 2009)|North Korea’s long-range missile launch (December 12, 2012)|North Korea’s third nuclear test (February 12, 2013)|North Korea’s fourth nuclear test (January 6, 2016) / Long-range missile launch (February 7, 2016)|North Korea’s fifth nuclear test (September 9, 2016)|
|Position|• Condemns North Korea’s missile launch • Grave concerns over violation of moratorium on missile launches|• Condemns North Korea’s nuclear test • expresses concerns over threats to nonproliferation, peace and stability|• Most strongly condemns North Korea’s nuclear test • Concerns over heightened tension within and outside the region|• Condemns North Korea’s missile launch using ballistic technology|• Strongly condemns North Korea’s nuclear test that threatens nonproliferation, peace and stability|• Strongly condemns North Korea’s nuclear test and ballistic missile launch|• Strongly condemns North Korea’s continued nuclear tests|
|On WMD programs|• Demands suspension of all ballistic missile related programs • Demands reconfirmation of moratorium on missile launches|• Demands suspension of nuclear tests and missile launches|• Demands suspension of nuclear tests and all missile launches that utilize ballistic technology|• Demands termination of all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programs • Urges suspension of additional missile launches, nuclear tests and provocations|• Demands suspension of nuclear tests and ballistic missile launches, including uranium enrichment|• Prohibits education and training related to development of nuclear weapons and missiles • Catch-all Controls (prevents exportation of all items believed to be intended for WMD)|• Caps North Korea’s coal exports to China to cut off its WMD program funding|
|arms embargo|• Demands Member States to ensure North Korea is unable to utilize missile-related materials and technologies|• Bans trade of 7 major weaponry and WMD-related items as well as luxury goods with North Korea * tanks, armored combat vehicles, large caliber artillery systems, combat aircrafts, attack helicopters, warships and missiles|• Bans trade of all arms-related materials and technologies with North Korea * embargoes all arms exports * embargoes most arms imports with an exception to small arms|• allows States to seize and dispose of items in violation of previous resolutions via all available means|• Prohibits technologies to North Korea responsible for research and development of advanced weapons systems; imposes travel ban and asset freeze on intermediate organizations • embargoes all goods related to uranium enrichment|• Prevents entry via airports and seaports, or overflight if cargo is presumed to include prohibited goods • arms embargo expanded to include all arms including small arms and light weapons • Bans trade of all goods applicable to developing weapons|• Suspends scientific and technical cooperation that may contribute to nuclear activities or WMD-related programs • Prohibits transfer of dual-use items that are related to conventional arms|
|Cargo inspections|-|• inspect shipments of North Korean cargo containing prohibited items|• authorizes Member States to inspect all cargos to and from North Korea|• issues an implementation assistance Notice in the event a vessel refuses inspection|• inspect all cargo intermediated or facilitated by individuals and entities acting on behalf of North Korea • Denies entry to any vessel that refuses inspection and requires the State to report the incident to the Committee|• requires cargo inspection of all North Korean imports and exports * including rare minerals and aviation fuel • Prohibits leasing or chartering flagged vessels and aircraft as well as providing crew service to North Korea|• Grants the Committee such authorities as denying entry of suspected vessels and imposing asset freeze|
|Financial sanctions|• requires Member States to prevent and monitor transfer of any financial resources in relation to North Korea’s WMD programs|• imposes financial sanctions on individuals and entities designated by the 1718 DPrK Sanctions Committee|• Bans all financial services and support that could contribute to North Korea’s WMD program|• Monitors illicit financial activities • Monitors and regulates the use of bulk cash by designated individuals and entities|• Prohibits opening new branches of North Korean banks as well as those of overseas banks in North Korea • enhances ban on public financial support|• Freezes all assets associated with nuclear or missiles programs that are owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by entities of the North Korean government or the Worker’s Party of Korea • Bans public and private financial dealings with North Korea (closing of existing bank offices or branches)|• Limits number of financial accounts held by North Korean diplomats • Member states must further close existing financial offices and institutions in North Korea; also prohibits all financial support for trade with North Korea|
|Significance|• UN-level condemnation of North Korea’s long-range ballistic missile launch • advisory in nature|• requires practical implementation of the North Korea sanctions|• adds designations and expands the scope of the North Korea sanctions|• adds designations and expands the scope of the sanctions, including the trigger clause * Warns of further significant measures should North Korea commit additional provocations such as a missile launch or a nuclear test|• Lays groundwork for sanctions that could fundamentally weaken the regime; adds designations and expands the scope of the sanctions * Luxury goods, diplomatic immunity for North Korean personnel, etc.|• addresses North Korea’s human rights crisis for the first time|• reduces loopholes in the previous resolutions by capping trade items such as coal, which were previously exempt from the sanctions for livelihood purposes|


-----

**Appendix 9**

**Chronicle of Inter-Korean Military Relations**

**(December 1. 2014 - December 3. 2016)**

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
|report by the Western Front Command criticizes South Korea’s annual tree lighting ceremony at aegibong Peak|December 21, 2014||
|Statement by spokesperson for the Policy Department of the National Defense Commission (NDC) denies the hacking of Sony Pictures entertainment|December 27||
||December 29|Government officially proposes inter-Korean bilateral talks under the Presidential Committee for Unification Preparation * Sometime during January 2015 in Seoul, Pyeongyang, or any other location of mutual convenience|
|During his New Year’s address, Kim Jong-un emphasizes “improving inter-Korean relations” and repeats previous demands such as “suspending the joint training of rOK-U.S. combined forces”|January 1, 2015|Statement by the Ministry of Unification urges North Korea to “respond as soon as possible to our proposal to hold talks if North Korea is sincere about improving inter-Korean relations via dialogue”|
|Statement by NDC spokesperson demands rOK to clearly express its positions on the prerequisites mentioned during the New Year’s address for improving inter-Korean relations|January 7||
|Korean Central News agency (KCNa) reports that “North Korea will temporarily cease its nuclear tests if rOK temporarily suspends its combined training”|January 10||
||January 12|During her New Year press conference, President Park urges for inter-Korean talks * “North Korea should hesitate no more and consent to bilateral talks”|
||January 13|rOK-U.S. combined maritime training (through January 14, east Sea)|
|Deputy ambassador to the UN claims “suspension of joint training of rOK-U.S. combined forces is North Korea’s prerequisite condition for genuine discussions and cooperation”|January 14||
||January 19|Beginning-of-the-year report for the Ministry of Unification, Ministry of Foreign affairs and agency for National Security Planning * President Park says, “South Korea must work toward creating conditions for bilateral talks acceptable to North Korea”|
|Government, party and organizations send a joint statement that calls upon the South to improve inter- Korean relations and change its North Korea policy * Letter addressed to the Blue house, National assembly, Korean red Cross, and political parties received on January 21|January 20||
|Statement by the Policy Department of the NDC criticizes rOK government’s North Korea policy|January 25|Statement by Ministry of Unification (MOU) spokesperson expresses regreat over North Korea’s criticisms on our government’s North Korea policy and calls for bilateral talks|


-----

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
|Launches four Scud missiles into the sea off the eastern coast|February 6||
|Launches five short-range missiles into the sea off the eastern coast|February 8||
|WPK Central Committee Politburo meeting adopts written decision commemorating the party’s 70th anniversary * “We must develop more cutting edge arms and equipment that are precise, light, unmanned, and intelligent to meet the demands of modern warfare”|February 10||
||March 1|During a commemorative speech for the March 1st independence Movement, President Park calls for “reunions of separated families” and “trans-Korea railway”|
|Launches two short-range ballistic missiles from the western region of Nampo into the east Sea Statements by General Staff Department and Ministry of Foreign affairs (MOFa) spokespersons criticize Key resolve and Foal eagle combined exercises|March 2|Kr/Fe exercise begins (through april 24) MND “warns North Korea not to behave recklessly and that the South is prepared to respond firmly and strongly to any type of provocation”|
|Statement by the Committee for the Peaceful reunification of the Fatherland criticizes Kr/Fe exercise * “the opportunity for bilateral talks and improvement of inter-Korean relations has expired”|March 3||
|Launches seven surface-to-air missiles into the east Sea|March 12||
||March 17|Government’s joint investigation group announces that North Korea is responsible for the massive hacking of Korea hydro and Nuclear Power Company * traces of known North Korean malicious codes and iP addresses found|
|Frontline troops threaten to “strike back with firepower against propaganda broadcasts”|March 22|Warns North Korea of rOK military’s readiness to “firmly counter such provocations”|
|NDC Policy Department spokesperson demands lifting the “reinvestigation of rOKS Cheonan and 5·24 measure” * announces North Korea’s position on the sinking of rOK Cheonan and the 5·24 measure|March 24||
|Korean People’s army (KPa) Panmunjom Mission presents bill of indictment regarding the sinking of rOKS Cheonan on the 5th anniversary of the incident to claim that the “U.S. is responsible”|March 25||
|Launches four short-range missiles to the south from the west coast|april 3||
|Launches two short-range missiles from Pyongwon-gun, Pyongnam|april 7||
||May 1|Government announces it will expand inter-Korean private exchanges * Promotes joint projects in the field of culture, history and sports|


-----

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
|KCNa reports Kim Jong-un’s visit to the General Satellite Control Center of the National aerospace Development administration (NaDa) * “North Korea’s satellites shall continue to successfully launch into space at a time and place deemed appropriate by the Central Committee of the WPK”|May 3||
|Letter sent in the name of the Southwestern Front Command claims rOK naval vessel infiltration over the NLL and threatens to commence unwarned direct fire NaDa spokesperson announces that “launching satellites is a state’s sovereign right”|May 8|responds under the name of rOK Navy 2nd Fleet Command * expresses regret and urges North Korea to cease provocations, including verbal provocations|
|KCNa reports successful SLBM test launches *With Kim Jong-un present, North Korea test fires KN-11 from the eastern coast near Sinpo, hamnam Southwestern Front Command provokes the South to “challenge us if you have the courage” Launches three Scud missiles from the east Sea|May 9||
||May 11|MOU spokesperson urges “firm counter-response to North Korean provocations while still encouraging private exchanges”|
|Nighttime military exercises in the West Sea * Notifies South of its plans to fire (May 13, 15:00 ~ May 15, 24:00|May 13|Navy 2nd Fleet Command warns not to “raise unnecessary tension in the NLL” and that it will respond with “immediate and powerful retaliation”|
|Firing exercises for warships and artillery barrages near Yeonpyeongdo island|May 14||
|Statement by NDC Policy Department spokesperson claims North Korea is “in the process of miniaturizing its nuclear weapons”|May 20||
|the NDC Policy Department makes statement suggesting a joint investigation into the sinking of rOKS Cheonan Statement by KCNa spokesperson opposes the international sanctions imposed in response to the SLBM launch by claiming a nation’s “inherent right to self- defense”|May 24|Ministry of Unification announces its position that if North Korea “cooperates with the South’s proposal to hold talks, they may be able to discuss a range of issues, including the 5·24 measure, but the North must also agree to take responsibility for their actions”|
||May 30|rOK-U.S.-Japan discuss measures to strengthen trilateral cooperation during the Defense Ministers Meeting (asia Security Summit)|
|NDC spokesperson criticizes events related to anthrax and urges an anti-U.S. movement KCNa spokesperson criticizes the South regarding inter-Korean talks|June 3|Successfully test launches ballistic missile with range of 500km|
|Strategic Force spokesperson makes crude criticisms on rOK president for rOK’s test firing of a ballistic missile|June 4||
|Launches three short-range missiles into the east Sea|June 14||
|a DPrK government statement demands fulfillment of the “June 15th Joint Declaration” * renounce system unification; cease training of military invasion of North Korea, etc.|June 15|MOU spokesperson states “there mustn’t be any preconditions for talks”|
|MOFa spokesperson criticizes the establishment of the Office of the United Nations high Commissioner for human rights in Seoul|June 23|establishment of the Office of the United Nations high Commissioner for human rights in Seoul|


-----

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
|North Korean patrol boat crosses the NLL in the West Sea|June 30|rOK armed Forces Senior Leaders Seminar Military sends warning messages and fires warnings shots|
|KPa crosses central front of the MDL|July 11|Military fires warning shots|
|KCNa spokesperson criticizes rOK president for laying the blame for the failed inter-Korean relations on the North|July 15||
||July 17|extends invitation to North Korea to Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD) for the first time|
|the CPrF Secretariat indirectly declines the invitation to SDD * “an outcry for dialogue will only be received by mockery and criticism”|July 19||
|Korean People’s army (KPa) Panmunjom Mission spokesperson criticizes live fire exercises in the West Sea and threatens to fire at Paengnyeongdo island|July 25||
|informs that North Korea will not be attending the 2015 CiSM Military World Games|July 31|Government states that “an ambassador abroad communicating North Korea’s position is improper” and urges North Korea to “actively participate in talks”|
||august 5|Former first lady Lee hee-ho visits North Korea (through august 8) Begins restoration of Gyeongwon Line|
|announces “Pyongyang time” * time to be pushed back by 30 minutes starting august 15(UtC+08:30)|august 7||
||august 10|JCS announces results of probe into the incident of North Korea’s landmine provocations in the DMZ (august 4) and sends warning statement to North Korea resumes loudspeaker broadcast to North Korea (17:00)|
|a CPrF spokesperson statement threatens to use “military retaliation should the South conduct UFG combined military exercise”|august 12||
|announcement by MOFa spokesperson criticizes UFG combined military exercise|august 13||
|the NDC Policy Department denies responsibility in DMZ landmine provocations Public announcement by KPa Large Combined Unit threatens to “retaliate against rOK civilian organization propaganda leaflets”|august 14||
|Public warning by the KPa Front Command threatens to “strike indiscriminately at broadcasts of psychological warfare” Statement by NDC spokesperson criticizes UFG combined military exercise|august 15||
||august 17|rOK and North Korea enter into an agreement to raise minimum wage of Kaesong industrial Complex employees by 5%|


-----

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
|artillery provocations in Yeoncheon Ultimatum given from the General Staff Department demanding “suspension of broadcasts of psychological warfare within 48 hours beginning august 20, 17:00”|august 20|Military returns artillery fire issues state of high alert on the entire armed forces|
|Quasi-state of war declared on frontline areas (ordered by the Supreme Commander) a Ministryof Foreign affairs statement denies responsibility in landmine provocations and criticizes artillery exchange Senior official and secretary of WPK Kim Yang-gon sends a letter addressed to Director of National Security Kim Kwan-jin proposing to hold bilateral talks|august 21|JCS responds, “strong retaliation was necessary in the interest of self-defense, but the North should bear full responsibility” Defense Minister addresses the entire nation with an official statement * “We will put an end to the vicious cycle of North Korean provocations”|
||august 22|inter-Korean high-level Meeting (through august 24, Panmunjom) * South Korean delegates: Director of National Security Kim Kwan-jin; Unification Minister hong Yong-pyo / North Korean delegates: Director of the General Political Bureau hwang Pyong-so; Secretary of the WPK Kim Yang-gon|
|Director of General Political Bureau hwang Pyong-so appears on tV and publicizes that the results of the high-level contact was a “lopsided victory for the North”|august 25|agrees to a joint press release for the inter-Korean high-level meeting * △holds bilateral talks △expresses regret for the maiming of rOK soldiers △Suspends loudspeaker propaganda broadcasts △North Korea lifts quasi-state of war △Proceed with the reunion of separated families △Vitalize private exchanges|
|an NDC spokesperson statement reiterates that “expression of regret for the maimed soldiers during the high-level meeting is not to be mistaken for an apology”|September 2||
|During a press interview, the director of the National aerospace Development administration (NaDa) implies possibility of a long-range missile launch * “you shall witness it soaring high into the sky at time and place determined by the party”|September 14||
|reveals the newly built General Satellite Control Center for the first time via CNN|September 23||
|Formal military review in commemoration of the ruling party’s 70th anniversary * “North Korea is ready for any type of warfare that the U.S. desires”|October 10||
||October 16|adopts “2015 rOK-U.S. Joint Statement on North Korea” during rOK-U.S. summit * “agreed to deal with North Korean nuclear issues with utmost urgency and determination”|
||October 20|1st reunion of separated families (through October 22, Kumgangsan Mountain)|
|Fisheries patrol boat crosses the NLL|October 24|2nd reunion of separated families (through October 26, Kumgangsan Mountain) Military sends warning messages and fires warning shots|
||November 2|Jointly approves the “4D operations” with the U.S. during the 47th rOK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting (SCM)|


-----

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
|Southwestern Front Command spokesperson criticizes rOK’s live fire exercises near the Northwest islands|November 22|Northwest islands Defense Command says, “the preplanned training exercises will be undertaken as planned and any provocations from the North will be met with firm, strong retaliation“|
||November 23|Commences naval firing exercises near the northwest islands in commemoration of the 5th year since the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo island|
|a statement by the NDC Policy Department spokesperson criticizes the live fire exercises near the Northwest islands|November 24||
||November 26|Working-level meeting in preparation for inter-Korean talks * agreed to hold the 1st inter-Korean talks on December 11 in Kaesong|
|test fires an SLBM in the east Sea|November 28||
||November 30|MND, “test launching SLMBs is a violation of the UN Security Council resolutions”|
||December 11|1st inter-Korean talks (through December 12) end without an agreement * North Korean officials insist on linking the issue of resuming the Kumkangsan Mountain tour with the reunion of separated families|
|KCNa reports that South Korea is to blame for the failed attempt to reach an agreement during the talks * “the misguided position and poor attitude of the South have caused the talks to bear no fruit”|December 12||
|CPrF spokesperson criticizes the South, “the South will not be able to sidestep the responsibility for failing the inter-Korean summit”|December 15||
||December 18|the UN General assembly adopts a resolution that condemns the human rights crisis in North Korea and refers North Korea to the international Criminal Court (iCC) for the second year in a row|
|Kim Jong-un makes no mention of the nuclear program in his New Year’s address * “North Korea is prepared to sit down with anyone who desires peace and unification to have an open discussion about national and unification issues”|January 1, 2016|Government,“the stance on resuming talks with North Korea and working toward peaceful unification for the Korean Peninsula remains firm“|
|Conducts the fourth nuclear test (10:30) Statement by the government claims “North Korea’s first test of its hydrogen bomb is a complete success” * December 15, 2015: Kim Jong-un issues the order; January 3, 2016: Kim Jong-un signs the final order|January 6|Convenes the National Security Council (NSC) the government statement strongly condemns North Korea’s nuclear tests|
||January 7|Government decides to resume its loudspeaker propaganda broadcasts starting at noon on January 8 (North Korea’s fourth nuclear test is considered ‘an abnormal case’ and provides justification for resuming the broadcasts)|
|Korean Central television (KCtV) reveals footage of the SLBM test-fire|January 8|resumes loudspeaker propaganda broadcasts (12:00)|
||January 10|U.S. military flies B-52 bomber over the Korean Peninsula|


-----

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
|resumes loudspeaker propaganda broadcasts against the South|January 12|Government restricts access to Kaesong industrial Complex to “bare minimum” * From an average of 800 people per day to 600~700 people per day|
|rains propaganda leaflets across districts of northern Seoul Drone infiltration in vicinity of Dorasan Observation Post, rOK army 1st Division|January 13|President Park addresses the nation * “the international community must adopt a different set of countermeasures from those of the past” Military sends warning messages and fires warning shots at the infiltrating drone|
|MOFa spokesperson demands peace treaty with the U.S. and criticizes loudspeaker propaganda broadcasts|January 15||
|Notifies an international organization of its plans to launch long-range missiles * February 8-25, between 07:00-12:00 daily|February 2||
||February 3|the government statement urges North Korea to “call off its launch plans” and warns of “severe consequences”|
|Notifies international Maritime Organization (iMO) of altered launch schedule * From February 8-25 to February 7~14|February 6||
|Long-range missile launch (09:30) Special report announces successful launch of KMS-4 * “(North Korea) shall launch many more observation satellites in the future”|February 7|National Security Council (NSC) convened and government statement issued * “We must continue to pressure North Korea as required to force their change” MND announces “official consultations on the deployment of thaaD on the peninsula” Ministry of Unification announces further reduction in the number of people allowed in Kaesong industrial Complex to 500|
|a patrol boat crosses the NLL in the West Sea|February 8|Military responds with warning messages and warning shots|
||February 10|Government announces “complete suspension of operations at Kaesong industrial Complex”|
|CPrF announces “shutdown of Kaesong industrial Complex” * Completely blocks the MDL, cuts off land route through the Joint administrative area of the Western Corridor, terminates both military communication lines and Panmunjom communication channels, banishes rOK personnel|February 11||
||February 13|rOK-U.S. Submarine Warfare exercises take place in the east Sea (through February 15)|
||February 15|Police chief announces that the impersonation incident of Blue house e-mail (January 13~14) is North Korea’s doing * Confirmed as the same account from the hacking of Korea hydro and Nuclear Power Company in 2014|
||February 17|U.S. flies four F-22 raptor fighters over Osan air Base|
|Comments by the KCNa criticizes thaaD deployment * “(thaaD) will become the chief target for surrounding countries”|February 19||


-----

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
|Statement by the Supreme Command threatens to “strike the Blue house and the continental U.S.” * “Primary targets will be the Blue house and government bodies while the secondary targets will be the U.S. military bases in the asia-Pacific region and the continental U.S.”|February 23||
||February 24|JCS responds by demanding immediate cessation of provocative conduct * “(rOK) will respond with firm retaliation as planned and prepared”|
||March 2|National assembly passes the North Korean human rights act (NKhra) adopts UN Security Council resolution 2270|
|Fires 6 short-range missiles into the east Sea * Kim Jong-un asserts that North Korea “is constantly ready to fire nuclear warheads at any given time if need be”|March 3||
|Government and MOFa spokespersons criticize the sanctions imposed by the UN Security Council|March 4||
|MOFa spokesperson criticizes the Kr/Fe combined military exercises * “Our military countermeasures will transition into methods of preemptive strikes”|March 6||
|Statement by the NDC criticizes the Kr/Fe training exercises * “Powerful nuclear weapons are always on standby” Statement by CPrF spokesperson criticizes the Kr/Fe training exercises * “have already begun taking a preemptive strike posture”|March 7|Begins Kr/Fe training (through april 30) MND announces its position * Warns North Korea to “immediately cease their ‘rash behavior and actions’ which will only lead to their own ruin”|
||March 8|Government announces unilateral sanctions against North Korea * Public and private financial sanctions, port entry denial to foreign vessels that underwent port-of-call at North Korea within the last 180 days, etc. NiS announces that “North Korea has hacked several smartphones belonging to diplomats and major security personnel”|
|rodong Newspaper reveals photos of warheads and KN-08 * Kim Jong-un makes numerous threats such as “the nuclear warheads have been standardized and made lighter for compatibility with ballistic missiles“; “undergoing massive production of materials needed for nuclear program”; “nuclear weapons that are ready for real combat are also being constantly renewed”; “prepared to strike first with nuclear missiles without hesitation”|March 9|MND responds, “North Korea must realize that they are only hastening their own destruction”|


-----

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
|Launches two short-range ballistic missiles into the east Sea * Kim Jong-un commands his strategic force to “constantly be ready to launch all types of nuclear missiles at any given time” CPrF spokesperson opposes rOK’s unilateral sanctions * Nullifies all economic cooperation and business exchanges, liquidates all of rOK’s assets|March 10|MOU spokesperson states that “under no circumstances can rOK concede to their current claims and demands”|
|Statement by the General Staff Department criticizes the Kr/Fe military training exercises, particularly the amphibious maneuver known as “Ssangyong” * “For our amphibious training, we will use our ‘South Korea Liberation Operation’ and against specifically targeted strikes, we will respond with our precision surprise attacks”|March 12|rOK-U.S. Combined amphibious Operations exercises (Ssangyong exercises) Military announces that “upon continued provocations, North Korea’s top political leadership will come to an end”|
||March 13|USS John C. Stennis, a nuclear-powered carrier in the U.S. Navy, arrives at the port of Busan|
|KCNa reports “successful trial of ballistic rocket re-entry into the atmosphere” * Kim Jong-un gives instructions to “conduct explosion tests of nuclear warheads and test launch various kinds of ballistic rockets compatible with nuclear warheads in the near future”|March 15||
|Special statement by the government, party and organizations criticizes part two of rOK’s Kr/Fe exercise * “Our cleanup operations shall drastically eliminate our enemies”|March 16||
||March 17|Military reports first successful test of a mid-range surface-to-air interdiction of a ballistic missile|
|Launches two mid-range ballistic missiles into the east Sea * Presumed to be rodong-1’s; one exploded mid-air|March 18||
|KCNa reports defensive training exercise against amphibious and semiamphibious operations (witnessed by Kim Jong-un)|March 20||
|Launches five short-range missiles into the east Sea (witnessed by Kim Jong-un) * “Final test fire before the deployment of new rocket artillery system”|March 21|air Force commences training exercise for precision strikes on North Korea’s core military installations|
|Special report by the CPrF criticizes precision-strike training exercise * “ready to obliterate the Blue house in an instant”|March 23|MOU spokesperson says “(North Korea) should immediately stop their shallow and crooked behavior”|
|KCNa reports conducting ‘ground expulsion and stage separation tests on high-powered rocket engines’ * Kim Jong-un claims that “the ballistic rockets have now been improved to withstand enemy strikes”|March 24|President Park issues nationwide high-alert security posture * “Our military must be prepared to respond to any of North Korea’s potentially reckless provocations” JCS hosts an emergency meeting between operational commanders * “retaliate with full strength upon provocation and make them regret their actions”|


-----

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
|KCNa reports KPa Large Combined Unit training of long-distance concentrated artillery fire * Kim Jong-un says “we must mercilessly obliterate the evil government bodies within Seoul and achieve the historical feat of unification”|March 25|Commemoration of “1st West Sea Defense Day” * President Park says, “North Korea’s reckless provocations will send its regime down the path of self-ruin”|
|Spokesperson for the inspection Group of the NDC criticizes “West Sea Defense Day” Long-range artillery unit of the KPa Large Combined Unit sends ultimatum * “Failure to comply will result in a preemptive strike on the Blue house”|March 26|JCS Chief Directorate of Operations responds to North Korea’s ultimatum with military’s stance on the issue * “Such provocations will only bring the downfall of the North Korean regime”|
|KCtV reveals footage of training exercises for striking the Blue house and other major facilities in Seoul|March 27||
|Fires one short-range missile from Wonsan toward inland provinces|March 29||
|Jams GPS signals in South Korea by producing maximum output of radio waves|March 31|issues caution to metropolitan areas and Gangwon provinces affected by the GPS jamming as part of countermeasures during crisis situations|
|Fires one short-range missile into the east Sea * reports suggest Kim Jong-un witnessed the test-fire of new anti-aircraft guided missile systems in order to determine combat performance|april 1|MND sends warning to North Korea regarding GPS jamming|
|Media outlet “DPrK today” broadcasts footage of attacking the Blue house and key state buildings using long-range artillery|april 5|MND warns North Korea regarding footage of long-range artillery attacks * “North Korea’s provocative frivolities will lead to its own downfall”|
|KCNa reports conducting ground expulsion tests for new high-powered engines for iCBM * Kim Jong-un emphasizes that North Korea will “further improve, develop, expand and diversify its nuclear weapons in order to fight others’ nuclear missiles with nuclear missiles of their own”|april 9||
|KCNa reports of nighttime artillery training exercises under the command of its Large Combined Unit|april 12||
|Launches one Musudan missile (presumably) into the east Sea * Mid-air explosion not long after lift-off|april 15||
||april 16|UN Security Council adopts official press statement regarding North Korea’s missile launch|
|Claims successful test-fire of SLBM near the coast of Sinpo * Kim Jong-un claims North Korea now has the capabilities to “send the final blow to our South Korean and U.S. enemies from behind whenever we desire”|april 23||
||april 24|UN Security Council adopts official press statement regarding North Korea’s test-fire of SLBM|
|Fires two Musudan missiles (presumably) from Wonsan * Mid-air explosion after launch|april 28|President Park convenes National Security Council ahead of her visit to iran (May 1~3) * “there will be no future as long as North Korea continues its nuclear tests”|


-----

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
|Joint statement by government, party and organizations criticize rOK-U.S. combined exercise * “U.S. should reach the decision to alter their hostile policies and cease training exercises of North Korea invasion”|april 30||
|holds the 7th Congress of the Workers’ Party of Korea (through May 9) * Demands negotiation for inter-Korean talks while maintaining its position as a nuclear state|May 6||
||May 8|MOU spokesperson states that “North Korea’s call for negotiation and bilateral talks is merely an insincere propaganda”|
|Joint statement by government, party and organizations says Kim Jong-un has accomplished a plan for unification * “South Korea should take a good look at our determination and efforts, and make responsible and rational choices”|May 16||
|NDC sends public letter demanding an inter-Korean military summit|May 20|MND demands denuclearization prior to talks|
|Director of the Propaganda and agitation Department (Kim Ki-nam) urges bilateral talks * “if interested in improving relations, presence is required for talks and negotiations” Letter from the Ministry of the People’s armed Forces proposes working-level meeting for inter-Korean military summit * at the most convenient time and location between end of May and beginning of June|May 21||
|Director of the CPrF Secretariat urges bilateral military summit * “enough with the absurd preconditions such as forfeiting our nuclear projects and appear for talks”|May 22||
||May 23|MND demands to know North Korea’s stance on denuclearization * “it is very unfortunate and regretful that North Korea would suggest a military summit without any mentioning of the nuclear issues at hand”|
|Ministry of the People’s armed Forces once again demands a bilateral military summit|May 24||
|One fishing boat and one patrol boat crosses the NLL in the West Sea Special report by the Supreme Command criticizes rOK’s warning shots * “have achieved a retaliatory posture and is awaiting attack orders for annihilation”|May 27|Military sends warning messages and fires warning shots Military states that “the North is making unreasonable claims against our normal operations”|
|Notice from the General Staff Department threatens to “make targeted strikes without warning”|May 28||
|Fires one Musudan missile (presumably) from Wonsan * Presumed to have exploded on the mobile launch pad|May 31||


-----

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
|CPrF makes threats to rOK regarding bilateral talks * “refusing to comply with what we believe is a justified and reasonable suggestion will force us to choose more merciless and kinetic alternatives”|June 2||
|Minister of the People’s armed Forces criticizes the discussion of North Korea’s nuclear program during the asia Security Summit * “any enemy force that stands against us will not be able to avoid destruction” Government agencies, ruling party and organizations adopt a written appeal addressed to all people of both Koreas during a joint meeting * Suggests holding a meeting regarding unification|June 9||
||June 10|Civil police gets involved in dealing with Chinese fishing boats illegally operating in the han river estuary|
|a report by the KCNa criticizes the civil police’s involvement in the han river estuary * “a reckless move that only intensifies confrontation and conflict”|June 20||
|Fires two Musudan missiles (presumably) from Wonsan * One launch is presumed to have failed|June 22||
|KCNa reports successful test-fire of the hwasong-10, a mid-range strategic ballistic missile * Kim Jong-un says North Korea will “continue to expand and strengthen the capabilities for preemptive nuclear strikes and continue to research and develop various strategic weapons”|June 23|hosts rOK armed Forces Senior Leaders Seminar * “Continued provocations will lead to complete isolation and self-destruction”|
|Detailed report by the NDC Policy Department delivers criticisms regarding the NLL * “the NLL is an unlawful and illegitimate demarcation line that holds no pretext or justification”|June 25||
|Suggests holding a joint meeting between the North, South and other foreign countries * Sometime near august 15 in Pyongyang or Kaesong|June 27||
|Convenes the 4th Session of the 13th Supreme People’s assembly * establishes the new State affairs Commission and appoints Kim Jong-un as its chairman|June 29||
|CPrF spokesperson demands change in the South’s North Korea policy while asserting success of Musudan missiles|June 30||
|Statement by government spokesperson criticizes “denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula” * “the denuclearization we demand is one of the entire Korean Peninsula, including disarmament of nuclear weapons in the South as well as its surrounding regions”|July 6||
||July 8|alliance decision to deploy thaaD between rOK armed Forces and United States Forces, Korea (USFK)|


-----

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
|Launches one SLBM off the coast of Sinpo, hamnam * Presumed to have exploded mid-air|July 9|Military announces that it “strongly condemns North Korea’s continued nuclear and missile provocations” and that it will “maintain a full readiness posture in order to respond immediately to any type of provocation”|
|General Staff Department criticizes the deployment of thaaD * “tangible contingency plans will be carried out”|July 11||
||July 13|Decision reached to deploy thaaD to Seongju, Gyeongbuk|
|Statement by CPrF spokesperson criticizes deployment of thaaD * “it is a diabolical and impulsive move to rid of our precious nuclear assets”|July 14||
||July 15|MND warns North Korea to “immediately cease their arrogant and imprudent threats, both verbal and physical”|
|Launches three ballistic missiles into the east Sea * Presumed as one Scud missile and two rodong-1 missiles|July 19||
|KCNa reports Strategic Forces hwasong artillery Unit’s training exercise of ballistic rocket launch * “Preemptive strikes to South Korea’s ports and airfields within the operational zone” “test conducted specifically for detonation controls of nuclear warheads”|July 20||
||July 24|installation of artificial reefs near the NLL * Prior notice sent to the United Nations Command Military armistice Commission (UNCMaC) and North Korea|
|Naval fleet in the West Sea criticizes the artificial reef near the NLL * “We must thoroughly repress the enemies’ activities in the West Sea that are gradually expanding and strengthening their military force”|July 25||
|Launches two rodong-1 missiles (presumably) into the east Sea * One missile explodes immediately after launch, the other lands within Japan’s exclusive economic zone (eeZ) after travelling approximately 1,000 km|august 3||
|MOFa spokesperson criticizes U.S. strategic assets * “Will not just idly watch while there are existing nuclear threats and intimidation”|august 17||
|Statement by CPrF spokesperson criticizes UFG training exercises * “Do not act recklessly without proper understanding of the strategic structure of the Korean Peninsula”|august 21||
|General Staff Department spokesperson criticizes UFG exercise * “Maintain an aggressive military posture at all times in order to ensure preemptive retaliation”|august 22|Starts the UFG exercise (~9. 1.)|


-----

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
|CPrF spokesperson delivers criticisms against the 8·25 agreement * “if (South Korea) forgets the lessons learned from the incident in august and decides to provoke the North, we will completely wipe out the rebels through a massive war on unification”|august 23||
|Fires one SLBM off the coast of Sinpo * travels roughly 500 km and falls in Japan’s air defense identification zone|august 24||
|Military commander at Panmunjom warns that “any type of provocation that occurs at Panmunjom will not be tolerated and can be expected to be met with immediate retaliation|august 27||
|White paper for the Korean People’s army (KPa) Panmunjom Mission criticizes UFG exercise|September 2||
||September 4|“North Korean human rights act” is passed and enforced|
|Fires three ballistic missiles into the east Sea * travels roughly 1,000 km and falls in Japan’s air defense identification zone|September 5||
|Conducts fifth nuclear test (09:30) Statement by the nuclear weapon research facility states they have conducted “final inspections and tests on the structure, operation, performance and force of standardized nuclear warheads”|September 9|Convenes National Security Council (NCS) Statement by the government strongly condemns North Korean nuclear tests JCS announces the Korea Massive Punishment and retaliation (KMPr) plan|
|KCNa reports ground expulsion test of a new high- powered missile engine * Kim Jong-un reveals intention to “obtain geostationary satellites within a few years”|September 20||
||September 21|U.S. deploys B-1B bomber to the Korean Peninsula|
|General Staff Department spokesperson criticizes rOK’s military contingency plans * “the nuclear missiles we fire shall turn Seoul, where the Blue house and government bodies are situated, to ashes”|September 22||
|Foreign affairs Minister ri Su-yong gives speech to the UN General assembly * “(North Korea) will continue to build up its nuclear strength in both quantity and quality”|September 24||
||September 30|Decision made to deploy thaaD to Seongju Country Club, Gyeongbuk|
||October 1|President Park recommends North Korean soldiers and civilians to come to rOK during her commemoration speech on armed Forces Day|
|rodong Newspaper criticizes commemoration speech for armed Forces Day * “(South Korea) is insulting our dignity and instigating defection”|October 3||


-----

|north Korea|Date|south Korea|
|---|---|---|
||October 10|rOK-U.S. combined maritime training, a joint drill among naval forces called the “invincible Spirit” (through October 15)|
|Launches mid-range Musudan missile (presumably) in Pyongbuk * Presumed to have ended in failure|October 15||
|Launches mid-range Musudan missile (presumably) in Pyongbuk * Presumed to have ended in failure|October 20||
|report by the KCNa threatens to strike rOK’s methods of psychological warfare * “(South Korea) mustn’t meddle with us in our faces”|October 29||
|KCNa reports Kim Jong-un’s visit to the Special Operations Squadron * “eliminating the foul beings of the Blue house, puppet government and key military authorities is the primary mission”|November 4|rOK-U.S.-UK conduct combined strategic exercise called “invincible Shield” (through November 10)|
|KCNa reports Kim Jong-un’s visit to Kalido and Jangjedo islands of the West Sea * “the newly reorganized plans for artillery strike on Yeonpyeongdo island is authorized”|November 13|Military declares it will “retaliate firmly against provocations”|
|Spokesperson for the Chosun asia-Pacific Peace Committee criticizes rOK-Japan General Security of Military information agreement (GSOMia)|November 17||
||November 23|rOK-Japan conclude GSOMia|
|MOFa spokesperson criticizes the conclusion of rOK-Japan GSOMia|November 25||
||November 30|UN Security Council adopts resolution 2321|
|MOFa spokesperson criticizes the UN Security Council resolution * “it will lead to even stronger self-defensive contingency plans”|December 1||
|KCNa reports Kim Jong-un witnessed concentrated artillery strike exercises of the Frontline artillery Corps * “including Seoul itself, the strikes will also aim at the main frontline and the direction of support fire as well as military targets and government bodies”|December 2|Government announces unilateral sanctions against North Korea * Financial sanctions imposed on 36 officials and personnel as well as 35 agencies and organizations|
|Spokesperson for the CPrF Policy Department claims there is “potential for North Korea invasion and war provocations by the South” * “a cunning and deceitful strategy to suppress the impeachment of President Park and redirect the public opinion to security issues”|December 3||


-----

**Appendix 10**

**north Korea’s Infiltrations and Local Provocations**
**against the ROK**

**status of Infiltrations and Local Provocations by Year**

|Category|Total|1950|1960|1970|1980|1990|2000|2010-2014|2015|2016|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|total|3,094|405|1,340|406|228|222|241|220|26|6|
|infiltrations|1,977|386|1,011|311|167|63|16|21|2|0|
|Local Provocations|1,117|19|329|95|61|159|225|199|24|6|



*[ 2016 is until November 30]

**Chronicle of Infiltrations and Local Provocations**
**(December 1, 2014 - november 30, 2016)**

|Date|Descriptions|
|---|---|
|December 5, 2014|enemy patrol boat violates the NLL west of Yeonpyeongdo island in the West Sea|
|February 19|One North Korean iron ship violates the NLL east of Dokdo island in the east Sea|
|april 21, 2015|enemy armed patrol boat violates the NLL north of Baengnyeongdo island in the West Sea|
|May 16|enemy armed patrol boat violates the NLL west of Yeonpyeongdo island in the West Sea|
|June 11|enemy armed patrol boat violates the NLL north of Baengnyeongdo island in the West Sea|
|June 11|enemy armed patrol boat violates the NLL northeast of Socheongdo island in the West Sea|
|June 12|enemy armed patrol boat violates the NLL southeast of Socheongdo island in the West Sea|
|June 16|enemy armed patrol boat violates the NLL northwest of Baengnyeongdo island in the West Sea|
|June 23|enemy patrol boat violates the NLL northwest of Baengnyeongdo island in the West Sea|
|June 30|enemy armed patrol boat violates the NLL west of Yeonpyeongdo island in the West Sea|
|July 2|enemy troops violate the MDL at Cheolwon, Gangwon|
|July 11|enemy troops violate the MDL at Cheolwon, Gangwon|
|august 4|enemy troops conduct mine-laying in Paju, Gyeonggi|
|august 20|enemy troops fire howitzers and direct fire weapons to the south of MDL|
|august 22|enemy small UaV violates the MDL in the forward area of hwacheon|
|august 23|enemy small UaV violates the MDL in the forward area of hwacheon|
|august 24|enemy small UaV violates the MDL in the forward area of hwacheon (twice)|
|august 31|enemy armed patrol boat violates the NLL northeast of Baengnyeongdo island in the West Sea|
|September 8|enemy patrol boat violates the NLL southeast of Socheongdo island in the West Sea|
|September 25|enemy patrol boat violates the NLL west of Yeonpyeongdo island in the West Sea|
|October 24|enemy patrol boat violates the NLL northeast of Yeonpyeongdo island in the West Sea|
|November 30|enemy armed patrol boat violates the NLL northeast of Socheongdo island in the West Sea|


-----

|Date|Descriptions|
|---|---|
|December 14|One North Korean fishing boat violates the NLL north of Baengnyeongdo in the West Sea|
|December 14|enemy armed patrol boat violates the NLL north of Baengnyeongdo island in the West Sea|
|January 13, 2016|enemy small UaV violates the MDL in the forward area of Munsan, Gyeonggi|
|February 8|One North Korean tug boat violates the NLL west of Yeonpyeongdo island in the West Sea|
|February 8|enemy armed patrol boat violates the NLL southeast of Socheongdo island in the West Sea|
|april 10|One North Korean fishing boat violates the NLL west of Yeonpyeongdo island in the West Sea|
|May 27|enemy patrol boat and fishing boat violate the NLL west of Yeonpyengdo island in the West Sea|
|June 8|One North Korean fishing boat violates the NLL east of Geojin in the east Sea|


**Detailed status of Infiltrations and Local Provocations by Year and Type**

|Category|Col2|Total|1950|1960|1970|1980|1990|2000|2010-2014|2015|2016|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Total||3,094|405|1,340|406|228|222|241|220|26|6|
|infiltrations|Direct|1,759|381|990|300|38|50|0|0|0|0|
||indirect|179|0|0|0|127|13|16|21|2|0|
||South Korean defectors to NK or those abducted by North Korea sent as spy agents|39|5|21|11|2|0|0|0|0|0|
||subtotal|1,977|386|1,011|311|167|63|16|21|2|0|
|Local Provocations|Contact area provocations|507|7|300|51|45|51|42|7|4|0|
||Contact waters provocations|559|2|22|28|12|107|180|188|15|5|
||aerial provocations|51|10|7|16|4|1|3|4|5|1|
||subtotal|1,117|19|329|95|61|159|225|199|24|6|


-----

**Appendix 11**

**Combined and Joint exercise and Training**

**ROK-U.s. Combined exercises**

|name|Type|Purpose|Descriptions|
|---|---|---|---|
|Ulchi Freedom Guardian (UFG)|Military command post and government exercise|• exercise theater operations command and warfighting procedures under the current combined defense system • Develop the rOK JCS and USFK’s theater operations command and execution capabilities in preparation for the wartime OPCON transition • Gain proficiency with execution procedures of the Chungmu Plan and the warfighting SOP|• Crisis management exercise • Wartime transition procedure exercise • Operational plan execution procedure exercise • Senior Leaders Seminar • Military Coordination elements operating exercise|
|Key resolve/ Foal eagle (Kr/Fe)|Command post exercise and field training exercise|• examine the current combined defense system and gain proficiency in warfighting procedures • increase capabilities for the rOK-U.S. combined operations and rear area defense operations|• Crisis management exercise • Wartime transition procedure exercise • Operational plan execution procedure exercise • Gain proficiency in reception, staging, onward movement and integration procedures within combined operational areas • rOK-U.S. combined field training exercise|



**ROK Armed forces Joint exercise and Training**

|name|Type|Purpose|Descriptions|
|---|---|---|---|
|taegeuk exercise|theater-level command post exercise|• Develop theater operations execution capability of the rOK JCS|• exercise operations execution procedures to prepare for various threats caused by changes in operational environment|
|hoguk training|Operational command-level field training exercise|• Develop joint operation execution capability and force management capability|• Operational plan execution training in preparation for local provocations and full-scale war • application exercise of operational execution procedure caused by changes in operational environment|
|Comprehensive rear area training (hwarang training)|integrated civil-government- military-police defense training by area|• Gain proficiency in wartime and peacetime operational plan execution procedures • enhance local residents’ security awareness • Check the integrated civil-government- military-police defense posture|• Operations to prepare for infiltrations and local provocations • Wartime transition • Operations to prepare for a full-scale war|


-----

**Appendix 12**

**International Defense Industrial Cooperation**
**Agreements**

**Countries that Have Concluded International Defense Industrial Cooperation**
**Agreements (MOUs) with the ROK: 34 Countries**

As of December 2016

|Country|Concluded in|Country|Concluded in|Country|Concluded in|Country|Concluded in|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|U.S.|June 1988|thailand|November 1991|Spain|March 1992|indonesia|October 1995|
|UK|September 1993|Philippines|May 1994|israel|august 1995|romania|November 1997|
|Canada|May 1996|Germany|November 1997|russia|November 1997|Vietnam|august 2001|
|Netherlands|June 1999|turkey|November 1999|Venezuela|December 1999|Pakistan|May 2006|
|australia|august 2001|Bangladesh|January 2004|india|September 2005|ecuador|January 2010|
|Ukraine|December 2006|Colombia|May 2008|egypt|December 2009|Norway|September 2010|
|Uzbekistan|February 2010|Peru|June 2010|Uae|September 2010|Czech republic|august 2015|
|Denmark|May 2011|Poland|May 2014|Chile|august 2015|||
|Finland|June 2016|hungary|July 2016|France|august 2016|||



**status of Other Defense Industrial Cooperation Agreements**

As of December 2016

|Category|Agreements for International Technological Cooperation (12 countries)|Agreements for Quality Assurance (23 countries)|Agreements for Provision of Price Information (4 countries)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Country|U.S., France, UK, israel, russia, turkey, india, Colombia, Norway, Sweden, indonesia, Singapore|U.S., UK, France, Spain, Switzerland, Canada, italy, Netherlands, Denmark, australia, Philippines, Germany, israel, turkey, indonesia, New Zealand, Greece, Poland, Czech republic, Slovakia, Sweden, Peru, Norway|U.S., UK, Germany, Netherlands|


-----

**Appendix 13**

**Joint Communiqué of the 47[th] ROK-U.s. security**
**Consultative Meeting**

November 2. 2015, Seoul

1. the 47[th] republic of Korea (rOK) and United States (U.S.) Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) was held in Seoul
on November 2, 2015. rOK Minister of National Defense han Min-koo and U.S. Secretary of Defense ashton Carter led their respective delegations, which included senior defense and foreign affairs officials. Before the SCM,
rOK Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Lee Sun-jin and the U.S. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
General Joseph F. Dunford Jr. presided over the 40[th] rOK-U.S. Military Committee Meeting (MCM) on November 1,
2015.

2. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the commitment of rOK and U.S. presidents to continue building a comprehensive strategic alliance of bilateral, regional and global scope based on common values and mutual trust, as
set forth in the June 2009 “Joint Vision for the alliance of the republic of Korea and the United States of america”
and reiterated in the May 2013 “Joint Declaration in Commemoration of the 60[th] anniversary of the alliance between the republic of Korea and the United States of america,” and the 2015 Joint Fact Sheet titled “the republic
of Korea-United States alliance: Shared Values, New Frontiers.” they also reaffirmed that the scope and level of
alliance cooperation should continue being broadened and deepened by strengthening the combined defense posture on the Korean Peninsula and enhancing cooperation on regional and global security in the 21[st] century, as reflected in the “rOK-U.S. Defense Cooperation Guidelines” signed at the 42[nd] SCM in 2010. against this background, the minister and the secretary noted that the efforts of the “Korea-U.S. integrated Defense Dialogue
(KiDD)” would significantly advance alliance objectives by providing high-level political oversight and coordinating
and integrating various defense consultation mechanisms between rOK and the United States. Consequently, they
decided to pursue more active bilateral security consultation centered around the KiDD in the future.

3. the minister and the secretary reiterated the firm view of both rOK and the United States that North Korea’s policies and actions, including its United Nations-proscribed nuclear and ballistic missile programs and proliferation
activities, pose a serious threat to regional stability and global security, as well as to the integrity of the global
nonproliferation regime. in this regard, the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the commitments set forth in the
“2015 republic of Korea and United States of america Joint Statement on North Korea.” the minister and the secretary condemned North Korea’s test launch of an underwater ballistic missile from a submarine on May 8 (local
time) as a clear violation of numerous UN Security Council resolutions. the minister and the secretary also expressed grave concern over North Korea’s recently expressed intent to conduct a long-range missile launch or nuclear test. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed that North Korea should fulfill its commitments under the
September 19, 2005 Joint Statement of the Six Party talks and abide by its obligations under UN Security Council
resolution Nos. 1718, 1874, 2087 and 2094. they also urged North Korea to immediately cease all activities related to its nuclear programs, including its nuclear activities at Yongbyon, such as its operation of a 5MW graphite
moderated reactor, uranium enrichment, and construction of a light water reactor, and to abandon all nuclear
weapons and existing nuclear programs in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. the minister and the
secretary also reaffirmed that rOK and the United States would continue to cooperate closely in implementing fully all UN Security resolutions concerning North Korea.

4. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the two nation’s mutual commitment to the fundamental mission of the
alliance to defend rOK through a robust combined defense posture, and to enhance mutual security based on
rOK-U.S. Mutual Defense treaty. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the need to continue to conduct combined exercises on the peninsula to demonstrate alliance readiness, particularly given the unstable security environment since North Korea’s sinking of rOKS Cheonan and shelling of Yeonpyeongdo island in 2010, its long

-----

range missile launches in april and December 2012, its third nuclear test in February 2013, and its DMZ
provocations in august 2015. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed that any North Korean aggression or military provocation would not be tolerated, and that rOK and the United States would work shoulder to shoulder to
demonstrate their combined resolve. they also reaffirmed that rOK-U.S. alliance remains vital to the future interests of both nations in securing peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula and in Northeast asia, and stressed
their determination to ensure that the combined forces have sufficient capabilities to guarantee the security of
rOK. the secretary reiterated the U.S.’ firm and unwavering commitment to the defense of rOK using the U.S.
forces and capabilities positioned on the Korean Peninsula and those available worldwide. in particular, the minister and the secretary reaffirmed that the rotational deployment of U.S. forces with complete combat capabilities
demonstrate the U.S. defense commitment to the security of rOK and also contribute to enhancing rOK-U.S. combined defense posture on the peninsula. the secretary also reiterated the U.S.’ commitment to maintaining the
current level of U.S. military personnel in rOK and to enhancing combat readiness.

5. the minister and the secretary assessed that the two countries successfully deterred, through close collaboration,
further provocations following the North Korean DMZ provocations in august and stably managed the situation.
Both countries remain committed to responding jointly and firmly to any future North Korean provocations. the
minister and the secretary noted that the two militaries are continuing to develop military plans related to a range
of crisis situations on the Korean Peninsula to ensure an effective response by the alliance. the minister and the
secretary reaffirmed the need to continue promoting combined exercises and training events and to enhance their
two countries’ combined capabilities in order to be prepared for any North Korean provocation in the vicinity of the
Northwest islands and the Northern Limit Line (NLL). Moreover, noting that the NLL has been an effective means
of separating rOK and North Korean military forces and preventing military tension for more than sixty years, the
minister and the secretary urged North Korea to accept the practical value of, and abide by, the NLL. additionally,
the minister and the secretary reaffirmed that the armistice agreement and the United Nations Command remain
crucial instruments in maintaining peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula.

6. the secretary reaffirmed the continued U.S. commitment to providing and strengthening the extended deterrence
for rOK using the full range of military capabilities, including the U.S. nuclear umbrella, and conventional strike
and missile defense capabilities. the minister and the secretary noted with appreciation the formation of rOK-U.S.
Deterrence Strategy Committee (DSC), whose remit is to ensure that the extended deterrence for rOK remains
credible, capable, and enduring so as to enhance the deterrence and response capabilities of the alliance against
North Korea’s nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and ballistic missile threats, and to
promote information sharing and interoperability. in addition, the minister and the secretary assessed that the tailored Deterrence Strategy table top exercise (ttX) contributed to enhancing the alliance’s understanding of the
tailored Deterrence Strategy and to preparing political and military response procedures for various situations.
the minister and secretary decided to continue to develop further the policies and procedures for implementing
the tailored Deterrence Strategy. rOK and the United States are committed to maintaining close consultation on
deterrence matters to achieve a tailored deterrence against key North Korean threats and to maximize its deterrent effects. the minister and the secretary noted with appreciation that the two militaries have completed the organization of a rOK-U.S. Combined Division in wartime, with a functioning combined staff during the armistice,
and shared an understanding that the Combined Division would serve to enhance the combined combat posture.
assessing that the bilateral counterfire capability certification plan has been completed, the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the commitment to maintaining U.S. counterfire forces in their current location north of the han
river until rOK forces’ counterfire capability has been certified. Upon certification, the U.S. counterfire forces are
to relocate to Camp humphreys. the minister reaffirmed that rOK is continuing to develop rOK counterfire forces
capable of executing the mission during the early phases of a war by around the year 2020.

7. the minister and the secretary approved the implementation guidance on the “Concept and Principles of rOK-U.S.
alliance Comprehensive Counter-missile Operations (4D Operational Concept)” to detect, disrupt, destroy and defend against North Korean missile threats, including nuclear, chemical and biological warheads, and pledged to
cooperate on the systematic implementation of the guidance. the minister reaffirmed that rOK is seeking to develop by the mid-2020s its own Kill-Chain and Korean air and Missile Defense (KaMD) systems, which will be critical


-----

military capabilities for responding to North Korean nuclear and missile threats, as well as being interoperable with
alliance systems. the minister and the secretary also decided to enhance information sharing on the North Korean
missile threats. rOK and the United States are committed to maintaining close consultations to develop comprehensive alliance capabilities to counter North Korean nuclear, other WMD and ballistic missile threats.

8. the minister and the secretary pledged that rOK and the United States would continue to enhance close cooperation between the parties to the alliance to address wide-ranging global security challenges of mutual interest, including peacekeeping operations, stabilization and reconstruction efforts, humanitarian assistance, and disaster
relief. additionally, the minister and the secretary emphasized that rOK and the United States are continuously
developing joint response capabilities through rOK-U.S. able response exercise against the various biological
threats that may arise on the Korean Peninsula, and have decided to further strengthen cooperation in the future.
the secretary praised rOK’s continuous endeavors to promote peace and stability in the international community,
including its counter-piracy efforts in the Gulf of aden, UN peacekeeping operations in Lebanon and South Sudan,
as well as the activities of the Korea Disaster relief team in combating ebola in Sierra Leone. the minister and the
secretary shared an understanding that the announcements of rOK and the U.S. governments at the Leaders’
Summit on peacekeeping would contribute to enhancing the UN’s peacekeeping capabilities. at the summit, rOK
pledged to deploy a future engineering unit and to provide level-two hospital equipment to peacekeeping operations in africa. the United States announced that it intends to work with the UN to double the number of U.S. military staff officers serving in UN missions, offer logistical support, conduct engineering projects and build the UN’s
capacity. the minister praised the United States for demonstrating global leadership on addressing global security
challenges, such as efforts to counter iSiL while the secretary expressed appreciation for rOK Government’s continued active participation in the Proliferation Security initiative (PSi).

9. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the need to strengthen cooperation regarding the space and cyberspace
domains, and to promote the security of critical infrastructures including information and space systems. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the importance of strengthening mission assurance for space capabilities. to
that end they emphasized cooperation in Space Situational awareness exercises, including the related table top
exercises, and space operator training. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the efforts of rOK-U.S. Cyber
Cooperation Working Group to enhance military cyberspace collaboration and decided that the two militaries
would take steps to further cooperate on cyberspace and enhance the alliance’s capacity to address challenges in
cyberspace. the efforts are to include alliance joint cyber training, exercises, and enhanced cyber military education.

10.  the minister and the secretary received a report on the results of rOK-U.S. Military Committee Meeting from the
Commander of rOK-U.S. CFC, General Curtis M. Scaparrotti, which highlighted the fact that the combined defense posture is capable and ready to “Fight tonight” and is prepared to respond effectively to any provocation,
instability or aggression.

11. the minister and the secretary endorsed and signed the “Conditions-based Operational Control (OPCON) transition Plan” (COt-P) in accordance with the “Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of National Defense of the republic of Korea and the Department of Defense of the United States of america regarding the implementation of a Conditions-Based approach to the transition of Wartime Operational Control,” which was
signed at the 46[th] SCM. the minister and the secretary decided to implement the COt-P faithfully in order to ensure a stable transition to wartime OPCON at the proper time.

12. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed that the return of the camps and relocation of the U.S. Forces Korea
(USFK) are in the interests of rOK and the United States and pledged to work together closely to complete these
efforts successfully. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the commitment to strive together for timely completion of the Yongsan relocation Plan (YrP) and Land Partnership Plan (LPP) while minimizing any challenges
associated with relocation. the two also decided to continue efforts to consult closely on camp return issues
through the Joint environmental assessment Procedure (JeaP).


-----

13. the minister and the secretary shared their understanding that the “trilateral information Sharing arrangement
concerning the Nuclear and Missile threats Posed by North Korea among the Ministry of National Defense of the
republic of Korea, the Ministry of Defense of Japan and the Department of Defense of the United States of america,” signed in December 2014, enhances mutual understanding and cooperation between the three sides on the
North Korean nuclear and missile threats and should also increase their deterrence capabilities. in this regard,
the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the need to promote practical trilateral defense cooperation based on
the information sharing arrangement as well as through regular trilateral defense consultations, such as the Defense trilateral talks (Dtt).

14. the minister and the secretary assessed that defense cost-sharing contributes to strengthening combined defense capabilities on the Korean Peninsula. Secretary Carter offered his appreciation of rOK’s contributions to a
stable stationing environment for the USFK. Both sides noted with appreciation the efforts to implement faithfully
the system improvements that were adopted last year to enhance transparency and accountability in the implementation of the Special Measures agreement (SMa), and the commitment to ensuring the faithful implementation thereof.

15. With a view to strengthening coordination in rOK-U.S. defense technology strategy and cooperation, the minister
and the secretary decided to establish a strategic level Defense technology Strategy and Cooperation Group cochaired by the Ministry of National Defense, the Ministry of Foreign affairs, the Department of Defense and the
Department of State, with participation by other relevant agencies. through this group, the two sides will work
together more closely on their defense technology strategy and cooperation agenda.

16. Secretary Carter expressed his sincere appreciation to Minister han for the courtesy and hospitality extended to
him and his delegation by rOK government, and for the excellent arrangements that contributed to the success
of the meeting. the minister and the secretary affirmed that the discussions held during the 47[th] SCM and the
40[th] MCM contributed substantively to strengthening rOK-U.S. alliance and further enhanced the development of
the bilateral defense relationship into a comprehensive strategic alliance. Both sides expect to hold the 48[th] SCM
in Washington, D.C. at a mutually convenient time in 2016.


-----

**Appendix 14**

**Joint Communiqué of the 48[th] ROK-U.s. security**
**Consultative Meeting**

October 20. 2016, Washington D.C.

1. the 48[th] United States (U.S.) and republic of Korea (rOK) Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) was held in Washington D.C. on October 20, 2016. the U.S. Secretary of Defense ashton Carter and rOK Minister of National Defense han Min-koo led their respective delegations, which included senior defense and foreign affairs officials. On
October 13, the U.S. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Joseph F. Dunford Jr., and the Chairman of the
republic of Korea Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Lee Sun-jin, presided over the 41[st] rOK-U.S. Military Committee
Meeting (MCM).

2. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the commitment of rOK and U.S. presidents to continue to build a comprehensive strategic alliance of bilateral, regional, and global scope based on common values and mutual trust, as
set forth in the June 2009, “Joint Vision for the alliance of the republic of Korea and the United States of america,”
and reiterated in the May 2013 “Joint Declaration in Commemoration of the 60[th] anniversary of the alliance between the republic of Korea and the United States of america” and the 2015 Joint Fact Sheet titled “republic of
Korea-United States alliance: Shared Values, New Frontiers.” they also reaffirmed that the scope and level of alliance cooperation should continue to be broadened and deepened by strengthening the combined defense posture
on the Korean Peninsula and enhancing cooperation on regional and global security in the 21[st] century, as reflected in the “rOK-U.S. Defense Cooperation Guidelines” signed at the 42[nd] SCM in 2010. against this background,
the minister and the secretary noted that the efforts of the Korea-U.S. integrated Defense Dialogue (KiDD) would
significantly advance alliance objectives by providing high-level policy oversight and coordinating and integrating
various defense consultative mechanisms between the United States and the republic of Korea. at the conclusion
of the SCM, the minister and the secretary signed a revised KiDD terms of reference (tOr) to support the existing
crisis coordination and decision-making mechanisms, such as the SCM and MCM, as appropriate.

3. the minister and the secretary condemned in the strongest possible terms North Korea’s unprecedented number
of nuclear tests and ballistic missile launches this year—including its fourth and fifth nuclear tests, as well as its
short-range, medium-range, intermediate-range, long-range, and submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM)
launches—as a destabilizing factor for the region and as clear violations of numerous United Nations (UN) Security
Council resolutions. the minister and the secretary reiterated the firm view of the United States and the republic
of Korea that North Korea’s policies and actions, including its UN Security Council-proscribed nuclear and ballistic
missile programs and proliferation activities, pose an increasingly serious threat to regional stability and global security, as well as to the integrity of the global nonproliferation regime. in this regard, the minister and the secretary
reaffirmed the commitments set forth in the “2015 republic of Korea and United States of america Joint Statement on North Korea.” the minister and the secretary reaffirmed that North Korea should fulfill its commitments
under the September 19, 2005 joint statement of the Six-Party talks and abide by its obligations under UN Security Council resolution Nos. 1718, 1874, 2087, 2094, and 2270. they also urged North Korea to cease all activities
related to its nuclear and ballistic missile programs immediately and to abandon all nuclear weapons and existing
nuclear programs as well as other existing weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and ballistic missile programs in a
complete, verifiable, and irreversible manner. the minister and the secretary also reaffirmed that rOK and the U.S.
would continue to cooperate closely to implement fully all UN Security Council resolutions concerning North Korea
and lead active international efforts to create an environment in which North Korea has no other choice but to denuclearize.

4. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the two nations’ mutual commitment to the fundamental mission of the
alliance to defend rOK through a robust combined defense posture, as well as to enhance mutual security based


-----

on rOK-U.S. Mutual Defense treaty. the minister and the secretary expressed their great confidence in the
strength of rOK-U.S. alliance and the U.S. extended deterrent to continue to deter North Korean aggression and
preserve stability on the Korean Peninsula and throughout the wider region. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the need to continue to conduct combined exercises on the Peninsula to demonstrate alliance readiness,
particularly given the security environment following North Korea’s fourth and fifth nuclear tests, and the multiple
ballistic missile launches conducted under the Kim Jong-un regime. in light of North Korea’s continued provocations, the minister and the secretary agreed, within the context of the 2+2 extended Deterrence Strategy and Consultation Group, to examine the options for taking additional steps to further strengthen the extended deterrence
capabilities in order to dispel any doubts North Korea may have about the resolve of the alliance. they further expressed their determination to maintain close alliance coordination in responding to any more potential provocations.

5. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed that no North Korean aggression or military provocation will be tolerated
and that rOK and the U.S. will work shoulder-to-shoulder to demonstrate our combined resolve. they also reaffirmed that rOK-U.S. alliance remains vital to the future interests of both nations in securing peace and stability on
the Korean Peninsula and in Northeast asia, and stressed their determination to ensure the combined forces have
sufficient capabilities to ensure the security of rOK. the secretary reiterated the U.S.’s firm and unwavering commitment to the defense of rOK using the U.S. forces and capabilities positioned on the Korean Peninsula and
those available worldwide. the secretary also reiterated the commitment to maintaining the current level of U.S.
military personnel in rOK and to enhancing combat readiness.

6. the secretary reaffirmed the continued U.S. commitment to provide an extended deterrence for rOK using the full
range of military capabilities, including the U.S. nuclear umbrella, conventional strike, and missile defense capabilities. the secretary also reiterated the long-standing U.S. policy that any attack on the United States or its allies
will be defeated, and that any use of nuclear weapons will be met with an effective and overwhelming response.
the minister and the secretary are committed to ensuring that the extended deterrence for rOK remains credible,
capable, and enduring by continuing to enhance alliance deterrence measures and capabilities in response to the
increasing North Korean nuclear, WMD, and ballistic missile threat and by continuing to promote information-sharing and interoperability. the minister also highlighted the increased understanding and confidence in the U.S. extended deterrence based on the multiple deployments of strategic assets to the Korean Peninsula this year, as well
as the B-52, Ground-Based interceptor (GBi) Launchpad, and Minuteman iii intercontinental ballistic missile
demonstrations earlier this year at the Vandenberg air Force Base, California. the minister and the secretary also
praised the work of the Deterrence Strategy Committee (DSC) in signing the 4D (detect, defend, disrupt, and destroy) Concepts and Principles implementation Guidelines (CPiG), which will strengthen the alliance’s counter-missile strategy in the wake of a growing North Korean ballistic missile threat. the minister and the secretary are
committed to continue to develop policies and procedures to increase the execution capabilities of both the 4D
CPiG and the tailored deterrence strategy (tDS). the republic of Korea and the United States are committed to
maintaining close consultation on deterrence matters to establish a tailored deterrence against key North Korean
threats and to maximize its deterrent effects.

7. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed their commitment to the deployment of the terminal high-altitude area
Defense (thaaD) battery to U.S. Forces Korea (USFK) on the Korean Peninsula. they noted that North Korea’s nuclear tests and ballistic missile launches reinforce the necessity of the alliance’s decision to enhance its missile
defense capabilities significantly. the minister and the secretary emphasized the military effectiveness of thaaD
and reaffirmed that the system is aimed solely at defending rOK against North Korean missile threats and will not
be directed towards any third-party nations. the minister and the secretary pledged to take appropriate measures
to ensure that the thaaD deployment process continues to move forward without delay.

8. the minister and the secretary also decided to enhance information-sharing on the North Korean missile threat.
the republic of Korea and the United States are committed to maintaining close consultation to develop comprehensive alliance capabilities to counter North Korean nuclear, other WMD, and ballistic missile threats. the minister reaffirmed that the republic of Korea is seeking to develop its own kill-chain and Korean air and Missile De

-----

fense (KaMD) systems by the mid-2020s. these systems represent a critical military capability for responding to
North Korean nuclear and missile threats and are to be interoperable with various alliance systems, including Patriot and thaaD. to this end, the republic of Korea will continue to invest in its capabilities to detect, defend, disrupt, and destroy North Korean nuclear and missile threats.

9. the minister and the secretary praised the close coordination between the republic of Korea and the United
States in response to the evolving North Korean threat. Both countries remain committed to responding jointly and
firmly to any future North Korean aggression or military provocation. the minister and the secretary noted that the
two militaries are continuing to develop military plans related to a range of crisis situations on the Korean Peninsula to ensure an effective response by the alliance. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the need to continue
promoting combined exercises and training events and to enhance combined capabilities in order to be prepared
for any North Korean provocation in the vicinity of the Northwest islands and the Northern Limit Line (NLL). Moreover, noting that the NLL has been an effective means of separating the republic of Korea and North Korean military forces and preventing military tension for more than 60 years, the minister and the secretary urged North Korea to accept the practical value of, and abide by, the NLL. additionally, the minister and the secretary reaffirmed
that the armistice agreement and the United Nations Command remain crucial instruments in maintaining peace
and stability on the Korean Peninsula. the minister and the secretary decided to increase rOK-U.S. naval cooperation to respond to increased North Korean maritime provocations, including the submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) test launches. to this end, the minister and the secretary committed to consider various cooperation
measures to expand the scope and execution of rOK-U.S. naval training events, including combined ballistic missile defense and anti-submarine exercises, and to increase information-sharing through strengthened staff coordination.

10. the minister and the secretary pledged that the republic of Korea and the United States would continue to enhance close cooperation within the alliance to address wide-ranging global security challenges of mutual interest,
including peacekeeping operations, stabilization and reconstruction efforts, regional security cooperation initiatives, and humanitarian assistance and disaster relief. the secretary praised rOK’s efforts to promote peace and
stability around the world, including rOK’s $255 million pledge for capacity building in support of socio-economic
development in afghanistan and the afghan National Security Forces, subject to domestic procedures, and rOK’s
contributions to global efforts to counter the islamic State of iraq and Levant (iSiL), to counter-piracy efforts in
the Gulf of aden, and to UN peacekeeping operations (PKO). the secretary also praised rOK’s commitment to increasing humanitarian contributions by $100 million, subject to domestic procedures, and expressed appreciation for rOK Government’s continued active participation in the Proliferation Security initiative (PSi). the minister
and the secretary applauded the efforts of rOK-U.S. Counter Proliferation Working Group (CPWG) to enhance the
alliance’s combined capability to prevent the acquisition and/or use of WMD and, if necessary, to respond to and
mitigate threats posed by WMD.

11. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the need to strengthen cooperation in the space and cyberspace domains, and to promote the security of critical infrastructure, including information and space systems. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the importance of strengthening mission assurance for space capabilities and
enhancing cooperation in Space Situational awareness and the Space Cooperation table-top exercise (ttX). the
minister and the secretary affirmed the importance of greater cooperation in cyberspace to improve the alliance’s
capacity to address challenges in this domain. they noted the significance of rOK-U.S. Cyber Cooperation Working Group (CCWG) and its efforts to create a rOK-U.S. Cyber task Force to study how the republic of Korea and
the United States can better synchronize and enhance our combined cooperation in cyberspace within the alliance construct. they decided that both countries would continue to receive updates on the progress of this study
through regular bilateral engagements and continue to explore new opportunities to strengthen our ability to respond to cyber threats. the minister and the secretary are also committed to advancing rOK-U.S. cooperation in
science and technology under the auspices of the Defense technological and industrial Cooperation Committee
(DtiCC) to identify new and innovative means of countering the North Korean threat, including collaboration in
robotics and autonomous technologies.


-----

12.  the minister and the secretary received a report on the results of rOK-U.S. Military Committee Meeting from the
commander of rOK-U.S. Combined Forces Command (CFC), Gen. Vincent Brooks, which highlighted that the
combined defense posture is capable and ready to “Fight tonight” and is prepared to respond effectively to any
provocation, instability, or aggression.

13. the minister and the secretary affirmed that preparation for the conditions-based operational control (OPCON)
transition is progressing according to the “Conditions-based OPCON transition Plan” (COt-P), which was signed
at the 47[th] SCM. they pledged to continue implementing the COt-P faithfully in order to ensure a stable transition
to wartime OPCON at the proper time.

14. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed that the return of the camps and relocation of the U.S. Forces Korea
(USFK) are in the interests of the republic of Korea and the United States and pledged to work together closely
to complete these efforts successfully. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed their commitment to strive together for the timely completion of the Yongsan relocation Plan (YrP) and Land Partnership Plan (LPP). the minister and the secretary applauded the progress made in the force relocation process, noting that the first move of
U.S. combat forces to U.S. army Garrison humphreys (USaG-h) occurred this year and that both the USFK and
8[th] army headquarters at USaG-h are planned to be in place there in 2017. the two also decided to continue efforts to consult closely on camp return issues through the joint environmental assessment procedure (JeaP).

15. the minister and the secretary shared understanding of the importance of trilateral defense cooperation among
the republic of Korea, the United States, and Japan in the face of North Korean nuclear and missile threats. the
minister and the secretary concurred that the missile warning exercise, PaCiFiC DraGON, conducted in June
2016, contributed to increasing their information-sharing capabilities against the North Korean nuclear and missile threat. the minister and the secretary lauded the trilateral diplomatic and defense coordination that took
place swiftly after multiple North Korean provocative actions this year, including the January and September nuclear tests. the minister and the secretary reaffirmed the need to continue to promote and expand practical trilateral defense cooperation through regular trilateral defense consultations, such as the defense trilateral talks
(Dtt).

16. the minister and the secretary assessed that the sharing of defense costs contributes to strengthening combined
defense capabilities on the Korean Peninsula. Secretary Carter expressed his appreciation of rOK’s contributions
to a stable stationing environment for the USFK.

17. the minister and the secretary praised the inaugural meeting of the Defense technology Strategy and Cooperation Group (DtSCG) in July 2016. the DtSCG enables the two sides to work together to advance policy and strategic discussion on technology security, foreign policy, and defense technology cooperation in support of rOKU.S. alliance.

18. Minister han expressed his sincere appreciation to Secretary Carter for the courtesy and hospitality extended to
him and his delegation by the U.S. Government, and for the excellent arrangements that contributed to the success of the meeting. the minister and the secretary affirmed that the discussions held during the 48[th] SCM and
the 41[st] MCM contributed substantively to strengthening rOK-U.S. alliance and further enhanced the development of the bilateral defense relationship into a comprehensive strategic alliance. Both sides expect to hold the
49[th] SCM in Seoul at a mutually convenient time in 2017.


-----

**Appendix 15**


**Defense Cooperation Agreements**
**with Other Countries[1) ]**

As of November 2016

|Country|Concluded in|Country|Concluded in|Country|Concluded in|Country|Concluded in|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Germany|May 1994|Uzbekistan|June 2008|Peru|October 2011|Czech republic|February 2015|
|Canada|May 1995|Japan|april 2009|australia|December 2011|Colombia|March 2015|
|israel|august 1995|Sweden|July 2009|thailand|March 2012|Bulgaria|May 2015|
|russia|November 1996|Jordan (treaty)|October 2009|China|July 2012|turkmenistan|May 2015|
|turkey|November 1999|Singapore|December 2009|Saudi arabia (treaty)|February 2013|Paraguay|January 2016|
|Mongolia|December 1999|Lithuania|February 2010|indonesia (treaty)|October 2013|ethiopia|May 2016|
|Kuwait|November 2004|india|September 2010|Philippines|October 2013|Uganda|May 2016|
|Brazil (treaty)|March 2006|Kazakhstan|September 2010|Poland (treaty)|October 2013|ecuador|July 2016|
|Ukraine|September 2006|Vietnam|October 2010|azerbaijan|December 2013|||
|Uae (treaty)|November 2006|romania|October 2010|New Zealand|May 2014|||
|Spain|December 2006|Gabon|October 2011|Qatar (treaty)|November 2014|||



1) Significance: this is a document of the basic agreement for promoting mutual defense cooperation, stating comprehensive provisions
such as cooperation principles, sectors, and methods, etc.
Content: Cooperation principles (mutual reciprocity, etc.), cooperation scope (military information, military personnel exchanges,
defense industry, logistics, etc.), administrative details (cost burden, effect, etc.)


-----

**Appendix 16**

**International Disarmament, non-proliferation**
**Agreements, and Organizations**

As of November 2016

|Category|Col2|number of Member states (year of effectuation or establishment)|Joined by south/ north Korea|Descriptions|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|UN Organizations|First Committee of the UN General assembly|193 (October 1945)|South Korea (September 1991) North Korea (September 1991)|• One of six committees of the UN General assembly (UNGa) to discuss issues concerning disarmament and international security • recommends 50-60 draft resolutions per year to the UNGa, mostly adopted by the UNGa • Composed of all UN member states|
||UN Disarmament Commission (UNDC)|193 (January 1952)|South Korea (September 1991) North Korea (September 1991)|• Carries out an in-depth review of the three major issues concerning disarmament and non-proliferation and submits a report to the upcoming UNGa • a deliberative body to draw consensus in the international community, directions and principles concerning major issues • Composed of UN member states|
||Conference on Disarmament (CD)|65 (March 1962)|South Korea (June 1996) North Korea (June 1996)|• the only multilateral disarmament negotiation body in the international community • Majority of key disarmament-related multilateral treaties created through negotiations in the CD • Not a direct organization under the UNGa, it is operated by a regular UN budget and independently decides its agendas and standing rules • Submits an annual report to the UNGa|
|Nuclear|treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPt)|191 (March 1970)|South Korea (april 1975) North Korea (December 1985) * Withdrew in January 2003|• Prevents the proliferation of nuclear weapons and promotes the peaceful use of atomic energy|
||international atomic energy agency (iaea)|168 (July 1957)|South Korea (august 1957) North Korea (June 1974) * Withdrew in June 1994|• Carries out international cooperation initiatives to promote the peaceful use of atomic energy and prevent its transfer for military purposes|
||Comprehensive Nuclear test Ban treaty (CtBt)|183 (Not effectuated yet)|South Korea (September 1999)|• all-out prohibition of nuclear tests in all areas, including underground, underwater, air and space to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons|
|Missiles|hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation (hCOC)|138 (November 2002)|South Korea (November 2002)|• Voluntary international norms to prevent the proliferation of ballistic missiles (not legally binding as of yet) * Bans support for ballistic missile development plans by states which have the potential to develop or acquire WMD|
|Biological and Chemical Weapons|Biological Weapons Convention (BWC)|175 (March 1975)|South Korea (June 1987) North Korea (March 1987)|• Prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of biological weapons (agents and toxins)|


-----

|Category|Col2|number of Member states (year of effectuation or establishment)|Joined by south/ north Korea|Descriptions|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Biological and Chemical Weapons|Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)|192 (april 1997)|South Korea (april 1997)|• all-out prohibition of the development, production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons • Stipulates that all member states should destroy all chemical weapons in their possession within 10 years of joining the CWC * if inevitable, the deadline could be extended by five additional years|
||Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)|192 (May 1997)|South Korea (april 1997)|• an executive body to verify and inspect member states on their implementing CWC obligations|
|Conventional Weapons|the arms trade treaty (att)|130 (June 2013)|South Korea (June 2013)|• Contribution to world peace and security by preventing illegal trading of conventional weapons and their appropriation • Prescribes matters related to international trading of conventional weapons|
||Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW)|123 (December 1983)|South Korea Protocols i & ii (May 2001) Protocol V (January 2008)|• Full title: Convention on Prohibitions or restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects - Protocol i: P rohibits the use of fragmentary ammunitions that are non-detectable by X-rays - Protocol ii: P rohibits or restricts the use of mines, booby traps, etc. - Protocol iii: P rohibits and restricts the use of incendiary weapons - Protocol iV: Prohibits the use of blinding laser weapons - Protocol V: regulates the explosive remnants of war|
||United Nations register of Conventional arms (UNrCa)|193 (December 1991)|South Korea (March 1993)|• all member states should register data on their imports and exports records and possessions of conventional arms at the UN • aims to share information on the transfer of conventional arms and promote transparency in armaments, thereby contributing to confidence building|
|Multilateral export Control System|Zangger Committee (ZC)|39 (august 1974)|South Korea (October 1995)|• an export control regime to ensure the implementation of article 3(2) of the NPt, which prohibits the export of nuclear materials and equipment to any non-nuclear powers that do not comply with relevant safety measures • Only NPt member states are allowed to join the ZC|
||Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG)|48 (January 1978)|South Korea (October 1996)|• an export control regime concerning nuclear materials, equipment and technology • Non-NPt member states may join the NSG • Controls exports to all non-nuclear powers regardless of their NPt membership • Controls exports of nuclear power-related dual-use items and technology|
||australia Group (aG)|42 (april 1985)|South Korea (October 1996)|• an export control regime to prevent the proliferation of chemical and biological weapons-related items and technology on states of concern|
||Missile technology Control regime (MtCr)|35 (april 1987)|South Korea (March 2001)|• a regime to control exports and transfer of rockets that carry WMD, UaVs, and related equipment and technology|
||Wassenaar arrangement (Wa)|41 (July 1996)|South Korea (July 1996)|• an export control regime concerning conventional weapons and dual-use items and technology|
|Prevention of WMD Proliferation|Proliferation Security initiatives (PSi)|105 (June 2003)|South Korea (May 2009)|• international cooperative activities that aim to block the illegal trade of WMD, missiles and related materials by rogue states and terrorist groups, and to prevent the proliferation of such items|


-----

**Appendix 17**

**ROK Overseas Deployments**

**Total of 1,104 personnel deployed to 13 countries**


As of November 30. 2016

|Category|Col2|Col3|Col4|Current no. of Personnel|Region|Initial Deployment|Rotation Cycle|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|UN PKO|Unit-based|Dongmyeong Unit in Lebanon||329|tyre|July 2007|8 months|
|||hanbit Unit in South Sudan||293|Bor|March 2013||
||individual- based|UN Military Observer Group in india and Pakistan (UNMOGiP)||7|Srinagar|November 1994|1 year|
|||UN Mission in the republic of South Sudan (UNMiSS)||7|Juba|July 2011||
|||UN-african Union Mission in Darfur (UNaMiD)||2|Darfur|June 2009||
|||UN interim Force in Lebanon (UNiFiL)||4|Nakura|January 2007||
|||UN Operation in Côte d’ivoire (UNOCi)||1|abidjan|July 2009||
|||UN Operation in Côte d’ivoire (UNOCi)||4|Laayoune|July 2009||
||subtotal|||647||||
|Multinational Peace Operations|Unit-based|Cheonghae Unit||302|Gulf of aden|March 2009|6 months|
||individual- based|Combined Maritime Forces (CMF) in Bahrain|Staff officers|4|Manama|January 2008|1 year|
|||Combined Joint task Force-horn of africa (CJtF-hOa)|Coordination officers|2|Djibouti|December 2003||
|||U.S. Central Command|Coordination group|2|Florida|November 2001||
|||U.S. africa Command|Coordination officers|1|Stuttgart|March 2016||
||subtotal|||311||||
|Defense Cooperation activities|Unit-based|akh Unit in the Uae||146|al ain|January 2011|8 months|
||subtotal|||146||||
|Total||||1,104||||


-----

**Appendix 18**

**Changes in enlisted servicemembers salaries**

Unit: won

1970 900 800 700 600 1994 11,700 10,400 9,300 8,400

1971 1,030 920 800 690 1995 12,100 10,700 9,600 8,700

1972 1,200 1,050 900 800 1996 12,700 11,200 10,100 9,100

1973 Freeze 1997 13,300 11,800 10,600 9,600

1976 2,260 1,990 1,700 1,510 2000 13,700 12,200 10,900 9,900

1977 2,890 2,540 2,170 1,930 2001 19,600 17,700 16,000 14,800

1978 3,460 3,050 2,600 2,320 2002 21,900 19,800 17,900 16,500

1979 3,800 3,300 2,900 2,600 2003 23,100 20,900 18,900 17,400

1980 3,900 3,400 3,000 2,700 2004 34,000 30,700 27,800 25,600

1981 Freeze 2005 44,200 39,900 36,100 33,300

1982 4,200 3,700 3,300 3,000 2006 72,000 65,000 58,800 54,300

1983 4,500 3,900 3,500 3,200 2007 88,600 80,000 72,300 66,800

1984 Freeze 2008 97,500 88,000 79,500 73,500

1987 5,100 4,500 4,000 3,600 2011 103,800 93,700 84,700 78,300

1988 7,500 6,500 6,000 5,500 2012 108,000 97,500 88,200 81,500

1989 8,300 7,000 6,500 6,000 2013 129,600 117,000 105,800 97,800

|Year|sergeant|Corporal|Private first|Private|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|1994|11,700|10,400|9,300|8,400|
|1995|12,100|10,700|9,600|8,700|
|1996|12,700|11,200|10,100|9,100|
|1997|13,300|11,800|10,600|9,600|
|1998|Freeze||||
|1999|Freeze||||
|2000|13,700|12,200|10,900|9,900|
|2001|19,600|17,700|16,000|14,800|
|2002|21,900|19,800|17,900|16,500|
|2003|23,100|20,900|18,900|17,400|
|2004|34,000|30,700|27,800|25,600|
|2005|44,200|39,900|36,100|33,300|
|2006|72,000|65,000|58,800|54,300|
|2007|88,600|80,000|72,300|66,800|
|2008|97,500|88,000|79,500|73,500|
|2009|Freeze||||
|2010|Freeze||||
|2011|103,800|93,700|84,700|78,300|
|2012|108,000|97,500|88,200|81,500|
|2013|129,600|117,000|105,800|97,800|
|2014|149,000|134,600|121,700|112,500|
|2015|171,400|154,800|140,000|129,400|
|2016|197,000|178,000|161,000|148,800|


|Year|sergeant|Corporal|Private first|Private|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|1970|900|800|700|600|
|1971|1,030|920|800|690|
|1972|1,200|1,050|900|800|
|1973|Freeze||||
|1974|1,560|1,370|1,170|1,040|
|1975|Freeze||||
|1976|2,260|1,990|1,700|1,510|
|1977|2,890|2,540|2,170|1,930|
|1978|3,460|3,050|2,600|2,320|
|1979|3,800|3,300|2,900|2,600|
|1980|3,900|3,400|3,000|2,700|
|1981|Freeze||||
|1982|4,200|3,700|3,300|3,000|
|1983|4,500|3,900|3,500|3,200|
|1984|Freeze||||
|1985|4,600|4,000|3,600|3,300|
|1986|4,900|4,300|3,900|3,500|
|1987|5,100|4,500|4,000|3,600|
|1988|7,500|6,500|6,000|5,500|
|1989|8,300|7,000|6,500|6,000|
|1990|9,400|8,200|7,300|6,600|
|1991|10,000|9,000|8,000|7,200|
|1992|10,900|9,800|8,700|7,800|
|1993|11,300|10,100|9,000|8,100|



*[ Source: -  1983]~[2016 Public Officials remuneration regulations (Presidential decree) ]
asterisk 13: Salary scale of servicemembers

-  1970~1982 Military Personnel remuneration act enforcement ordinance (Presidential decree)
asterisk 2: Salary scale of servicemembers


-----

**Appendix 19**


**Alternatives to Military service by Type**

|Type|Col2|service Period|Basic Qualifications|service sectors|Workplace|Legal Basis|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Secondment|auxiliary police|21 months|Men aged between 18-30 who have not served in the military and fall under the first conscription category|Public security duty|Maneuver force, auxiliary police station, checkpoints, etc.|‘act on the establishment and Operation of auxiliary Police Force’|
||Maritime police|23 months||Maritime public security duty|Korea Coast Guard, Coast Guard||
||Conscripted firefighter|23 months||Firefighting duty assistance|Fire stations and 119 Fire emergency Center|‘act on the establishment of Conscripted Firefighter Force’|
|Social work personnel|• Social service - Social welfare - health and medical service - education and culture - environment and safety - administrative duties|24 months|- those who fall under Grade 4 after physical check-ups - those who fall under supplemental service status due to illness|Social welfare facility duty, patient relief duty, supporting disabled students, environmental protection activities, etc.|State agencies, local governments, public organizations, social welfare facilities|‘Military Service act’|
|art and sports personnel|arts|34 months|- Second place or higher in international competitions - First place in domestic competitions - those who have taken intangible cultural heritage training for more than 5 years|arts|Ministry of Culture, Sports and tourism|‘Military Service act’|
||Sports||- third place or higher in the Olympic Games - First place in asian Games|Sports|||
|industrial technical personnel|active duty service|34 months|those who are engaged in manufacturing or production in industrial enterprises with technical qualifications or licenses|industry, mining, game S/W, animations, energy, construction, defense industry|Designated entity, defense industry entity|‘Military Service act’|
||Supplemental service|26 months|||||
|expert research personnel|active duty service|36 months|those who have attained a master’s degree or higher and engage in research institutions selected as designated entities|academic and technological research|Doctorate program in the natural science sector, research institute in the natural science sector, defense industrial research institute, university research institute, etc.|‘Military Service act’|
||Supplemental service|26 months|||||
|Public health doctor||36 months|- a person who is to be enlisted for active duty service but not enrolled on the military register of officers in active duty service in the medical judicial affairs, or veterinary service field. - a person enrolled on the military register of medical, judicial affairs, or veterinary service cadet officers but not enrolled on the military register of officers in active duty service in the applicable field - a person who is qualified as a doctor, dentist, oriental medical doctor, or veterinarian and is in supplemental service to be called to social work personnel service.|Public health and medical services in agricultural and fishing villages|Ministry of health and Welfare|‘act on the Special Measures for Public health and Medical Services in agricultural and Fishing Villages, etc.’|
|Doctor specializing in the draft physical examination||||Military Manpower administration draft physical examination|Military Manpower administration|‘Military Service act’|
|Public-service advocate||||Legal aid affairs|Ministry of Justice|‘Public-Service advocates act’|
|Public quarantine veterinarian||||epidemic prevention for livestock|Ministry of agriculture, Food and rural affairs|‘act on the Public Service Veterinarians for Prevention of epidemics’|


-----

**Appendix 20**

**national**

**Defense**
**Organizations**

Army

|Col1|institutions Joint Chiefs o|
|---|---|
|||



Navy

Air Force


**Defense Organization Chart**

Subsidiary institutions (3): Seoul National Memorial Board, Defense Media agency,

**Ministry of national Defense (MnD)** Defense Computing and information agency

institutions by individual Law (3): MND USFK Base relocation Office, Compensation Support
team for Persons Who Performed Special Military Missions,

**Joint Chiefs of staff** Support team for Landmine Victims


Units and agencies directly
controlled by the MND(27)

- armed Forces CBr Defense Command

-  armed Forces Medical Command

-  armed Forces Nursing academy

-  armed Forces Printing & Publishing Depot

-  Criminal investigation Command

-  Defense Combat readiness Posture
inspection Corps

-  Defense Command Communication Forces

-  Defense Cyber Command

-  Defense installations agency

-  Defense integrated Data Center

-  Defense Psychological Operation Group

-  Defense Security Command

-  Financial Management Corps

-  Gyeryongdae Service Support Group


*In alphabetical order

- high Court for armed Forces (high Military Court)

-  institute for Military history Compilation

-  Joint Forces Military University

-  Korea armed Forces athletic Corps

-  Korea arms Control Verification agency

-  Korea Defense intelligence agency

-  Korea National Defense University

-  MND agency for Kia recovery and identification

-  MND Prosecutor’s Office

-  MND Service Support Group

-  Defense agency for Spiritual & Mental Force
enhancement

-  MND Welfare agency

-  rOK transportation Command


Military Manpower
Administration

Defense Acquisition
Program
Administration



General

|eadquarters Mini|ister|
|---|---|
|Mini Office of the Minister Office of Spokesperson Vice M General Counsel Bureau|ster|
|||

Services
Division


**Office of Planning and**
**Coordination**

Planning and
Management Bureau

Programming and
Budgeting Bureau

Information Planning
Bureau


**Office of national**
**Defense Policy**

Policy Planning
Bureau

International Policy
Bureau

National Defense
Education Policy Bureau


**Office of Personnel**
**and Welfare**

Personnel Planning
Bureau

Mobilization Planning
Bureau

Health and Welfare
Bureau


**Office of Military force and**
**Resources Management**

Logistics Management
Bureau

Military Installations
Planning Bureau

Military Force Policy
Bureau

Military Airbase
Relocation Bureau


-----

**Assignments and functions of MnD subsidiary Institutions and Organizations set Up by**

|Individual Law|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Category||Assignments and functions|
|Subsidiary institutions|Seoul National Memorial Board|• executing memorial service including burial and enshrinement • Planning and executing tours for visitors • Planning and executing educational initiatives to honor patriotic martyrs for the country and Pr activities on the Seoul National Cemetery • Management and operation of its facilities, graves and surrounding forest|
||Defense Media agency|• Military Pr activities and education of service members through the Korea Defense Daily newspaper, Defense tV, Defense FM radio, etc. • Production of defense news and current affairs reports and cyber Pr activities • Photograph shooting and record management related to defense events|
||Defense Computing and information agency|• Development and maintenance of information systems for management of defense resources • Procurement and operation of communications networks and computing equipment for the MND and its subsidiary institutions • research, learning, dissemination and management of new information technology • Planning and executing information educational programs|
|institutions by individual Law|MND USFK Base relocation Office|• establishment of execution plans for USFK facility-related projects • execution, management and supervision of USFK facility-related projects • Support for management and operation of special accounts for relocating USFK bases • Other matters related to pursuit of USFK facility-related projects|
||Compensation Support team for Persons Who Performed Special Military Missions|• Preparation and support for deliberations of the Compensation Deliberation Committee for Persons Who Performed Special Military Missions and its subcommittees • Budget compilation and execution for compensation payments • Verification and research on applicants’ submitted materials • response to lawsuits and civil complaints concerning compensation in accordance with laws|
||Support team for Landmine Victims|• Preparation and support for deliberations of the victim support deliberation committee, practice committee to evaluate victims and the bereaved, and practice committee to determine handicap level • Budget compilation and execution for compensation payments • Verification and research on applicants’ submitted materials • Support duties and response to civil complaints concerning landmine victims|



**Assignments and functions of Public Institutions**

|Category|Col2|Assignments and functions|
|---|---|---|
|Public institutions|Korea institute for Defense analyses|• Study on security environment and basic defense policies and development of alternatives • Study on military strategies, military strength build-up, and weapon system selection and acquisition policies • Study on defense workforce, resources management, and defense science technology management policies • Study on defense informatization policies, and development support and technical advice on defense informatization-related projects • Collection and analysis of materials related to national defense and information provision|
||the War Memorial of Korea|• establishment and operation of the War Memorial of Korea and monuments • Collection, preservation, management, exhibition, surveys and research on war and military relics • research on war history and military relics, search for patriots and honor them and other academic activities • Pr activities for and education on commemorative projects and production and distribution of relevant publications|
||Military Outplacement training institute|• Provide cutting-edge outplacement support to servicemembers who are supposed to retire and improve job seekers’ employment capabilities • employment promotion for servicemembers who ar supposed to retire, such as: providing employment information and holding job fairs • Monitor and maintain a datavbase of job seekers among servicemembers who are supposed to retire • Conduct research on outplacement support-related policies for servicemembers who are supposed to retire and system development|


-----

**Appendix 21**

**Modification of Laws and Regulations under the**
**Jurisdiction of the Ministry of national Defense**

**Breakdown of Modified Legislation (november 1, 2014 - november 30, 2016)**

|Laws|Presidential Decrees|Ministerial Ordinances|Total|
|---|---|---|---|
|47|76|59|182|

|Laws|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|act on Special accounts for relocation of National Defense and Military installations|Partial amendment No. 12901 (December 30, 2014)|includes “relocation, integration and adjustment of national defense and military installations within a single base camp” in the definition of relocation of national defense and military installations. Devolves properties classified as sources of revenues on properties of special accounts.|
|Military aircraft airworthiness Certification act|Partial amendment No. 12903 (December 30, 2014)|includes domestic purchases of military in military aircraft programs subject to the airworthiness certification program to foster the domestic aircraft industry. Delegates certain rights of the Deliberative Committee on airworthiness Certification to a technical working committee.|
|Military Personnel Management act|Partial amendment No. 12904 (December 30, 2014)|increases the number of examinations for reappointment from one to two in order to reinforce the capabilities of officers working as professors in military academies and the Korea National Defense University and promote research activities.|
|Military Pension act|Partial amendment No. 12905 (December 30, 2014)|Sets the prescription for the state to collect funds to be recouped and others as five years. Provides legal grounds for interrupting prescription by a notification and demand for payment. enables soldiers to pay retroactive contributions for their military service period in a lump sum if they wish to.|
|Korea institute for Defense analyses act|Partial amendment No. 12908 (December 30, 2014)|requires the Korea institute for Defense analyses to carry out as its business affairs researches on policies regarding the prevention of human rights violations in the military and the protection of human rights of military personnel, and the development of alternative policies.|
|establishment of homeland reserve Forces act|Partial amendment No. 12909 (December 30, 2014)|enables to the Ministry of National Defense to order the members of the National assembly, who are reservists, to muster for reserve forces drills.|
|Military Pension act|Partial amendment No. 13214 (March 11, 2015)|Strengthens compensations for soldiers injured on duty by allowing compensations to be paid for the diseases or injuries by the causes prescribed by the Presidential Decree, which are those caused by soldiers’ conducts while their normal cognitive capability was noticeably impaired.|
|Framework act on Military Welfare|Partial amendment No. 13242 (March 27, 2015)|enables the military to provide loans on deposits for private housing rental to military personnel who are on stand-by for housing assignment due to the lack of official residences. enables the military to collect security deposits from military personnel.|
|act on the repatriation, treatment of the republic of Korea armed Forces Prisoners of War|Partial amendment No. 13237 (March 27, 2015)|enables the Ministry of National Defense to partially subsidized repatriation costs for family members of prisoners of war from the places of detention who bring remains of the rOK armed Forces (rOKaF) prisoners of war into Korea.|
|Military Welfare Fund act|Partial amendment No. 13241 (March 27, 2015)|enables the military to include security deposits collected from military personnel, who moved into official residences, in the financial resources of the account for rental deposit loans and use them as loans on deposits for private housing rental provided to military officers who were not offered official residences.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|act on the honor restoration of and Compensation to Victims involved in the Samchong training Camp incident|Partial amendment No. 13244 (March 27, 2015)|Clarifies the expiration term of the legal activities of the Deliberative Committee for the honor restoration of and Compensation to Victims involved in the Samchong training Camp incident as June 30, 2015, in order to have the committee finalize its activities within the period and abolish the committee.|
|Military Secret Protection act|Partial amendment No. 13239 (March 27, 2015)|Provides grounds for follow-up measures for leaked military secrets by enabling a prosecutor or a military prosecutor order confiscated articles to be discarded or devolved on the National treasury when the person committing a military secret- related crime is not prosecuted.|
|act on the Management of Military Supplies|Partial amendment No. 13240 (March 27, 2015)|Provides legal grounds for entrusting the scrapping of explosives and grenades to civilian manufacturers of military explosives (ammunitions manufactures) as the disposal of explosives and grenades among ammunitions required to be demilitarized is urgently needed.|
|act on the agency for Defense Development|Partial amendment No. 13238 (March 27, 2015)|Provides grounds for the agency for Defense Development to carry out defense and military installations projects.|
|Military Personnel Management act|Partial amendment No. 13352 (June 22, 2015)|in order to enable appropriate respectful treatment of military personnel who died during military service, the partial amendment includes the provision for the installation of the Committees for examination of Killed or Wounded in action and Death or injury While on Duty, which was part of a lower-level regulation and breaks down the group of decedents who died on duty into multiple categories.|
|Military Mutual aid association act|Partial amendment No. 13396 (July 20, 2015)|requires the Military Mutual aid association to publicly release major management information and the results of external audits in order to strengthen the objectivity and professionalism in asset management of the association.|
|act on the Control of Military Uniforms and accouterments|Partial amendment No. 13395 (July 20, 2015)|adds bands for identification of friend or foe to the items that are controlled by the existing act in order to block the diversion of the items onto the market and to compensate defects in the operations of the rOK military.|
|Military Personnel Management act|Partial amendment No. 13505 (September 1, 2015)|States the legal ground for discharging warrant officers and non-commissioned officers from their assignments before the end of their terms for reasons including a mental or physical disorder.|
|Protection of Military Bases and installations act|Partial amendment No. 13504 (September 1, 2015)|enables applicants for permission to request the commanders of the jurisdictional units a counseling prior to applying for permission and requires the commanders of the jurisdictional units to inform the applicants their opinions within 20 days, in order to promote convenience of local residents regarding military base and installation protection zones.|
|act on the establishment of the armed Forces Nursing academy|Partial amendment No. 13500 (September 1, 2015)|adjusts the age restriction for applicants for the armed Forces Nursing academy to 17 years or more but less than 21 years of age, the same as that of the Military academy in order to resolve the issue regarding the equality between the academies.|
|act on the Management of Civilian Personnel in the Military Service|Partial amendment No. 13501 (September 1, 2015)|Changes the term “special employment examination” to “career-based competitive examination for appointment.” Newly creates legal grounds for the employment of residents who escaped from North Korea through career-based competitive examinations for appointment.|
|Military health and Medical Services act|Partial amendment No. 13502 (September 1, 2015)|requires the Minister of National Defense to conduct fact-finding surveys every year and conduct an epidemiological investigation when an infectious disease has broken out.|
|Military Secret Protection act|Partial amendment No. 13503 (September 1, 2015)|Strengthens the protection of military secrets by establishing a provision on the punishments against persons who have acquired military secrets or possess military secrets provided by others and disobey investigating agencies’ orders to delete the military secrets.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|Military Pension act|Partial amendment No. 13506 (September 1, 2015)|in order to secure the effectiveness of the ban on seizures of benefits, requires benefits to be paid to the bank accounts dedicated to the collection of benefits when beneficiaries of pensions request payments of benefits. Prescribes the duties of financial institutions to ensure only the relevant benefits are paid to the bank accounts dedicated to the collection of benefits.|
|Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 13507 (September 1, 2015)|allows the government to grant a permit to use, lease or transfer state-owned properties to the Defense agency for technology and Quality free of charge.|
|establishment of homeland reserve Forces act|Partial amendment No. 13567 (December 15, 2015)|Provides that the state compensates reservists who are wounded or killed while moving to the designated place in compliance with the mobilization or muster for the drill or returning home after released. establishes a provision on assurance to students mobilized or mustered for drills in the same way the existing law has a provision on assurance to employees.|
|Military Pension act|Partial amendment No. 13630 (December 29, 2015)|extends the period of payment of expenses for medical care of diseases or injuries sustained in the line of duty so that the state covers medical expenses incurred until the completion of the treatments when soldiers injured on duty have to be treated in civilian hospitals due to the limited medical capabilities of military hospitals.|
|Framework act on Military Status and Service|enactment No. 13631 (December 29, 2015)|requires the Minister of National Defense to cultivate the awareness of fundamental rights of soldiers through periodic training on soldiers’ fundamental rights, imposes on soldiers to report harsh treatments by other soldiers and requires the Minister to protect soldiers who reported harsh treatments, in order to eliminate ills such as beatings and harsh treatments remaining in barracks.|
|Defense technology Security act|enactment No. 13632 (December 29, 2015)|Protects defense technologies systematically and supports relevant agencies to ultimately ensure the national security and contribute to the maintenance of international peace.|
|act on the repatriation, treatment of the republic of Korea armed Forces Prisoners of War|Partial amendment No. 13700 (December 31, 2015)|Changes the standard for calculating the amount of compensation benefits to console a rOK armed Forces prisoner of war from the minimum cost of living to the standard median income.|
|Military Court act|Partial amendment No. 13722 (January 6, 2016)|reduces the number of units where general military courts can be established, reorganizes the composition of military courts, and limit the scope of reduction of punishment by the convening authority.|
|act on the Operation, etc. of Military aircraft|Partial amendment No. 13774 (January 19, 2016)|Prescribes in the act the duties for those intending to fly over air defense identification zones prescribed by the enforcement Decree to submit flight plans as well as the duties of the Minister of National Defense to identify aircraft flying over air defense identification zones.|
|act on the Control of Military Uniforms and accouterments|Partial amendment No. 13772 (January 19, 2016)|By excluding “bankrupts who have not been reinstated” from the reasons for disqualification in receiving permission to manufacture or sell military uniforms and accouterments, it provides opportunities for bankrupts to recover smoothly.|
|Protection of Military Bases and installations act|Partial amendment No. 13773 (January 19, 2016)|in order to secure fairness in deliberations, clarifies that the Minister of National Defense can decide standards for consultation for dispositions by administrative agencies, which belonged to the regulations of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, thereby limiting transparency of the results of deliberations.|
|Military Personnel Management act|Partial amendment No. 13775 (January 19, 2016)|Prohibits persons, who were sentenced a fine of at least 1 million won and whose sentence was confirmed less than two years ago, from being appointed as officers, warrant officers or non-commissioned officers.|
|act on National Defense and Military installations Projects|Partial amendment No. 13770 (January 19, 2016)|expands the scope of owners of national defense and military installations projects. Streamlines procedures of noticing heads of competent local governments when the Minister of National Defense approves plans or action plans for national defense and military installation projects.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|act on the recognition of Military Service and Compensation for Contributors to Operations Behind enemy Lines in the Korean War|repeal No. 13769 (January 19, 2016)|repealed|
|act on the assignment and Operation of responsible administrative agencies in the Military|Partial amendment No. 13776 (January 19, 2016)|adds to the reasons of the cancellation of assignment of responsible administrative agencies in the Military prescribed by the existing act the case where a superior agency or military unit is assigned as a responsible administrative agency and the case where a responsible administrative agency gets integrated into another agency or military unit, in order to adapt the act to real situations.|
|Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 13777 (January 19, 2016)|requires military supply trade agencies that broker weapons and other goods and ordinary companies not relevant to the defense industry such as food and pharmaceutical businesses to submit a pledge of integrity.|
|act on Compensation to Persons Who Performed Special Military Missions|Partial amendment No. 13779 (January 19, 2016)|extends the period, in which applications for compensation can be made, to within one year after the enforcement of the act. allows public officials in charge of veterans or social welfare to ex officio apply for compensation on behalf of the persons who are subject to compensation and living in the jurisdictions when they become to recognize such persons even after the period has passed.|
|establishment of homeland reserve Forces act|Partial amendment No. 13780 (January 19, 2016)|includes a person chosen by a reservist to the group of people allowed to receive a muster notice on behalf of the reservist in a bid to improve convenience in receipt of a muster notice.|
|Special act on the Support for Mine Victims|Partial amendment No. 14081 (March 22, 2016)|enables the Committee to adjust and pay compensation with the amount not exceeding 20 million won when the compensation calculated based on the monthly average wage at the time of death or injury is less than 20 million won.|
|Military Personnel Management act|Partial amendment No. 14180 (May 29, 2016)|Clarifies the legal status of those, whose discharge from active service is differed, by allowing short-term officers and short-term non-commissioned officers defer their retirement from active service by up to three months when they request it in order to carry out important operations, drills, training, etc., and the request passes deliberation by the committee for examination on discharge from active service.|
|Military Criminal act|Partial amendment No. 14181 (May 29, 2016)|Newly establishes crimes of general violence and intimidation against military personnel and civilian personnel in the military in order to eliminate violence and intimidation in the military and foster a sound and health barracks culture where human rights are guaranteed.|
|Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 14182 (May 29, 2016)|Provides the procedures for the systematic registration of trade agencies that are not contracting parties such as manufacturers and allowing fees at reasonable levels are charged to foster a transparent environment for defense acquisition programs.|
|establishment of homeland reserve Forces act|Partial amendment No. 14184 (May 29, 2016)|Modifies the title of the act from “establishment of homeland reserve Forces act” to “establishment of reserve Forces act” and the term “homeland reserve forces” to “reserve forces” by removing the term “homeland” from the existing law.|


**Presidential Decrees**

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|enforcement Decree of the Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 25685 (November 4, 2014)|establishes under the Minister of National Defense the requirement review Committee, which deliberate on matters related to the review of the adequacy of requirement for weapons systems. allows public officials dispatched to the sites of overseas projects to supervise them.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|Organizational Setup of the Joint Chiefs of Staff|Partial amendment No. 25686 (November 4, 2014)|Changes “matters regarding proposal on requirements” for the building of military power, a duty of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to “matters regarding decision on requirements.” adds to the duties of the Joint Chiefs of Staff researches to develop the system for testing and evaluation, formulation of plans for testing and evaluation, and preliminary reviews to judge results, in order to support testing and evaluation of weapons systems and core technologies.|
|enforcement Decree of the Military Personnel Management act|Partial amendment No. 25732 (November 19, 2014)|requires discharged servicemen, who want to become a professional barracks manager, to have qualifications related to psychological counseling or social welfare. When persons have cheated in examinations for appointment, suspends or cancels the examinations.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the repatriation, treatment of the republic of Korea armed Forces Prisoners of War|Partial amendment No. 25797 (December 3, 2014)|removes the provision that require ex-rOKaF prisoners of wars, who receive housing support, to report to the MND when they move or made changes on rental agreements.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the Control of Military Uniforms and accouterments|Partial amendment No. 25798 (December 3, 2014)|Makes it easier for manufacturers and distributors of military uniforms and accouterments to operate more easily by easing the facility standards for permission for the military uniforms and accouterments manufacturing and distribution business.|
|enforcement Decree of the Ministry of National Defense Outplacement training institute act|enactment No. 25822 (December 9, 2014)|Prescribes matters that are delegated by the act, including ex-officio executives of the MND Outplacement training institute and the procedures of applying for the approval for the borrowing of funds needed for revenues as well as matters necessary for their enforcement.|
|Decree on Disciplinary action against Military Personnel|Partial amendment No. 25823 (December 9, 2014)|Prescribes upper limit on disciplinary action surcharges so that when persons subject to the deliberation on disciplinary action surcharges have also been fined pursuant to other acts, the sum of disciplinary action surcharges and fines must not exceed five times the amount of the bribe accepted or the public funds embezzled.|
|Decree on the Joint Forces Military University|Partial amendment No. 25824 (December 9, 2014)|Prescribes that the Joint Staff College is established as a department of the Joint Forces Military University. Prescribes matters related to division of duties at the Joint Forces Military University.|
|enforcement Decree of the Military Pension act|Partial amendment No. 25863 (December 22, 2014)|Specifies the criteria for the recognition of diseases, injuries or deaths in the line of duty, which are the standards for the payments of expenses for medical care of diseases or injuries sustained in the line of duty, pensions for wounds, survivors’ pensions for soldiers who died on duty, etc. reduces the scope of beneficiaries of pensions in foreign countries, who have to report any changes in their status, to foreign nationals and those having permanent residency abroad.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the Management of Civilian Personnel in the Military Service|Partial amendment No. 25905 (December 30, 2014)|adjusts upward the ratio of reflection of the evaluation score for performance of service, which is the basis in making the list of candidates for promotion. Provides grounds for terminating civilian personnel professors in military academies and the Korea National Defense University, who failed examinations for reappointment.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on establishment of infrastructure for informatization of National Defense and Management of informational resources for National Defense|Partial amendment No. 25906 (December 30, 2014)|reduces documents private-sector institutions, which carry out r&D of information technology for national defense, have to submit when applying for the permission to use military installations and equipment needed for testing new technologies. Streamlines procedures for such applications.|
|Decree on Financial Management Corps|Partial amendment No. 25907 (December 30, 2014)|allows the National Defense integrated Benefits information System of the armed Forces Financial Management Corps to be used for the handling of student loans from the MND Welfare agency’s student loan account. transfer the control of affairs related to student loans from the MND Welfare agency to the armed Forces Financial Management Corps.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|Decree on the Submarine Command|enactment No. 25908 (December 30, 2014)|expands the duties of submarine units mainly in charge of underwater operations in accordance with the Defense reform Basic Plan and establishes the Submarine Command for submarine force buildup.|
|Decree on the Defense Security Command|Partial amendment No. 25948 (December 31, 2014)|Newly establishes the National Defense Security research institute under the direct control of the Defense Security Command for specialized researches into fields of defense security.|
|enforcement Decree of the United Defense act|Partial amendment No. 25964 (January 6, 2015)|adds heads of regional and District Offices of Patriots and Veterans affairs to the scope of ex-officio members of consultative councils of cities and provinces and united defense consultative councils of Si (city), Gun (county), Gu (district).|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the Management of Military Supplies|Partial amendment No. 26044 (January 12, 2015)|allows leasing ammunitions free of charge and transferring military dogs and horses, which can no longer be utilized, free or charge in order to promote exports of ammunitions.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the establishment of the Korea National Defense University|Partial amendment No. 26084 (February 3, 2015)|Prescribes the Korea international Peace Operations Center, which carries out education on overseas deployment of armed forces and policy researches as an organization under the control of the Korea National Defense University.|
|enforcement Decree of the establishment of homeland reserve Forces act|Partial amendment No. 26090 (February 10, 2015)|excludes important national facilities that have resources for a reserve force of fewer than nine persons excluding those whose mobilization or drill has been suspended, including overseas sojourners, from workplaces subject to organization of workplace reserve forces.|
|Organizational Setup of the Joint Chiefs of Staff|Partial amendment No. 26102 (February 16, 2015)|adds directing and supervising cyber operations to the duties of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.|
|Decree on the Defense Cyber Command|Partial amendment No. 26101 (February 16, 2015)|allows the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to direct and supervise cyber operations of the Defense Cyber Command with orders from the Minister of National Defense.|
|enforcement Decree of the Framework act on Military Welfare|Partial amendment No. 26149 (March 17, 2015)|Prescribes specific matters so that accommodations can be provided to the children of military service members studying at lifelong education establishments, the educational attainment of which is recognized under the Lifelong education act.|
|enforcement Decree of the Military Personnel Management act|Partial amendment No. 26168 (March 30, 2015)|the Presidential Decree prescribes matters related to the selection of recipients of grants for reserve officer candidates, which were previously prescribed by the Ministerial Decree of the Ministry of National Defense, as well as the scope of grants.|
|enforcement Decree of the Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 26195 (april 14, 2015)|Permits a free contract when a specialized research institute submits a research task as the subject of core technology r&D and the administrator chooses the task as the subject of core technology r&D, so that the institute can carry out r&D on the task.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the Management of Civilian Personnel in the Military Service|Partial amendment No. 26194 (april 14, 2015)|Prescribes ceiling measures on disciplinary action surcharges so that when persons subject to the deliberation (by a disciplinary committee) on disciplinary action surcharges have also been fined pursuant to other acts, the sum of disciplinary action surcharges and fines must not exceed five times the amount of the bribe accepted or the public funds embezzled.|
|enforcement Decree of the Special act on the Support for Mine Victims|enactment No. 26193 (april 14, 2015)|Prescribes matters that are delegated by the act, including the scope of illnesses for the recognition of mine victim, procedures for the payments of compensation and subsidies for medical expenses, and support methods, and matters necessary for their enforcement.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on Compensation to Persons Who Performed Special Military Missions|Partial amendment No. 26289 (June 1, 2015)|Changes the person, who can appoint an ex-officio member of Committee for Deliberation on Compensation for Persons who Performed Special Military Missions from high-level public officials of the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of National Defense and the Ministry of Patriots and Veterans affairs, from the Prime Minister to the Minister of National Defense.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|enforcement Decree of the Military Pension act|Partial amendment No. 26347 (June 30, 2015)|enables requests for certified or abridged copies of resident registration cards and certificates of family relations to the Metropolitan autonomous City Mayors, Special Self-Governing Province Governors, the head of each Si (city), Gun (county) and Gu (district), etc. Specifies the scope of groups and organizations that can request data related to works of the military pension and the scope of data that can be requested.|
|Military Code of Conduct|Partial amendment No. 26394 (July 13, 2015)|Prescribes that soldiers can request the National human rights Commission and other bodies to resolve their complaints related to military service, in order to clarify the ways to resolve soldiers’ complaints.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the excavation of the remains of Soldiers Killed in the Korean War|Partial amendment No. 26393 (July 13, 2015)|Deletes the parts related to the designation of protection zones for remains of decedents killed in action from matters examined by the remains recovery identification Committee.|
|Organizational Setup of the Martial Law Command|Partial amendment No. 26392 (July 13, 2015)|Divides the operating division of the Martial Law Command into the operations division and information division.|
|Presidential Decree on the implementation of Student Military education|Partial amendment No. 26407 (July 20, 2015)|Prescribes that those subject to the reserve Officers’ training Corps cadet course are chosen from third-year students when selecting from students in a 5-year course of study.|
|Decree on the armed Forces Medical Command|Partial amendment No. 26490 (august 19, 2015)|requires the Minister of Defense Minister to consult the Chief Officer of the Presidential Security when carrying out security inspections or internal audits of hospitals of the armed Forces Medical Command.|
|Organizational Setup of the Navy headquarters|Partial amendment No. 26511 (September 8, 2015)|Places a chief medical officer in the special staff department under the Navy Chief of Staff.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the repatriation, treatment of the republic of Korea armed Forces Prisoners of War|Partial amendment No. 26535 (September 22, 2015)|Define expenses subject to subsidies for the costs of repatriating remains of rOKaF prisoners of war as freight costs, daily expenditures, lodging expenses and food expenses. Matches the amount payable for each category to the amount of travel expenses allowed for state public officials equivalent to those of Grade V under the Public Officials travel expenses regulations.|
|enforcement Decree of the Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 26538 (September 22, 2015)|Prescribes matters that are delegated by the act, including the management of intellectual property rights on weapons systems and core technologies; the share ratio of joint ownership of intellectual property rights; the scope of exercise of intellectual property right ownership; and licenses to use intellectual property rights.|
|enforcement Decree of the Military Personnel Management act|Partial amendment No. 26537 (September 22, 2015)|Prescribes matters that are delegated by the act, including the standards for classifying decedents killed in action and the organization and operation of the committee for examination of killed or wounded in action and death or injury while on duty, and matters necessary for their enforcement.|
|enforcement Decree of the Military health and Medical Services act|Partial amendment No. 26536 (September 22, 2015)|includes assistant nurses prescribed by the Medical Service act and enlisted service members who have acquired qualifications or licenses in accordance with relevant acts including the Pharmaceutical affairs act to the scope of military health and medical personnel.|
|regulations on Special Cases Concerning the admission of Students, etc. for high Schools established to improve educational Conditions for Children of Military Personnel|Partial amendment No. 26554 (September 25, 2015)|allows heads of military children schools to set the time for the selection of applicants for admission that is different from the time set by the master plan for entrance screening that is formulated and publicly announced by a Superintendent of an Office of education within the range decided through consultations with the Minister of education.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|enforcement Decree of the Military Pension act|Partial amendment No. 26608 (October 29, 2015)|allows persons who suffer diseases or injuries in the line of duty at great risk to their lives that are subject to the recognition of soldiers wounded in a war or in line of special duty deaths, to receive medical cares for the period not exceeding two years. allows that if there is a medical opinion for continuous treatment even after such period has passed, the duration of medical care may be extended for up to one year for each occasion.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on National Defense and Military installations Projects|Partial amendment No. 26636 (November 13, 2015)|Delegates the authorities of the Minister of National Defense over consultations with heads of relevant administrative agencies regarding matters such as the approval of action plans for national defense and military installation projects to the Commander of the Defense installations agency under the Decree on the Defense installations agency.|
|enforcement Decree of the Protection of Military Bases and installations act|Partial amendment No. 26639 (November 18, 2015)|add to the scope of buildings that can be newly constructed within controlled protection zones without interfering with military operations warehouse facilities, facilities related to animals and plants, and temporary buildings constructed for the purpose of agriculture, forestry, livestock industry or fisheries, of which the sum of the total floor is not more than 200 square meters.|
|enforcement Decree of the Military health and Medical Services act|Partial amendment No. 26672 (November 30, 2015)|Prescribes matters that are delegated by the act, including the details, timing and methods for an epidemiological survey and the organization and duties of an epidemiological survey team, and matters necessary for their enforcement.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on Compensation to Persons Who Performed Special Military Missions|Partial amendment No. 26673 (November 30, 2015)|enables removing or dismissing members of the Committee for Deliberation on Compensation for Persons who Performed Special Military Missions when the members cannot perform their duties due to physical and mental disability; there has been corruption related to their duties; and they notify they cannot continue perform their duties.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the Management of Civilian Personnel in the Military Service|Partial amendment No. 26674 (November 30, 2015)|increases the weight of evaluations and lowers the weight of career experiences reflected in promotion reviews for civilian personnel, in order to ensure capability- focused personnel management of civilian personnel.|
|Decree on the Field army Commands|Partial amendment No. 26734 (December 22, 2015)|Changes heads of local governments who can request mobilization of military force for disasters and other matters to the Special Metropolitan City Mayor, Metropolitan City Mayors, Metropolitan autonomous City Mayors, Province Governors and Special Self-Governing Province Governors.|
|enforcement Decree of the establishment of homeland reserve Forces act|Partial amendment No. 26736 (December 22, 2015)|Prescribes persons required to receive reserve force training including the vice minister or higher state public officials, local council members, Special Metropolitan City Mayor, Metropolitan City Mayors, Metropolitan autonomous City Mayors, Province Governors, Special Self-Governing Province Governors, the head of each Si (city), Gun (county) and Gu (district), etc.|
|Decree on the Marine Division|Partial amendment No. 26735 (December 22, 2015)|appoints the Commanders and assistant Commanders of Marine Corps divisions, subordinate units of the Marine Corps, as general officers of the Marines Corps, instead of general officers of the Navy.|
|Decree on the air Mobility and reconnaissance Command|enactment No. 26772 (December 30, 2015)|establishes the air Force air Mobility & reconnaissance Command under the air Force Operations Command by integrating flight units centered on transport aircraft, reconnaissance aircraft and trainer forces under the air Force Command, air Force Operations Command, air Force education and training Command and air force Northern Combat Command.|
|Decree on the Combat Commands|Partial amendment No. 26773 (December 30, 2015)|establishes the fighter force-oriented air Forces air Combat Command by integrating on force types and functions of the region-oriented air Force Southern Combat Command and air Force Northern Combat Command under the air Forces Operations Command.|
|Decree on the Defense institute for Spiritual Force|enactment No. 26771 (December 30, 2015)|Separates the Defense institute for Spiritual Force, which was established to carry out education on military strategies, defense planning, and joint and combined operations, from the Joint Forces Military University, and establishes it under the Minister of Defense.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|Organizational Setup of the air Force headquarters|Partial amendment No. 26857 (January 6, 2016)|Change the term “matters regarding request on required capabilities” for the building of military power, a duty of the air Force Command, to “matters regarding proposal on requirements.”|
|enforcement Decree of the Military Personnel Management act|Partial amendment No. 26880 (January 12, 2016)|adds to the group subject to the investigation for disqualification for active service warrant officers and non-commissioned officers who have been discharged from their assignments. establishes the committee for examination on discharge from active service in order to examine warrant officers and non-commissioned officers’ discharge from active service.|
|Decree on Military attaches in Overseas Diplomatic and Consular Missions|Partial amendment No. 26881 (January 12, 2016)|increases the number of military attaches in diplomatic establishments abroad by four from 68 to 72, in order to support exports of defense goods to hungary, Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan and to strengthen military cooperative relations with Cambodia.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the repatriation, treatment of the republic of Korea armed Forces Prisoners of War|Partial amendment No. 26902 (January 19, 2016)|Changes the basis for calculating the amount of a monthly benefit payment among compensation benefits paid to a person registered as a Grade-3 rOKaF prisoner of war from the minimum cost of living to 43 percent of the standard median income.|
|Decree on the Gyeryongdae Service Support Group|Partial amendment No. 26939 (February 3, 2016)|Provides grounds for integrating service support duties including gate management and security service performed by each unit and agency such as the army training and Doctrine Command and Joint Forces Military University and having the Gyeryongdae Service Support Group to perform those duties.|
|enforcement Decree of the Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 26997 (February 29, 2016)|Prescribes matters that are delegated by the act, including the methods in granting a permit to use, leasing or transferring military suppliers or state-owned properties free of charge, and matters necessary for their enforcement.|
|Decree on Military Uniforms|Partial amendment No. 26996 (February 29, 2016)|increase the number of layers of leaves of a hibiscus in an insignia for non- commissioned officers from two to three, which is equal to that of an insignia for an officer, in order to boost morale of non-commissioned officers.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the Management of Civilian Personnel in the Military Service|Partial amendment No. 26995 (February 29, 2016)|Modifies the regulation related to the special employment of civilian personnel. Specifies the eligibility in the case of hiring residents who escaped from North Korea through career-based competitive examinations for appointment.|
|enforcement Decree of the Special act on the relocation of and Support for Military airports|Partial amendment No. 26994 (February 29, 2016)|Prescribes criteria for dismissing members of the selection committee and working committee for relocation site of a military airport and its working committee as well as of the support committee for the relocation project of a military airport and its working committee.|
|enforcement Decree of the Protection of Military Bases and installations act|Partial amendment No. 26993 (February 29, 2016)|Prescribes matters that are delegated by the act, including matters that need to be discussed in advance regarding the approval for construction or expansion of buildings in military bases and military installation protection zones by the commanders of the jurisdictional units.|
|enforcement Decree of the Military Pension act|Partial amendment No. 27060 (March 29, 2016)|Prescribes procedures for the extension of medical care for diseases or injuries sustained in the line of duty, requirements and procedures for receiving additional medical care, and other matters delegated by the act as well as matters necessary for their enforcement.|
|enforcement Decree of the Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 27079 (March 31, 2016)|enables the administrator of the Defense acquisition Program administration to establish and operate a self-supervisory body to prevent corruption in defense acquisition programs. Prescribes limits on contractual penalties for delay in the production of prototypes of weapons systems and core technologies that consist of advanced technologies, making their developments uncertain.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the recognition of Military Service and Compensation for Contributors to Operations Behind enemy Lines in the Korean War|repeal No. 27084 (april 5, 2016)|repealed|
|Decree on the Partial revisions to the enforcement Decree of the act on Compensation to Persons Who Performed Special Military Missions, etc. for the improvement of Legal Forms|Partial amendment No. 27083 (april 5, 2016)|refines the term “required documents” into “attached documents” Changes forms in accordance with the standard for the types of paper varying by purposes of forms prescribed by the regulation on the efficient Management of administrative Work.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on National Defense and Military installations Projects|Partial amendment No. 27096 (april 19, 2016)|Delegates work related to the approval of action plans for national defense and military installations projects as well as authorizations and permissions to the Commander of the Defense installations agency.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the agency for Defense Development|Partial amendment No. 27117 (May 3, 2016)|Prescribes matters that are delegated by the act, including the methods in granting a permit to use, leasing or transferring state-owned or public properties free of charge, and matters necessary for their enforcement.|
|enforcement Decree of the Defense technology Security act|enactment No. 27264 (June 28, 2016)|Prescribes matters that are delegated by the act, including the government’s support for the designation, change and cancellation of designation of defense technology, and matters necessary for their enforcement.|
|enforcement Decree of the Framework act on Military Status and Service|enactment No. 27263 (June 28, 2016)|Prescribes matters that are delegated by the act, including the operation of the deliberative committee on military service policy and specific standards for military personnel’s annual leave, official leave, compassionate leave, ordinary leave, etc., and matters necessary for their enforcement.|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the Operation, etc. of Military aircraft|Partial amendment No. 27342 (July 19, 2016)|Prescribes matters that are delegated by the act, including the flight procedures for aircraft that fly over air defense identification zones.|
|enforcement Decree of the Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 27344 (July 19, 2016)|adds munitions trade agencies to the group that have to submit a pledge of integrity. Prescribes cases in which testing and evaluation for purchasing weapons systems can be done using documents.|
|enforcement Decree of the Protection of Military Bases and installations act|Partial amendment No. 27343 (July 19, 2016)|adds to the members of the Deliberation Committee of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Deliberation Committee on the Protection of the Military Bases and the Deliberation Committee of the Jurisdictional Unit persons recommended among relevant public officials of relevant ministries and local governments.|
|regulations on the Distribution of Military Uniforms and Commodities|Partial amendment No. 27480 (September 5, 2016)|Provides grounds for the Chiefs of Staff of each Service and the commander of the Marine Corps to decide specific items of military uniforms and daily necessities that each Service needs. Sets the cases in which those who are discharged or retire from active service and reservists do not return their uniforms.|
|enforcement Decree of the requisition act|Partial amendment No. 27562 (November 1, 2016)|Prescribes that the compensation standard for usage fees for requisitioned subject matters that are immovables, rights or non-consumable movables is the price of appraisal and assessment. expands the scope of agents that can appraise and assess to certified public appraisers who has notified the opening of an appraisal and assessment office.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|enforcement Decree of the act on the Management of Civilian Personnel in the Military Service|Partial amendment No. 27591 (November 22, 2016)|replace the Korean history part of the open competitive examination for employment of civilian personnel in the military service with the Korean history Proficiency examination like the open competitive examinations for employment of Grade-V public officials. adjusts upward the ratio of reflection of the evaluation score for performance of service, which is the basis in making the list of candidates for promotion.|
|enforcement Decree of the Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 27618 (November 29, 2016)|Prescribes matters that are delegated by the Defense acquisition Program act, including procedures of applying for the registration of munitions trade agencies and for registration of changes as the act has been revised to provide procedures for the systematic registration of munitions trade agency. Prescribes matters necessary for their enforcement.|
|enforcement Decree of the establishment of homeland reserve Forces act|Partial amendment No. 27619 (November 29, 2016)|Modifies relevant provisions in accordance with the amendment to the establishment of homeland reserve Forces act, which changed the term “homeland reserve forces” to “reserve forces.” Based on this, removes the term “homeland” from the law and modifies related terms, for example from “defense of the homeland” to “defense of the region.” rationalizes the standards in calculating the amount of a compensation payment for business suspension.|


**Ministerial Ordinances**

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|enforcement rules of the act on the execution of Criminal Penalties in the armed Forces and the treatment of Military inmates|Partial amendment No. 830 (November 3, 2014)|Classifies military inmates subject to the submission of non-sealed letters and censoring of letters into narcotics-related inmates, organized crime-related inmates and inmates subject to concerns. Prescribes specific types of military inmates for each category.|
|enforcement rule of the Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 831 (November 7, 2014)|requires munitions relevant to the safety of harmful substances to be tested to check if they meet National Defense Standards and be labeled with integrated national certification marks in order to help procure munitions whose safety has been ensured.|
|enforcement rules of the Organizational Setup of the Ministry of National Defense and its Subsidiary institutions|Partial amendment No. 833 (November 10, 2014)|Designates duties related to testing and evaluation as the duties of the Force Control and evaluation Division. reflects the expansion of personnel in the quota of each rank. Changes the name of Mental Strength Division to Mental Strength Policy Division and Personnel Management Division to Personnel Policy Division.|
|rules on the Selection of Students for the Korea National Defense University and Collection of tuition|Partial amendment No. 835 (November 19, 2014)|establishes the Ministry of Personnel Management, the organization in charge of managing the personnel affairs of public officials under the Prime Minister, and transfer the control of the affairs related to personnel management, ethics, service and pension that used to be administered by the Ministry of Security and Public administration to the Ministry of Personnel Management. Changes the name or the Ministry of Security and Public administration to Ministry of the interior.|
|rules on the handling of Confiscated articles by Military Prosecutors|Partial amendment No. 836 (November 19, 2014)|establishes the Ministry of Personnel Management, the organization in charge of managing the personnel affairs of public officials under the Prime Minister, and transfer the control of the affairs related to personnel management, ethics, service and pension that used to be administered by the Ministry of Security and Public administration to the Ministry of Personnel Management. Changes the name or the Ministry of Security and Public administration to Ministry of the interior|
|enforcement rules of the Military Service act|Partial amendment No. 837 (November 19, 2014)|reflects the reorganization pursuant to the establishment of the Ministry of Public Safety and Security under the Prime Minister.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|enforcement rules on the Decree on Badges for Disabled Veterans|Partial amendment No. 838 (November 19, 2014)|establishes the Ministry of Personnel Management, the organization in charge of managing the personnel affairs of public officials under the Prime Minister, and transfer the control of the affairs related to personnel management, ethics, service and pension that used to be administered by the Ministry of Security and Public administration to the Ministry of Personnel Management. Changes the name or the Ministry of Security and Public administration to Ministry of the interior.|
|enforcement rules of the establishment of homeland reserve Forces act|Partial amendment No. 839 (November 19, 2014)|establishes the Ministry of Personnel Management, the organization in charge of managing the personnel affairs of public officials under the Prime Minister, and transfer the control of the affairs related to personnel management, ethics, service and pension that used to be administered by the Ministry of Security and Public administration to the Ministry of Personnel Management. Changes the name or the Ministry of Security and Public administration to Ministry of the interior.|
|enforcement rules of the Military Personnel Management act|Partial amendment No. 840 (December 1, 2014)|improves and modifies legal terms with nuances that reflect social prejudice against or are negative toward the disabled toward a positive and desirable direction.|
|enforcement rules of the Organizational Setup of the Ministry of National Defense and its Subsidiary institutions|Partial amendment No. 841 (December 9, 2014)|reduces the number of personnel involved in the printing of the Korea Defense Daily of the Defense Media agency by two as it has been outsource to a private agency.|
|rules on the Selection of Students for the Korea National Defense University and Collection of tuition|Partial amendment No. 842 (December 10, 2014)|removes matters related to the entrance quota of the Joint Staff College of the Korea National Defense University. Divides the entrance quota of the Korea National Defense University into that of basic courses and that of degree courses.|
|enforcement rules of the Decree on Disciplinary action against Military Personnel|Partial amendment No. 843 (December 12, 2014)|Prescribes the standard for the imposing of disciplinary action surcharges as the amount between the amount of bribery and entertainment accepted and five times the amount depending on the degree of corruption.|
|enforcement rules of the regulations on Military Scholarship Students|Partial amendment No. 844 (December 31, 2014)|Pays military scholarship students scholarships, whose amounts are equal to those of relevant educational institutions’ tuitions, in order to provide living expenses during their studies.|
|enforcement rules of the Military Pension act|Partial amendment No. 845 (December 31, 2014)|Specifies the methods to determine the wound level and the criteria for determining the wound level by body part. Changes a registered identification number to a date of birth among information to be entered into the form for reporting the loss of entitlement to a pension.|
|enforcement rules of the act on the Management of Civilian Personnel in the Military Service|Partial amendment No. 849 (January 6, 2015)|Converts 10 persons in the management operation group, including those who passed the examination for transfer, to personnel in the technical group. adjust a separate quota to fill child care leave vacancies to a realistic level.|
|enforcement rules of the Organizational Setup of the Ministry of National Defense and its Subsidiary institutions|Partial amendment No. 849 (January 6, 2015)|Converts 10 persons in the management operation group, including those who passed the examination for transfer, to personnel in the technical group. adjust the number of persons to fill maternity leave vacancies to a realistic level.|
|enforcement rules of the act on the Management of Military Supplies|Partial amendment No. 850 (January 19, 2015)|Prohibits separate conditions on leasing periods for munitions decided against using in order to the smooth leasing of such munitions by easing leasing conditions.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|rules on Physical Checkups for Conscription|Partial amendment No. 851 (January 21, 2015)|Modifies the criteria to decide a disqualified conscription status due to mental illness from one year of psychiatric treatments to six months of psychiatric treatments. adds to the criteria to decide a replacement status matters related to excessive myopia, hyperopia and astigmatism.|
|enforcement rules of the Organizational Setup of the Ministry of National Defense and its Subsidiary institutions|Partial amendment No. 852 (February 6, 2015)|Modifies certain functions of departments of the Office of Military Force and resources Management.|
|rules on the establishment of and Supervision on Non- profit Organizations in the Jurisdiction of the Ministry of National Defense and affiliated agencies|Partial amendment No. 853 (February 25, 2015)|Changes a registered identification number to a date of birth among information to be entered into the form for applying for the establishment of, or notifying the dissolution of, a non-profit organization under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of National Defense and its affiliated agencies, in order to protect personal information.|
|rules for the Selection of Personnel responsible for reserve Forces Management|Partial amendment No. 854 (February 27, 2015)|reduces the number of subjects for written tests from five to four. reduces the portion of a written exam score in the total score from 50 to 40 and increases the portion of a score for the evaluation of active-duty performances from 50 to 60.|
|rules on the Selection of Military Surgeons and Veterinary Officers|Partial amendment No. 855 (March 5, 2015)|Modifies terms related to military surgeons and veterinary officers. enables the Minister of National Defense to decide specific matters needed for determining the acceptance of military surgeons and veterinary officers.|
|rules on the Calculation of Costs of Goods Subject to Defense Costs|Partial amendment No. 856 (March 26, 2015)|removes the lower limit in reflecting the costs of retirement payments in defense costs.|
|rules on Payment of Military Bonuses|Partial amendment No. 857 (april 1, 2015)|adds those who have received military scholarships to the group of people who have to return military grants they have received.|
|enforcement rules of the act on the Management of Civilian Personnel in the Military Service|Partial amendment No. 858 (april 16, 2015)|Modifies terms related to disciplinary action surcharges. Creates the form related to a notice to impose disciplinary action surcharges and other matters.|
|enforcement rules of the Organizational Setup of the Ministry of National Defense and its Subsidiary institutions|Partial amendment No. 860 (May 26, 2015)|adds computer-related functional category to the scope of multiple-functional categories of public officials in general service of the Seoul National Cemetery.|
|rules on Special Duty Benefits for Military Personnel|Partial amendment No. 863 (July 6, 2015)|Creates additional hazardous duty allowances for soldiers to improve treatment of soldiers.|
|enforcement rules of the Presidential Decree on the implementation of Student Military education|Partial amendment No. 864 (July 22, 2015)|removes armories from facilities needed for military education and adds a barracks guidance room needed for barracks guidance to such facilities.|
|rules on reserved Officer training Corps Cadets|Partial amendment No. 865 (august 4, 2015)|in cases where reserve Officers training Corps (rOtC) cadets have been chosen as exchange students and completed military-related studies in overseas universities, recognizes that the cadets have received the training in the reserve Officers training Corps (rOtC) curriculum.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|rules on Selecting Military religion Officers|Partial amendment No. 866 (august 4, 2015)|adds a personality test to the process to select chaplain officers to check if they have characters and basic qualities of a chaplain officer.|
|enforcement rules of the Organizational Setup of the Ministry of National Defense and its Subsidiary institutions|Partial amendment No. 868 (august 11, 2015)|restructures certain parts of the Office of Military Structure & Defense Management reform.|
|enforcement rules of the act on the repatriation, treatment of the republic of Korea armed Forces Prisoners of War|Partial amendment No. 869 (September 22, 2015)|Creates the application form for payments of subsidies for repatriations of remains of the rOK armed Forces prisoners of war.|
|enforcement rule of the Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 870 (September 25, 2015)|Unify two institutions that approve exports of defense materials and national defense science and technology, the Minister of trade, industry and energy, and the Minister of the Defense acquisition Program administration (DaPa) into the Minister of DaPa.|
|rules on Physical Checkups for Conscription|Partial amendment No. 872 (October 19, 2015)|Strengthens the criteria for evaluating diseases and physical and mental disabilities, which are used in physical checkups for conscription, in order to improve the strength of the military and solve the problem of more people than what the military can accommodate waiting to enlist.|
|enforcement rules of the act on establishment of infrastructure for informatization of National Defense and Management of informational resources for National Defense|Partial amendment No. 873 (October 26, 2015)|Modifies relevant forms.|
|enforcement rules of the Military Pension act|Partial amendment No. 874 (November 3, 2015)|Creates a new form for applying for changing the type of benefits such as retirement pensions.|
|enforcement rules of the establishment of homeland reserve Forces act|Partial amendment No. 877 (December 28, 2015)|excludes from the group of people whose reserve forces drill has been suspended the vice minister or higher state public officials, local council members, heads of metropolitan local governments, heads of each Si (city), Gun (county) and Gu (district) , etc.|
|enforcement rules of the Organizational Setup of the Ministry of National Defense and its Subsidiary institutions|Partial amendment No. 880 (January 6, 2016)|reflects the quota of personnel, who are removed to be utilized as personnel for the implementation of major government projects and collaborative projects, by rank.|
|enforcement rules of the Military Personnel Management act|Partial amendment No. 881 (February 4, 2016)|expand the scope of personnel to the investigation to decide whether or not they are qualified for active service from those imposed with minor disciplinary measures twice or more within the same rank to those imposed with minor disciplinary measures twice or more throughout all rank, in order to innovate barracks culture and remove from the military officer, warrant officers and non-commissioned officers lacking necessary qualities.|
|enforcement rules of the act on the Management of Civilian Personnel in the Military Service|Partial amendment No. 883 (February 29, 2016)|adjusts upward the ratio of reflection of the evaluation score for performance of service, which is the basis in making the list of candidates for promotion, for capability-focused personnel management of civilian personnel in the military.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|enforcement rules of the Protection of Military Bases and installations act|Partial amendment No. 884 (February 29, 2016)|Prescribes the procedures and methods of a counseling prior to an application for permission for construction and expansion of buildings in military bases and installation protection zones.|
|enforcement rules of the Organizational Setup of the Ministry of National Defense and its Subsidiary institutions|Partial amendment No. 886 (March 22, 2016)|Modifies provisions on the establishment of organizations under the control of the Defense Computing and information agency and the division of duties.|
|enforcement rules of the Military Pension act|Partial amendment No. 888 (March 29, 2016)|Created the form for applying for the approval of additional medical care. the form is needed when a soldier, who received medical care expenses for a disease or injury sustained in line of duty (or expenses related to his or her official duties), suffers a recurrence of the same disease or injury after cured and intends to apply for additional medical care in a civilian hospital.|
|enforcement rule of the Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 889 (March 31, 2016)|Modifies durations of restrictions determined by reasons for the restrictions on participation in bidding including cases where heads or executives of defense contractors or research institutes violate their pledges of integrity.|
|rules on the Duties of Superintendents for Defense acquisition Programs|Partial amendment No. 890 (March 31, 2016)|Prescribes matters that are delegated by the act, including the formulation of plans to review defense acquisition programs and the methods for approving program reviews, and matters necessary for their enforcement.|
|rules on the Selection of Students for the Korea National Defense University and Collection of tuition for the improvement of Legal Forms|Partial amendment No. 891 (april 11, 2016)|Changes forms in accordance with the standard for the types of paper varying by purposes of forms prescribed by the regulation on the efficient Management of administrative Work.|
|enforcement rules of the Military Personnel Management act|Partial amendment No. 894 (May 25, 2016)|allows appointing tilt-rotor aircraft pilots, who plan to be discharged or have been a year ago or later, as pilot warrant officers, in order to secure pilot warrant officers in a timely manner.|
|rules on Payment of Military Bonuses|Partial amendment No. 893 (May 30, 2016)|Modifies relevant provisions in accordance with the revision of the provisions of the enforcement of Decree of the Military Personnel Management act on the selection of military grant recipients.|
|enforcement rules of the regulations on Military Scholarship Students|Partial amendment No. 896 (June 17, 2016)|adds the case, in which military scholarship students have had their scholarships cancelled due to unpredictable accidents or illnesses, not due to their intentional acts, to the reasons for waiving the requirement to return military scholarships.|
|enforcement rules of the Defense technology Security act|enactment No. 898 (June 28, 2016)|Creates forms needed in the enforcement of the Defense technology Security act and enforcement Decree of the act.|
|enforcement rules of the Framework act on Military Status and Service|enactment No. 897 (June 28, 2016)|Prescribes specific matters including the formulation of the military service basic policies and implementation plans for the basic policies, and specific standards for prohibiting acts that breach military discipline. Provides relevant forms including the application form for the examination of grievances of service member.|
|enforcement rule of the Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 900 (July 20, 2016)|Sets the standard ‘pledge of integrity’ form that military supplies trade agencies need to fill out and submit. Prescribes procedures for the formulation of plans for testing and evaluation.|
|enforcement rules of the act on the Operation, etc. of Military aircraft|Partial amendment No. 901 (July 20, 2016)|adjusts the time between reporting the location of an aircraft that flies over an air defense identification zone.|


-----

|Title|Proclamation no. (Date)|Description|
|---|---|---|
|rules on Special Duty Benefits for Military Personnel|Partial amendment No. 899 (July 21, 2016)|increases hazardous duty allowances and allows persons involved in incident scene investigations and autopsies to receive these allowances.|
|enforcement rule of the Defense acquisition Program act|Partial amendment No. 904 (November 29, 2016)|Creates relevant forms including application forms for the registration of munitions trade agencies, security pledge forms and application forms for registration of changes.|
|enforcement rules of the act on the Management of Civilian Personnel in the Military Service|Partial amendment No. 905 (November 29, 2016)|Modifies the evaluation score calculation methods used in making lists of candidates for promotions. the evaluation score for performance of service is an average of evaluation scores candidates obtained while in the current rank within 10 year ago over the latest 10 years up to the point when the drawing up of the candidate list began. the evaluation score for training and education when a candidate has taken two or more education and training courses is the average of scores from all courses.|
|enforcement rules of the Military Personnel Management act|Partial amendment No. 906 (November 29, 2016)|among national qualifications in fields of national defense, the helicopter mechanic qualification is divided into the specific categories of airframe, powerplant and electronics and telecommunications; 1st class deep-sea divers into saturation diving and diving supervisor; and aircraft equipment manager into parachute and safety flight gear. Newly establishes the qualification of underwater blaster.|
|enforcement rules of the establishment of homeland reserve Forces act|Partial amendment No. 909 (November 30, 2016)|remove the term “homeland” in order to change the name of homeland reserve Forces to reserve Forces.|
|rules on Fostering and assistance to the homeland reserve Forces|Partial amendment No. 910 (November 30, 2016)|remove the term “homeland” in order to change the name of homeland reserve Forces to reserve Forces.|


-----

**Appendix 22**

**Composition and Major Activities of the national Defense**
**Committee of the national Assembly**

|Chief of Staff|Deputy Chief of Staff|
|---|---|
|Park Chul-kyu Grade-2|Seong Seok-ho Grade-1|


|Committee Chairman|Col2|Kim Young-woo (b. 1967, Pocheon-si and Gapyeong-gun of Gyeonggi-do) 3rd term (18th,19th,20th National assembly) B.a. and M.a. in Political Sciences and international relations at Korea University Ph.D at Sungkyunkwan University Graduate School of Governance (Former) YtN reporter (Former) Senior spokesperson and 1st Deputy Secretary General for Saenuri Party|National assembly Main Building rm. 421 tel) 784-1364 788-2721 Fax) 788-3685|
|---|---|---|---|



As of December 8, 2016

|saenuri Party|Executive Secretary|Kyeong Dae-soo (b. 1958, Jeungpyeong-gun, Jincheon-gun, and eumseong-gun in Chungcheongbuk-do) 2nd term (19th, 20th National assembly) B.L. and M.L. at Seoul National University School of Law and Graduate School of Law (Former) head of Drugs and Organized Crime Division at the Supreme Prosecutors’ Office (Chief prosecutor) (Former) Chairman of Saenuri Party Chungcheongbuk-do regional Party Chapter|National assembly Members’ Bldg. rm. 941 tel) 784-3978 788-2009 Fax) 788-0110 National assembly Members’ Bldg. rm. 427 tel) 784-3861 788-2028 Fax) 788-0168 National assembly Members’ Bldg. rm. 830 tel) 784-6731 Korea 788-2304 Fax) 788-0199 of Party Minjoo National assembly Members’ Bldg. rm. 519 The tel) 784-5031 788-2586 Fax) 788-0133 National assembly Members’ Bldg. rm. 337 tel) 784-2175 788-2252 Fax) 788-0383 Main Building rm. 238 tel) 784-5071 788-2706 Fax) 788-0340 National assembly Members’ Bldg. rm. 549 tel) 784-7612 Party 788-2381 Fax) 788-0212 People’s National assembly Members’ Bldg. The rm. 928 tel) 784-8490 788-2427 Fax) 788-0227|Executive Secretary|Rhee Cheol-hee (b. 1964, Proportional Representative) First term B.a. and M.a. in Political Sciences and international relations at Korea University (Former) Chairman of the New Party Committee of the Minjoo Party of Korea (Current) Chairman of the Strategy and Planning Committee of the Minjoo Party of Korea|National assembly Members’ Bldg. rm. 923 tel) 784-5081 788-2754 Fax) 788-0147|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||Kim Byung-kee (b. 1961, Dongjak-gu (A) in seoul) First term B.S. in Philosophy at Kyung hee University (Former) Public official at the National intelligence Service (Former) Vice Chairman of the Policy Committee of the Minjoo Party of Korea (Current) Member of the Committee on economic Unification of the Korean Peninsula of the Minjoo Party of Korea|National assembly Members’ Bldg. rm. 721 tel) 784-1323 788-2004 Fax) 788-0101|
|||Kim Hack-yong (b. 1961, Anseong-si in Gyeonggi-do) 3rd term (18th, 19th, 20th National assembly) B.a. in economics at Chungang University (Former) executive Member of Special Committee on Budget and accounts (Former) executive Member of the National assembly Special Committee on Political reform (Former) Chief of Staff to the Chairman of Saenuri Party|||||
||||||Kim Jin-pyo (b. 1947, Gyeonggi-do, suwon-si (Mu)) 4th term (17th, 18th, 19th, 20th National assembly) B.L. at Seoul National University (Former) Deputy Prime Minister for economy (Former) Deputy Prime Minister for education, (Former) Floor Leader and Supreme Council Member of the Minjoo Party of Korea (Current) Chairman of the National assembly Special Committee on Decentralization and Local Financing|National assembly Members’ Bldg. rm. 744 tel) 784-3808 788-2008 Fax) 788-0109|
|||Baek seung-joo (b. 1961, Gumi-si (A) in Gyeongsangbuk-do) First term Ph.D in Political Science at Kyungpook National University (Former) Vice Minister of National Defense (Former) Foreign affairs and defense advisor in the 18th Presidential transition Committee (Former) Director of Center for Security and Strategy of the Korea institute for Defense analyses|||||
||||||Woo sang-ho (b. 1962, seodaemun-gu (A) in seoul) 3rd term (17th, 19th, 20th National assembly) B.a. in Korean Language and Literature at Yonsei University M.a. in Public administration at Yonsei University (Former) President of Yonsei University Student Body (Former) Supreme Council Member of the Unified Democratic Party (Current) Floor Leader of the Minjoo Party of Korea|Members’ Building rm. 413 Main Building rm. 202 tel) 784-3071 788-2514 Fax) 788-0261|
|||Lee Jung-hyun (b. 1958, suncheon-si in Jeollanam-do) 3rd term (18th, 19th, 20th National assembly) B.S. in Political Sciences and international relations at Dongguk University (Former) Senior Secretary to the President for Political affairs and for Public relations (Former) Supreme Council Member of the Saenuri Party (Current) Chairman of the Saenuri Party|||||
||||||Lee Jong-kul (b. 1957, Manan-gu in Anyang-si of Gyeonggi-do) 5th term (16th, 17th, 18th, 19th, 20th National assembly) B.L. in Public Law at Seoul National University (Former) Lawyer (Former) Chairman of the Korean Basketball association (Former) Chairman of the National assembly Committee on education, Science and technology (Former) Supreme Council Member of the Unified Democratic Party (Former) Floor Leader of the Minjoo Party of Korea (Current) Member of the emergency Committee of the Minjoo Party of Korea|National assembly Members’ Bldg. rm. 504 tel) 784-2783 788-2694 Fax) 788-0320|
|||Lee Jong-myeong (b. 1959, Proportional representative) First term Graduated from the Korea Military academy retired Korean army colonel (Former) CeO of the Lee Jong-myeong Leadership School (Current) Professor emeritus of the Joint Forces Military University|||||
|||Chung Jin-suk (b. 1960, Gongju-si, Buyeo-gun, Cheongyang-gu in Chungcheongnam-do) 4th term (16th, 17th, 18th, 20th National assembly) B.S. in Political Sciences and international relations at Korea University (Former) Senior Secretary to the President for Political affairs (Former) Chairman of the National assembly intelligence Committee (Former) Secretary General of the National assembly (Current) Chairman of the National assembly house Steering Committee|||Chin Young (b. 1950, Yongsan-gu in seoul) 4th term (17th, 18th, 19th, 20th National assembly) B.L. in Seoul National University LL.M. at University of Washington (Former) Member of the executive Committee and Vice Chairman of the inter-Parliamentary Union (iPU) (Former) Minister of health and Welfare (Former) Chairman of the National assembly Committee on Public administration and Security (Current) Member of the emergency Committee of the Minjoo Party of Korea|National assembly Members’ Bldg. rm. 622 tel) 784-4087 788-2925 Fax) 788-0372|
|||||Executive Secretary|Kim Joong-ro (b. 1950, Proportional representative) First term Graduated from the Korea Military academy B.a. in education at Seoul National University M.a. in Public administration at Yonsei University (Former) Commander of the 70th infantry Division (Former) Professor of Dongguk University Graduate School of Management (Current) Chairman of the Central Committee and the Policy Coordination Committee of the People’s Party|National assembly Members’ Bldg. rm. 922 tel) 784-9161 788-2465 Fax) 788-0238|
|Justice Party||Kim Jong-dae (b. 1966, Proportional representative) First term B.a. in economics at Yonsei University (Former) Policy Secretary to the Minister of National Defense (Current) Floor Spokesperson of the Justice Party|||||
|Independent||seo Young-kyo (b. 1964, Jungnang-gu (A) in seoul) 2nd term (19th, 20th National assembly) B.S. in Political Sciences and international relations, M.P.P., and Ph.D in east asia Studies at ewha Womans University (Former) Director of Cheong Wa Dae’s press office and President’s Press Secretary (Former) Floor Spokesperson and Chairperson of Gender equality Committee of the Minjoo Party of Korea|||||
||||||Kim Dong-cheol (b. 1955, Gwangsan-gu (A) in Gwangju Metropolitan City) 4th term (17th, 18th, 19th, 20th National assembly) B.L. at Seoul National University (Former) Member of the emergency Committee of Unified Democratic Party (Former) Chairman of the National assembly Committee on Construction and transportation and the Committee on trade, industry, and energy (Current) Chairman of the People’s Party Gwangju City Party Chapter|National assembly Members’ Bldg. rm. 613 tel) 784-3174 788-2695 Fax) 788-0126|


-----

**Major Activities of the national Defense Committee of the national Assembly**

|(september 1, 2014|4 ~ november 1|18, 2016)|
|---|---|---|
|session|Date|Major Activities|
|329th regular Session (September 1-December 9, 2014)|October 7-27, 2014|• National assembly State inspection (a total of 63 organizations and agencies including MND)|
||October 10, 2014|• Pending issue report on MND affairs (includes progress report on probe into alleged sexual assault charges against a division commander involving female subordinate)|
||October 20, 2014|• Pending issue report on MND affairs (NLL violation by North Korean patrol boat, situation on the military demarcation line, etc.)|
||October 29, 2014|• Pending issue report on MND affairs (2015~2019 Mid term Defense Program)|
||November 12, 2014|• 2015 overall budget/proposal for the operation and management of funds/proposal for the limit amount on BtL projects|
||November 18, 2014|• Public hearing on legislative bill regarding intensive management of military service fulfillment • Public hearing on legislative bill regarding fairness in cost management for defense acquisition programs|
||November 20, 2014|• total of 30 bills introduced, including the ‘Defense technology Security act’ • two motions including the agreement to extend the deployment of the rOK’s military contingent in the Uae for the training of troops|
||December 1, 2014|• total of 23 bills introduced, including partial amendment of the ‘Military aircraft airworthiness Certification act’ • two motions including the agreement to extend the deployment of the rOK’s military contingent in the Uae for the training of troops (continued)|
||December 9, 2014|• adoption of the 2014 National assembly State inspection result report|
|330th extraordinary Session (December 15, 2014 -January 13, 2015)|December 29, 2014|• Pending issue report on current affairs (Civilian-Government-Military Barracks Culture reform Committee recommendations, trilateral agreement between the rOK-U.S.-Japan defense ministries for information sharing regarding North Korean nuclear weapons and missiles)|
|331st extraordinary Session (February 2-March 3, 2015)|February 11, 2015|• Progress report (under MND·MMa·DaPa jurisdictions) • total of 18 bills introduced, including partial amendment of legislation involving National Defense reform act • Petition for humanitarian removal of landmines by discharged soldiers specializing in the disarmament of military explosives|
||February 24, 2015|• total of 31 bills introduced, including partial amendment of the ‘Military Secret Protection act’ • Progress report on the 2014 National assembly State inspection and the request to rectify account balances for the 2013 fiscal year|
|332nd extraordinary Session (april 7-May 6, 2015)|april 20, 2015|• total of 18 bills introduced, including partial amendment of the ‘Military Personnel Management act’ • total of 3 petitions, including the petition to legislate support for surrounding areas of ammunition depots • Pending issue report on MND affairs (evaluation of situation with North Korea, the rOK military’s readiness posture, preparing for the 2015 Military World Games, anti-corruption measures for DaPa, etc.)|
||april 21, 2015|• Public hearing on social compensation plan for personnel of mandatory military service • Public hearing on legislation regarding order and safety in the military|


-----

|session|Date|Major Activities|
|---|---|---|
|332nd extraordinary Session (april 7-May 6, 2015)|april 22, 2015|• Public hearing on legislation regarding the protection of defense industry technologies • Public hearing on legislation regarding compensation for irregular troops of distinguished service during the Korean War|
||april 28, 2015|• total of 6 bills introduced, including partial amendment of the ‘Military Personnel Management act’|
|333rd extraordinary Session (May 11-29, 2015)|May 11, 2015|• Urgent issue report on MND affairs (in relation to North Korea’s launch of SLBM and the rOK military’s readiness posture)|
|334th extraordinary Session (June 8-July 7, 2015)|June 16, 2015|• total of 19 bills introduced, including partial amendment of the ‘Military Personnel Management act’ • Pending issue report on MND affairs (evaluation of situation with North Korea, the rOK military’s readiness posture, recent outcomes in national defense diplomacy and cooperation, etc.)|
||July 1, 2015|• account balances for the 2014 fiscal year and approval of reserve fund expenses • Progress report on the 2014 National assembly audit and the request to rectify account balances for the 2013 fiscal year|
||July 7, 2015|• total of 22 bills introduced, including partial amendment of the ‘Military Personnel Management act’ • 2015 1st revised supplementary budget (under MND jurisdiction)|
|335th extraordinary Session (July 8-august 6, 2015)|July 13, 2015|• enforcement of MND subsidy for hanmin high School’s new dormitory and audit request for actual progress on the endowment and concession project • 2015 1st revised supplementary budget (under MND jurisdiction)|
||July 14, 2015|• Pending issue report on MND affairs (regarding leak of confidential and classified information in the Defense Security Command)|
|336th extraordinary Session (august 7-31, 2015)|august 12, 2015|• Pending issue report on MND affairs (regarding North Korea’s landmine provocations at the DMZ and suspicion of NiS hacking) • adoption of resolution related to the condemning of North Korea’s landmine provocations at the DMZ|
||august 26, 2015|• Pending issue report on MND affairs (recent landmine and shelling provocations at the DMZ; and the rOK military’s response and future countermeasures)|
|337th regular Session (September 1-December 9, 2015)|September 10 -October 8, 2015|• National assembly State inspection (a total of 60 organizations and agencies including the Ministry of National Defense)|
||October 5, 2015|• Confirmation hearing of JCS chairman candidate General Lee Soon-jin • adoption of progress report on the confirmation hearing of JCS chairman candidate General Lee Soon-jin|
||October 30, 2015|• Pending issue report on MND affairs (regarding KF-X acquisition) • audit request to the Board of audit and inspection for performance improvements made on KF-16 fighters|
||November 17, 2015|• Public hearing on acquisition program for homegrown KF-X fighters|
||November 18, 2015|• total of 46 bills introduced, including partial amendment of the ‘Military Personnel Management act’ • two motions including the agreement to extend the deployment of the rOK’s military contingent in the Uae for the training of troops|
||November 25, 2015|• total of 67 bills introduced, including partial amendment of the ‘Military Personnel Management act’ • two motions including the agreement to extend the deployment of the rOK’s military contingent in the Uae for the training of troops (continued) • total of 5 petitions, including the petition to enact legislation regarding military food service • adoption of the National assembly State inspection result report • audit requests to the Board of audit and inspection|


-----

|session|Date|Major Activities|
|---|---|---|
|337th regular Session (September 1-December 9, 2015)|November 26, 2015|• Public hearing regarding the institution of Specialist infantrymen • Public hearing on the special bill regarding payment of combat service allowance for Vietnam War veterans|
|338th extraordinary Session (December 10, 2015 -January 8, 2016)|January 7, 2016|• Pending issue report on MND affairs (regarding North Korea’s announcement of hydrogen bomb nuclear tests) • adoption of resolution condemning North Korea’s nuclear tests and calling for effective countermeasures and sanctions|
|339th extraordinary Session (January 9 -February 7, 2016)|February 7, 2016|• Urgent issue report on MND affairs (regarding North Korea’s long-range missile launches) • adoption of resolution condemning North Korea’s long-range missile launches|
|340th extraordinary Session (February 10 -March 10, 2016)|February 15, 2016|• total of 8 bills introduced, including partial amendment of the ‘Military Personnel Management act’ • Progress report on the request to rectify account balances for the 2014 fiscal year • report on audit results related to the founding of hanmin high School|
||February 23, 2016|• total of 9 bills introduced, including partial amendment of the ‘Military Personnel Management act’|
|342nd extraordinary Session (april 21-May 20, 2016)|May 3, 2016|• Pending issue report on MND affairs (recent situations regarding North Korea and the rOK military’s readiness posture)|
|343rd extraordinary Session (June 7-July 6, 2016)|June 29, 2016|• Progress report and update on MND affairs (2016 Defense Policies, Mid term Defense Program, etc.)|
||June 30, 2016|• Progress report (under MMa·DaPa jurisdictions) • Pending issue report on MND affairs (Kill Chain and KaMD)|
|343rd extraordinary Session (out of session)|July 11, 2016|• Pending issue report on MND affairs (regarding thaaD)|
|344th extraordinary Session (out of session)|august 8, 2016|• 2016 1st revised supplementary budget (under DaPa jurisdiction)|
|345th extraordinary Session (august 16-31, 2016)|august 29, 2016|• Pending issue report on MND affairs (North Korean SLBM threats and the rOK military’s readiness posture; progress report on deployment of thaaD by USFK)|
|346th regular Session (September 1-December 9, 2016)|September 9, 2016|• Urgent issue report on MND affairs (evaluation of the situation and procurement of countermeasures in response to North Korea’s fifth nuclear test) • adoption of resolution condemning North Korea’s fifth nuclear test|
||September 29 -October 14, 2016|• National assembly State inspection (a total of 60 organizations and agencies including the Ministry of National Defense)|
||October 28, 2016|• Pending issue report on MND affairs (regarding rOK-Japan GSOMia)|
||November 8, 2016|• total of 52 bills introduced, including partial amendment of the ‘Military Personnel Management act’ • two motions including the agreement to extend the deployment of the rOK’s military contingent in the Uae for the training of troops • resolution urging for settling conflicts regarding the construction of a naval base on Jeju island including withdrawal of reimbursement litigations|
||November 14, 2016 November 18, 2016|• total of 17 bills introduced, including partial amendment of the ‘Military Personnel Management act’ • two motions including the motion to extend the deployment of the rOK armed Forces to the Gulf of aden for the naval operation against Somali pirates • resolution urging the governments of the rOK and Japan to sign the agreement on Protection of Classified Military information|


-----

adequate defense budget 125, 126, 127
aDeX 121, 160
agency for Defense Development 108, 117, 118
air interdiction (ai) operations 51
air interdiction training 92
air transport/special operations training 92
akh Unit 177, 178, 180
alternative service personnel 223
anti-submarine operation 50
anti-surface operation 50
araw Contingent 176
armed Forces Medical research institute 215
armed Forces trauma Center 211, 214
armistice agreement 55, 186
arms trade treaty (att) 168
army Mobilization Force Command 59, 60
aSeaN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (aDMM-Plus) 12, 77, 165
aSeaN regional Forum (arF) 12, 83, 165, 167
ashena Unit 174, 180
asia Security Summit 165
asia’s paradox 13, 14, 40
asia-Pacific rebalance Strategy 8, 13
august 25 agreement 24

**B**
ballistic missile early warning radar system 71
Basic Plan for the Use of Civilian resources in Defense 133
Battle Command training Program (BCtP) 89
Battle Simulation Centers (BSC) 96
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) 168
Byungjin (parallel development) policy of economic and nuclear developments 187

**C**
C4i 29, 57, 66, 77
Central integrated Defense Committee 64, 65
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) 168, 188
Cheonghae Unit 174, 175, 176
Chungmu exercise 60, 95
CiSM Military World Games 77
civilian-military technology cooperation project 118
Close air Support (CaS) 52
CNaP 17
combined exercise 95, 96
Commonwealth of independent States (CiS) 160
component training 90
comprehensive strategic alliance 148
conditions-based wartime OPCON transition plan 151
controlled protection zones 230
cooperative childcare space 210
Counter-air Operations (CaOs) 51
Counter-Missile Capability Committee (CMCC) 68
Creative Defense 100, 101
cruise training 91
CtiiC 16


-----

Cyber Cooperation Working Group (CCWG) 79, 149
cyber threats 76, 77, 78, 110
cyber-attacks 8, 10, 21, 22, 27, 39, 41, 57, 58, 78
cybersecurity 16, 17, 18, 77, 78, 79

**D**
Defense acquisition Program act 114, 115
Defense acquisition Program administration (DaPa) 115
defense budget 115, 117
defense burden sharing 152, 153
defense experiment project 135
defense exports 120, 121, 143
Defense Fiscal reform Promotion Group 131
defense force improvement project 114, 115
Defense informatization Basic Plan 134
Defense informatization Standards 136
Defense Management efficiency inspection Committee 131
defense project 114, 123
Defense reform 19, 100, 101, 125, 126, 128, 130
Defense requirement information System (DriS) 62
defense space cooperation 75, 148
defense space power 74, 75
Defense Specification Management System 137
defense technology trading system 119
defensive counter-air training 92
degree programs in specialized fields 85
deliberation committee for verification of participation in war 221
Deterrence Strategy Committee 68
Development Plan of the armed Forces Medical System 211, 214
distribution innovation 137, 138
DMZ 23, 29, 186, 189
DMZ World eco-Peace Park 184, 185
Dongmyeong Unit 171, 180
DPKO 180
DQ mark certification 120
draft physical examination 223, 225
DSC 68
dual-track tactics of provocation and dialogue 21, 22, 23, 25

**e**
ebola 10, 178, 215
eMP 111
enhanced Defense Cooperation agreement (eDCa) 16
eU 8, 9, 161, 162
eurasia economic Union (eeU) 14
european Union (eU) 161
exclusive economic Zone (eeZ) 26
extended deterrence 67, 68, 151
extended Deterrence Policy Committee (eDPC) 68
extended Deterrence Strategy and Consultation Group (eDSCG) 68

F
facility management system 131
Fast-track 78, 108
fast-track system 132


-----

fidelity recognition system 123, 124
field training exercise 24, 94, 95, 181
Flexible Deterrence Options (FDO) 53
Foal eagle (Fe) 24, 95, 149
force improvement budget 111, 112, 127, 129
force operating costs 127, 129
force reinforcement 130
Force requirements review Committee (FrrC) 115
force support system 136, 141, 142
Forum for incident response and Security teams 12
four priorities in defense management 43, 44
FtX 95, 181
Future Command 103, 148, 151
F-X 52, 107, 111, 112, 113

**G**
gender equality officers 201
General Security of Military information agreement (GSOMia) 155
global disaster alert and coordination system (GDaCS) 12
global health security agenda (GhSa) 12
Government 3.0 233
Ground Operations Command 104
Guidelines for U.S.-Japan Defense Cooperation 16, 17

**H**
halifax international Security Forum (hiSF) 164, 165
hanbit Unit 172, 173
highly enriched Uranium (heU) 32
hoguk training 94
homeland defense basic training 226
hUaV 111, 112, 113, 128
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief training 92
hwarang training 94, 95
hybrid operations 29

**I**
ia/CND 79
iCt 45, 58, 75, 118, 123, 134, 135, 233
improvement of national defense regulations 228
infectious disease 216
institute of advanced Defense technology research 117
integrated civilian-government-military-police defense posture 64, 95
integrated Defense headquarters 64, 65, 66
integrated defense posture 64, 65
integrated defense situation 60, 65
integrated Defense Support headquarters 64, 65
integrated live fire exercise 89
integrated Logistics information System 140
integrated tactical command and control system 29
intercontinental Ballistic Missile (iCBM) 19
inter-Korean Basic agreement 55
inter-Korean Joint excavation of remains of Soldiers 192
inter-Korean Military hotlines 186, 190
inter-Korean military talk 24, 186, 187
inter-Korean Non-aggression agreement 186


-----

international Logistics Cooperation 142
international Maritime & Defense exhibition 113
interoperability 55, 71, 90, 93, 102, 110, 135, 136
islamic Military alliance to Combat terrorism 11
islamic State of iraq and the Levant (iSiL) 9, 10, 11, 15, 16, 76

**J**
JaM-GC 16
JCPOa 11
JDaM 70
job-tailored specialist program 224
Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) 156
Joint Chiefs of Staff terrorism readiness Comprehensive Development Plan 58
Joint Warfighting Simulation Center (JWSC) 96
JStarS 92
JtS 96

**K**
Key resolve (Kr) exercise 95
Khaan Quest exercise 93, 160
Kill Chain 44, 69, 70, 71, 107, 113, 128, 130, 151
Killed in action total information System (KiatiS) 221
Korea air and Missile Defense (KaMD) 44, 70, 71, 107, 113, 151
Korea arms Control Verification agency 188
Korea Disaster relief team 82, 178
Korea Marine exercise Program (KMeP) 93
Korea Massive Punishment and retaliation (KMPr) 44, 71, 72, 107
Korean indigenous fighters (KF-X) 52, 112, 114
Korea-U.S. integrated Defense Dialogue (KiDD) 68, 149, 292

**L**
Land Partnership Plan (LPP) 151
landmine provocation 235
large-scale campaign-level training 92
large-scale combined air campaign exercise 92
Leap Day Deal 25
Letter of intent on Defense exchanges between the republic of Korea and Japan 155
local provocations readiness training 91
logistics innovation 137
Long range Strike Bomber (LrS-B) 16
long-range missile 22, 24, 25, 26, 100
love servicemember campaign 234
Love Your Fellow Soldiers insurance 203
low-tier defense at the final stage of the trajectory 70
L-SaM 71, 73

**M**
maintenance support innovation 137, 138, 139
maneuver corps 104, 105
maternity protection system 202, 209
Max thunder 92
May 24 Measure 189
medium-range surface-to-air missiles (M-SaM) 71, 73, 102
mental health centers 197
MerS 10, 12, 74, 81, 82, 215, 234


-----

Mid-term Defense Program 17, 128, 129, 130
military aircraft airworthiness certification 120
Military Committee Meeting (MCM) 150
military community centers 200, 207
military culture innovation 126
Military Demarcation Line (MDL) 49, 56, 230
military executive agency 132
Military human rights Guard System 199
military installation protection zones 230, 231
military pension 215, 217, 219
Military Pensions act 219
Military Personnel Welfare Basic Plan 202
military service candidates of public interest 225
Military-Massive Open Online Courses (M-MOOC) 87
mine and counter-mine operations 50
Missile technology Control regime (MtCr) 168, 188
mission command 89
mission-based training 90, 91, 92
MND agency for Kia recovery and identification 220
MND Directive on Counter-terrorism activities 76
MND help Call Center 199
MND Outplacement training institute 217, 218
MOa on Wartime host Nation Support (WhNS MOa) 143
mobilization designation system 60
mobilization training 128
moral education 84, 86, 97
mothers’ military meal monitoring group 205, 206
multilateral combined training 90
multinational combined tactical training 92
Multiple integrated Laser engagement System (MiLeS) 87, 128
Multiple Launch rocket System (MLrS) 107
Mutual Defense treaty 53, 67
Mutual Logistics Support agreements 143

**n**
Najin-hasan project 26
Narasarang card 203
National Crisis Management Fundamental Guidelines 54
National Defense 3.0 233, 234
National Defense Cybersecurity Strategy 78
National Defense human rights Monitoring Group 199

National Defense Mobilization information System 60
national defense objective 41, 43
national defense policy 41, 42, 43
national defense vision 41, 42, 43
National Military Strategy 15
National Security Strategy 15, 19, 38, 39, 42, 43, 54
national vision 38, 43, 96
naval ships damage control training 91
Network Centric Warfare (NCW) 136
network-based simultaneous integrated operations 106
new type of major power relations 8, 13
North atlantic treaty Organization (NatO) 161
Northeast asia Cooperation Dialogue (NeaCD) 165, 167
Northeast asia Peace and Cooperation initiative (NaPCi) 40


-----

Northern Limit Line (NLL) 23, 55, 56, 114, 185
Northwest islands Defense Command (NWiDC) 50
Nuclear Non-Proliferation treaty (NPt) 168, 188
Nuclear Security Summit 7, 168, 192
nuclear umbrella 67, 68

**O**
offensive integrated operations 102, 111
one-stop distribution support system 108
Onnuri Unit 179, 181
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) 168
outpatient centers 214

**P**
part-time service system 102
Peace Keeping Operations (PKOs) 170
Performance-Based Logistics Support (PBL) 133
Permanent Court of arbitration (PCa) 8
PKO center 180, 181
plutonium 32
Prepare for Your Dream Fund program 203
Prisoners of War (POW) 189, 190, 191
proactive pacifism 14, 17
professional counselors for servicemembers 197
Proliferation Security initiative (PSi) 169
Protocol on the implementation and Observance of Chapter 2, Nonaggression 55
psychological examination 197, 225

**Q**
Quick reaction Forces 51, 57

**R**
readiness posture against terrorism 76
reconnaissance satellites 54, 70, 106, 110
reconnaissance UaV 50, 54, 70, 111, 112
recruitment system 224
red Flag-alaska 92
regional corps 104, 105
regional integrated Defense Committee 64, 65
remains recovery 220, 221
renowned military service family honors program 225
repair part management innovation 137, 138
repatriation of Chinese soldiers’ remains 192
requirement review framework 115
reserve force management organization 62
reserve force training 62, 108, 129, 223, 226, 227, 228, 229, 233
reserve force training units 62, 227
reserve Non-commissioned Officers training Corps 84
restricted protection zones 230
rim of the Pacific exercise (riMPaC) 90
rOK-China Joint Statement for a Future Vision 156
rOK-Japan General Security of Military information agreement (GSOMia) 155
rOK-New Zealand agreement on Defense Cooperation 159
rOK-russia Maritime accident Prevention agreement 157
rOK-U.S. Biological Defense task Force 74


-----

rOK-U.S. Combined Division 149
rOK-U.S. combined training 90, 92, 93
rOK-U.S. Cyber Cooperation Working Group 79, 149
rOK-U.S. Cyber task Force 149
rOK-U.S. Defense Space Cooperation Working Group (SCWG) 148
rOK-U.S. Joint response System 54
rOK-U.S. Logistics Cooperation Committee (LCC) 142
rOK-U.S. Marine Combined amphibious exercise (Ssang Yong) 93
rOK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) 67, 142, 150, 221
rOK-U.S. tailored deterrence strategy 44, 67

**s**
Safe Korea exercise 79, 80
Schengen agreement 8
scientific guard system 55
Search and rescue exercise (SareX) 91, 156
Seoul Defense Dialogue 77, 79, 155, 163, 165
Seoul international aerospace & Defense exhibition 121, 160
smart reserve force training management system 227
Soaring eagle 92
Space Situational awareness 75, 148
Special act on the relocation of and Support for Military airports 231
Special clause on the punishment for assaults and threats between servicemembers 199
Special Measures agreement (SMa) 152
special research institute 142
standing unit for overseas deployment 179
State affairs Commission 21, 27, 28
Status of Forces agreement (SOFa) 73, 152
Stockholm agreement 26
strategic force 28, 31
Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missiles (SLBM) 8, 113
Supplementary mobilization reserve training 226
surface-to-air missile 20, 30, 107

**T**
tactical information Communication Network (tiCN) 112, 113, 128
taegeuk exercise 84
talent Donation Bank for Soldiers 198
taurus 70
telemedicine 212, 213, 234
tenets 39, 41, 42, 43, 187
terminal high altitude area Defense (thaaD) 72
tests and evaluations 115, 116
time Phased Force Deployment Data (tPFDD) 53
total life cycle system management 123, 137, 141
transnational and non-military threats 8, 10, 41, 45, 76
triad system 44, 67, 69, 70, 71
trust-building Process on the Korean Peninsula 38, 39, 43

**U**
UaV 18, 23, 31, 50, 54, 57, 70, 111, 134, 135, 186
Ulchi Freedom Guardian (UFG) 74, 95, 149
Umbrella agreement concerning Wartime host Nation Support (WhNS Ua) 143
UNiFiL 171
uniforms 203


-----

United Nations 52, 95, 158, 167, 170, 171, 172, 179, 189, 220
United Nations Command (UNC) 95, 189
United Nations interim Force to Lebanon (UNiFiL) 171
United Nations Mission in the republic of South Sudan (UNMiSS) 172
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations Participation act 179
United Nations truce Supervision Organization (UNtSO) 170
United States Forces Korea (USFK) 52
use of the right to collective self-defense 17

**V**
violent extremist 9, 10, 11, 76
Visegrad 162, 166
volunteer reservists 61

**W**
Wartime Logistics Support requirements and Capabilities assessment 62
wartime operational control (OPCON) 49, 96
wartime operational control (OPCON) transition 49, 96, 150
wartime operations readiness training 91
Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) 27, 41, 166, 168, 169

**Y**
Yongsan relocation Plan (YrP) 151

**Z**
Zika virus 12
zone-based mobilization designation system 60

**numbers**
4D Operational Concept 69


-----

rOK armed
Forces
p48

Border watch in
the central
frontline inside
the DMZ
p55

2016 Safe Korea
exercise
p80

Navy UDt SeaL
cold weather
training
p90

hoguk training
(Namhangang river
river-crossing
training)
p94

2016 SDD
p166

holiday visits to border
patrol units
p200


army
p49

155 miles of wire
fence at the front
line is safe and
sound today
p55

invincible warriors
(service women)
p85

2016 multinational
combined tactical
training (red
Flag-alaska)
p92

2016 Black eagles
Singapore airshow
p120

Overseas
deployment
p171

Necessity of
building armed
Forces trauma
Center
p214


Navy
p50

Defense Minister han
Min-koo inspects the
readiness posture in
Yeonpyeong Unit
p55

army
firepower
p88

2016 air defense
artillery competition
p92

2015 Seoul aDeX
p120

Cheonghae Unit
MUSat training
p175

Korean War
remains recovery
p220


Marine Corps
p50

rOK-U.S. Foreign
and Defense
Ministers’ Meeting
p69

army Special Warfare
Command haLO
training
p89

Maritime firing
exercise near the
northwest islands
p93

Deployment of US
B-1B bomber on the
Korean Peninsula
p151

akh Unit special
operations
training
p177

thank you! Soldiers
injured by the
landmine provocation
p235


Dokdo
p55

Marine Corps 1[st] Marine
Division Special Guard
team Counter-terrorism
Fire
p77

Navy anti-air, anti-surface,
anti-submarine fire
training
p90

rOK-U.S. Marine
Corps combined
air land battle
training
p93

rOK-U.S.-U.K. air
Force Combined
training
p162

MND briefing on
North Korea’s 5[th]
nuclear test
p187


air Force
p51

Forces that protect
us USFK thaaD
Deployment
p73, p254

Live fire exercise
in the east Sea
p90

Navy·Marine Corps
joint amphibious
operations exercise
p93

Defense exchanges
and cooperation
p155

6[th] anniversary of
the shelling of
Yeonpyeongdo
island
p184


-----

-----

