###### NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

#### 2017

A SHARED PROJECT,
BY ALL AND FOR ALL

PRESIDENCIA


-----

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

2017

Spain’s 2017 National Security Strategy was approved by the Government
on 1 December 2017.

The National Security Council was the body responsible for defining this
strategy.

The following bodies participated in the process: The Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation; the Ministry of Justice; the Ministry of Defence;
the Ministry of the Treasury and of the Civil Service; the Ministry of the
Interior; the Ministry of Infrastructure; the Ministry of Education, Culture
and Sport; the Ministry of Employment and Social Security; the Ministry
of Energy, Tourism and the Digital Agenda; the Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries, Food and the Environment; the Ministry of the Presidency and
for the Territorial Administrations; the Ministry of the Economy, Industry
and Competitiveness; the Ministry of Health, Social Services and Equality;
and the National Intelligence Centre.

The Strategy also includes contributions from the independent Advisory
Committee, comprising more than 50 experts, including distinguished
academics from all over Spain, think-tank analysts, private sector
representatives, and members of associations related to the national
security areas included in this document.

The process was coordinated by the National Security Department
of the Office of the Presidency of the Government in its capacity as
Technical Secretariat and Permanent Working Body of the National
Security Council.


-----

#### NATIONAL SECURITY

##### STRATEGY

#### 2017


-----

THE PRESIDENT OF THE GOVERNMENT

_Security is one of the basic pillars of an open and democratic society such as_
_Spain’s, and an essential condition for its prosperity and progress. The purpose_
_of the National Security Policy, which is ultimately legitimized by the constitutional_
_order, is to guarantee this public service. The strategic dimension, embodied in the_
_National Security Strategy, is central to its work._

_The 2017 National Security Strategy, the successor to that of 2013 and to the Spanish_
_Security Strategy of 2011, is backed by a broad political consensus. This support_
_once again gives voice to the need for continuity in national security, as a State policy._

_In addition to parliamentary backing, it is noteworthy that the present document_
_includes contributions from experts from the world of academia, the private sector_
_and civil society in general; reaffirming that national security is the responsibility_
_of the Government, that it requires the involvement of public authorities, and that it_
_concerns us all._

_An exercise in strategic reflection of such importance reminds us that, to lead events_
_and anticipate challenges, the ongoing improvement of both forward-looking and_
_responsive instruments is required. Only in this way can we perform an accurate_
_diagnosis of our security environment, and of the threats and challenges deriving_
_from it._

_This environment has changed significantly since the approval of the 2013 Strategy._
_The reality we are facing is defined by dynamics that are frequently at odds with_
_each other: A globalized world, which is at the same time divided and competitive,_
_a space in which ambiguity has become one of the greatest security challenges._
_Dynamics such as the rapid pace of change driven by technology, the demographic_
_asymmetries between regions, and climate change call for efforts to adapt to and_
_manage changes in an agile and flexible manner._

_Transnational terrorism and cyberattacks continue to be one of the main security_
_challenges. They are accompanied by the so-called hybrid threats, a combination of_
_conventional and unconventional threats aimed at destabilizing our way of life, and_
_whose identification and attribution are particularly complex._

_In addition to global challenges, there are other, internal threats to our territorial_
_integrity and constitutional values. The response of a State governed by the rule of_
_law is, without question, the best means of safeguarding the rights and freedoms of_
_all our citizens._


-----

THE PRESIDENT OF THE GOVERNMENT

_Spain is a country with genuine global aspirations, which actively contributes to_
_international peace and security. This objective is achieved through our participation_
_in global governance institutions, the effective efforts of our diplomacy, and our_
_exemplary contribution to the different civil and military missions abroad._

_Moreover, the distinctive European, Mediterranean and Atlantic profile of our country_
_demands that we commit to strengthening those organizations that are crucial_
_for Spain, such as the European Union and NATO. Europe is the pillar of Spain’s_
_democratic, political and security model, and therefore our Strategy advocates_
_strengthening the integration, legitimacy, and unity of action of the European Union,_
_and defending its global interests._

_Spain faces a double challenge: We must adapt to the changes taking place in_
_today’s world, and we must respond appropriately to the different security threats_
_and challenges. In this regard, the Strategy defines a common position for all bodies_
_with responsibilities in the area of security, in addition to enhancing synergies and_
_aligning the State’s resources. These efforts, seek to prevent and manage crises_
_more effectively, endowing the State with the best instruments and capabilities._
_Only from a united, coordinated standpoint, can we analyse, have an impact on, and_
_improve our security environment._

_This new document also represents another step towards strengthening the culture_
_of national security in a nation that is aware of its responsibility and position in the_
_world. In short, it constitutes a new and significant advance within the concerted_
_efforts that guide the public service in its mission to protect Spanish citizens and their_
_rights and freedoms._
_._

Mariano Rajoy Brey

PRESIDENT OF THE GOVERNMENT OF SPAIN


-----

# Contents

**Executive Summary**

### 8


### 14


**Introduction**


-----

### 20 30 38 56 80
 120


**Chapter 1**

A National Security Strategy for today’s Spain

**Chapter 2**

Dynamics of transformation in Global Security

**Chapter 3**

Spain in the world: a country with global aspirations

**Chapter 4**

Threats and challenges to National Security

**Chapter 5**

National Security: general objectives and lines of
action

**Chapter 6**

National Security System


-----

-----

**EXECUTIVE SUMMARY**


-----

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

he National Security Strategy is the benchmark framework for Spain’s national
security policy, a State policy based on a broad conception of security. The current
Strategy goes into greater detail with respect to some of the concepts and lines of

## T

action defined in 2013, and represents a step forward in the adaptation of this policy to
new developments in an ever-changing security environment.

The Strategy is set out in six chapters. Chapter 1, “A National Security Policy for Today’s
Spain”, develops Spain’s national security vision based on its status as a democracy, its
particular geostrategic profile, and its global aspirations.

Spain faces a number of threats and challenges, both internal and external, including its
demographic prospects, its limited energy interconnections, and its territorial cohesion
issues. Challenges to the legal order and to the general interests of Spain require a response
based on the rule of law in order to safeguard the rights and freedoms of all its citizens.


-----

Additionally, in the midst of a technological revolution, Spain, as an interconnected
and interdependent country, must adapt to this transformation and take advantage of
opportunities for progress while addressing the new challenges brought about by hyperconnectivity. In this regard, it is important to raise awareness of today’s main threats and
challenges, through an appropriate culture of national security.

Chapter 2, “Dynamics of Transformation in Global Security”, analyses the global security
environment, placing particular emphasis on the processes of change and trends that have
been most in evidence since the publication of the previous strategy.

Today’s is a more complex and volatile environment, which has witnessed a rise in
geopolitical tensions and uncertainty; an increasingly globalized and interdependent world,
where one crisis follows on from another with ever greater intensity. Some of the most
notable dynamics are the rapid pace of change driven by technology, the demographic
asymmetries between regions, and climate change. All of these factors intensify the pressure
on the rules-based international order and the fairer, more inclusive and more effective
global governance favoured by Spain. The fundamental challenge for Spain will therefore
be to understand, adapt to, and manage these changes in an agile and flexible manner.

Chapter 3 of the Strategy, “Spain in the World: A country with global aspirations”, presents
a vision of Spain as a country concerned by events in every geographical region.

Spain’s national security is conditioned by its singular geostrategic position. The country’s
European, Mediterranean and Atlantic profile determines the importance of these regions
for its security, stability, and prosperity. However, beyond its geostrategic environment, in
the new international scenario, the contingencies and developments that arise in areas at
a great distance from Spain’s borders and its areas of immediate interest can also have an
impact on its national security.

Thus, considering criteria such as Spain’s identity, aspirations, geostrategic position,
interests and values, and the potential impact of threats and challenges to its security,
the areas of particular interest as regards national security are: Europe, North Africa
and the Middle East, Sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, North America and AsiaPacific. These are not self-contained areas, and the threats and challenges that arise


-----

within them could easily extend beyond their borders.

In this security environment, Chapter 4 of the Strategy addresses “Threats and
Challenges to National Security”. On the one hand, this chapter identifies the threats
that jeopardise or undermine national security and, on the other, the challenges that,
while not constituting threats as such, could generate vulnerabilities, provoke situations
of instability, or propitiate the emergence of new threats. The main threats identified
are armed conflicts, terrorism, organized crime, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, espionage, cyberthreats, and threats to critical infrastructure. Of particular
significance is the threat represented by jihadist terrorism, one of the main security
problems that the world faces, and which once again showed its unmitigated brutality
in Spain in August 2017.

The challenges to be addressed include economic instability, energy-related vulnerability,
migration, emergencies and disasters, epidemics and pandemics, and climate change.
These threats and challenges do not exist in isolation, but are interconnected; their
effects are not limited by borders, but frequently materialize in global common spaces,
such as cyberspace, maritime space, airspace and outer space.

In the light of these threats and challenges to national security, Chapter 5 of the
Strategy, “National Security: General Objectives and Lines of Action”, identifies five
general objectives guiding State action in the area of national security: develop the
comprehensive crisis management model, promote a culture of national security,
foster the proper use of global common spaces, emphasize the security dimension
in technological development, and strengthen Spain’s international profile. These
objectives are common to all areas of national security policy, and thus enable their
integration.

Moreover, the Strategy establishes 15 areas of action. Some are traditional, such as
national defence, counterterrorism, cybersecurity, and combating organized crime.
Others are new, responding to the new security panorama, such as protecting the
environment, and particularly combating climate change, security aspects of epidemics
and pandemics and airspace and outer space security.


10


-----

These objectives and lines of action organize, position, and prioritize Spain’s actions in
the area of national security, in addition to assigning the necessary resources, capacities
and efforts, while seeking at all times to ensure their optimization and efficient use.

The final chapter, “The National Security System”, establishes a number of initiatives
to strengthen Spain’s National Security System and improve the coordination and
effectiveness of State action and the participation of society.

To this end, the Strategy also calls for further development of Spain’s crisis management
system, establishing a Comprehensive National Security Culture Plan, approving a
National Aerospace Security Strategy and creating a National Aerospace Security
Council, as well as reviewing the existing sectoral Strategies (in the areas of maritime
security, energy, and cybersecurity). The National Security Council is also the single
point of contact with the competent authorities of other EU Member States for
issues involving network and information system security.


11


-----

-----

**INTRODUCTION**


-----

Introduction

## T

and its constitutional principles and values, and contributing to international security,
together with Spain’s partners and allies, in compliance with agreed commitments.

National defence, public security, and external action, supported by the State intelligence
and information services, constitute key components of national security. However,
many of the areas of special interest included in the Strategy, such as cybersecurity or
energy security, not only require the action of these key components, but also of all
levels of administration, and of society in general.

In particular, the 2013 Strategy and the National Security Act 36/2015, of 28 September,
designed an institutional structure built around a new National Security System, with
the President of the Government at its centre, assisted by a National Security Council.


14


he National Security Strategy adopts a comprehensive vision of security,
understood as a public service subject to State action directed towards
protecting citizens’ freedom, rights and wellbeing, ensuring the defence of Spain


-----

This System is a response to the need to address the different security threats and
challenges in a coordinated, timely, and comprehensive manner. Under its guidelines,
strategic, second-level documents relating to key areas such as cybersecurity, maritime
security, and energy security have been approved over the past few years.

Based on a broad conception of security, and a diagnosis of the international scenario,
the 2013 Strategy contributed to the practical articulation of national security as a



15


-----

State policy. It is, therefore, a policy with a measure of continuity, and is capable of
overcoming the particular agendas of any given Government, and involving the public
sector as a whole. In this regard, Act 36/2015, of 28 September, is the result of a
positive effort to join forces and integrate commitments. As a result of this collective
effort, Spain is today one of the most advanced countries in Europe in this matter.
On this basis, the promotion of a culture of national security that favours the active
involvement of Spanish society in its preservation and safeguarding must form part of
this State policy.

Every strategy needs to be periodically reviewed and adapted, particularly in view of
new events or developments that justify doing so. The aforementioned Act provides
for the Strategy to be reviewed every 5 years or “in light of the changing circumstances
of the strategic environment”. The 2013 Strategy underlined that the dynamism of the
environment and the national situation itself would call for constant adaptation and
periodic review.

Indeed, circumstances have changed—in some cases dramatically—since 2013, both
at the level of the international order and in Europe and Spain, heightening uncertainty.
Some of the threats identified at that time, such as terrorism and cyberthreats, have
become even more prominent. This was laid bare by the terrorist attacks in Europe,
including those that took place in Spain in August 2017, the first in the country since
2004. On the other hand, cyberthreats are on the rise, both in terms of number and
impact, as demonstrated by the WannaCry global cyberattack of May 2017, which
directly affected national companies, services and interests.

This increase must be understood in relation to the prevalence of so-called hybrid
actions. These are combined actions that may include—together with traditional
military methods—cyberattacks, data manipulation operations, or elements of
economic pressure, which have been particularly evident in recent electoral processes.
The ultimate goal pursued is destabilization, by promoting subversive movements and
polarizing public opinion.

In this context, trends such as the technological revolution, which form part of a
broader process of transformation and globalization, have gained momentum. They


16


-----

have taken centre stage in terms of security, especially in a world that has become
more interconnected, more interdependent, but also more divided.

Spain’s circumstances have also changed significantly since the approval of the 2013
Strategy, at a time when it was in the midst of a severe economic crisis with a high
social cost. This crisis also had a significant impact on capacities and resources, and
substantial effects on pro-independence movements, having been used as an argument
to support irresponsible actions.

Spain is now emerging from the crisis with economic growth, and with a renewed
interest in contributing to leadership in Europe and to international peace and security,
particularly in the new panorama developing around the globe.

Consequently, to be able to provide this public service in the most effective way
possible, Spain requires a new National Security Strategy, one that analyses the new
security environment and the challenges and threats it presents, expanding upon some
of the concepts and lines of action already defined in 2013. This document updates
the objectives to be achieved, and thus redefines the State’s action and resources.
It is, moreover, the result of a collective assessment and has been drafted seeking
greater participation from society. In preparing this document, input was sought from
representatives of the Administration and civil society experts. This collaborative
process was coordinated by the National Security Department of the Office of the
Presidency of the Government.

In this way, Spain, as an open, responsible country, will be better prepared to face
the major trends and changes of the current era that are transforming the security
landscape.


17


-----

-----

Chapter 1

**A NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY FOR**
**TODAY’S SPAIN**


-----

Chapter 1

A NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY FOR
TODAY’S SPAIN

_This chapter describes Spain’s current profile as defined by its constitutional_
_values, its particular geostrategic position, its global aspirations, and the_
_challenges represented by the new security environment._

pain approaches the end of the second decade of the 21st century as an advanced
democracy, a country that is firmly committed to Europe and fully integrated into
international society, where its active and constructive contribution to the main

## S

security organizations is recognized.

Spain is a social and democratic State governed by the rule of law, underpinned by a
citizen-centred constitutional framework of rights and freedoms, and by institutions that
espouse and defend freedom, justice, equality and political pluralism as their highest
values. In Spain, any political project may be defended if the law is strictly adhered to
and the rights and freedoms of all citizens are respected.


20


-----

This is the cornerstone of national security as a State policy and

public service whose purpose is to protect citizens´ freedom,

rights and wellbeing; to guarantee the defence of Spain and
the principles and values enshrined in its Constitution; and
to contribute to international security in collaboration with

partners and allies. While the Government is responsible for

national security, it also involves all administrative bodies and

society at large.

National security contributes to consolidating the fundamental aspects of

21st century Spain: its democratic system, its plural and open society, its rich territorial
and linguistic diversity, its socio-economic development, and its status as a country
with a distinctive historical legacy and a global language and culture. These aspects are
important to understanding the objectives that Spain advocates in the international arena,
as a country that is open to the world and that protects its citizens. The importance of
respecting the rule of law and the value of constitutional and European consensus
are fundamental criteria that Spain shares with the European Union.


21


-----

Spain’s identity is at once European, Mediterranean and Atlantic.
Its singular geostrategic position and natural orientation
towards different spaces requires it to have its own strategic
and dynamic vision. Its central position in key areas—between
Europe and North Africa; between the Mediterranean and the
Atlantic; and with peninsular territory, archipelagos, islands and
the sovereign territories in North Africa—makes Spain a bridge
between countries and cultures, conferring upon it a specific
security profile.


22


-----

As a reflection of its global aspirations, Spain contributes to regional and
international security initiatives, from which it also benefits. It is a reliable partner
that champions the most worthy causes, such as human rights, international law
and multilateralism.

Reflecting its European and Atlantic status, Spain is a key member of organizations
such as the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
accepting its collective security responsibilities. Additionally, under the umbrella of
the United Nations, NATO, and the European Union, it participates in different
overseas missions far from its borders and traditional spaces, in areas and regions
as diverse as the Sahel, Eastern Europe, the Indian Ocean and Iraq, in which
the Armed Forces and State Security Forces are deployed. These missions are
reinforced by the ongoing efforts of Spanish diplomacy and the State intelligence
and information services. Its development policy is another of Spain’s lines of
action, which contributes to international peace and security. These commitments
in the area of security and Spain’s external action represent, in turn, a great effort

in terms of capabilities and investments, which is necessary to ensure a stable

international environment and, with it, the security and prosperity of

the Spanish people.

In this regard, Spain has developed benchmark security

models that must continue to be updated with a pro-active

vision, to confront global threats that require comprehensive,

coordinated and cooperative responses, both on a national

and international level. A case in point is Spain’s comprehensive

model for combating terrorism—a robust model based on the

unity of political parties, the action of the State Security Forces

and Intelligence and Information Services, the work of judges and

prosecutors, international cooperation, and the maturity of Spanish society,

offering support and permanent assistance to victims.

This same comprehensive approach must be applied to other challenges, such
as irregular migration flows. This approach advocates safeguarding the human
dimension, cooperating with the countries of origin and transit, addressing


23


-----

the causes of migration, improving channels of legal migration,
protecting migrants, combating exploitation and people smuggling,
and cooperating in terms of return and readmission. On the
other hand, refugees and asylum-seekers deserve particular
consideration and attention.

Spain is also facing other major challenges, some that are specific
to it, such as the need to bolster inclusive growth or problems of
territorial cohesion, and others that are characteristic of the times, such
as those relating to demographics, technology, environmental protection
and biodiversity, and climate change.

Economic security is a key concern among the common challenges to be
addressed. After years of enduring a harsh and pervasive economic crisis, Spain
is showing clear signs of economic recovery, and currently has one of the highest
growth rates in the Eurozone. The Spanish economy is now more diversified and
open, with increasingly internationalized companies and leading multinationals in
several sectors.

Spain has made great strides in terms of recovering the employment levels
destroyed by the crisis, although the creation of quality jobs continues to be a
priority in order to allow all citizens to participate in the economic recovery and
to safeguard wellbeing and social cohesion. Similarly, since the approval of the
National Security Strategy in 2013, significant progress has been made in terms of
strengthening regulation and supervision mechanisms, and in combating tax fraud
through the international exchange of tax information.

As regards energy, on the one hand, Spain has great potential as an energy hub and
port of entry and distribution of resources within the European Union, given its
energy mix (with supply diversified by source and origin), its geographical position,
and its infrastructure. On the other hand, it is a consumer country dependent
on external resources—sometimes from unstable areas—with a limited level of
energy interconnection.


24


-----

Another strategic element of vital importance for Spain, as a country comprising
a peninsula and a number of islands, is the proper use of maritime spaces, where
most of its commercial and energy trades take place. Moreover, the Straits of
Gibraltar stand out as one of the main hubs for maritime traffic and as a strategic
enclave of the utmost significance.

Another characteristic feature of Spain derives from its status as the country of
residence for a large foreign population, and as a major global player in the tourist
industry. Spain’s natural environment, infrastructure, and services and transport
network make it an attractive destination for millions of people every year, and a
high level of security contributes to this.

In demographic terms, adverse trends, reflected particularly in the progressive
ageing of the population and the low birth rate, will step up pressures on the
welfare state, with repercussions for the system as a whole.

The technological revolution is key to the conception of the security of Spain as
an interconnected and interdependent country, both in the current scenario and
in the medium and long term. The technological revolution is set to transform
societies and lifestyles. Spain’s future success will therefore depend on taking
advantage of opportunities for progress, and on responding adroitly to new
challenges, particularly as regards work and employment.

In particular, technological development is associated with a greater

exposure to new threats, particularly those associated with cyberspace.

The hyperconnectivity of today’s world exacerbates some of the

security system’s vulnerabilities and requires greater protection of

networks and systems, as well as the public’s privacy and digital

rights. Spain must adapt to this permanent transformation by
stepping up its efforts to digitalize and technify the State and

society, based on an educational and training system adapted to

this new reality.

Another of the global challenges of the times is climate change. This


25


-----

phenomenon has clear repercussions in the sphere of national security, given
the heightened frequency and severity of droughts, floods, and forest fires. It is
an essential component both of Spain’s vision as an international player and of
the commitments assumed in the Paris Agreement signed in 2015 to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions.

In this context, Spain must foster a culture of national security, supported primarily
by a comprehensive educational system, which strengthens awareness of the
prevailing threats and challenges, and their possible impact on the way of life and
the prosperity of the Spanish people. Effective national security requires both
social awareness among citizens and the participation of their representatives.


26


-----

27


-----

#### 2


-----

Chapter 2

**DYNAMICS OF TRANSFORMATION IN**
**GLOBAL SECURITY**


-----

Chapter 2

DYNAMICS OF TRANSFORMATION IN
GLOBAL SECURITY

_This chapter analyses the processes of transformation occurring in the_
_global security environment since the approval of the 2013 National_
_Security Strategy._

ince the approval of the previous National Security Strategy in 2013, the world
has seen an acceleration in certain dynamics—sometimes contradictory dyna­
mics—that are contributing to a rise in geopolitical tensions and different kinds

## S

of pressure on the multilateral system. The security environment is even more com­
plex and volatile; therefore, it is foreseeable that this uncertainty—already cited in
2013—will become more acute in the coming years.

These dynamics, which form part of complex processes of transformation with
political, social, and even cultural impact, reflect the paradox of the two sides of
a globalized world: interdependent, but fragmented. On the one hand, connectivity


30


-----

generates higher levels of exchange and movements of merchandise, people,

goods, services, and capital, configuring a functional space different from

the purely geographical one. On the other hand, such connectivity

networks and infrastructure accentuate collective vulnerabilities,

and can operate as staging grounds for confrontation, magnifying

existing tensions. Crises of different kinds break out easily, and

have become almost a constant. The distance between situations

of normality and of crisis is increasingly shorter.

At the geopolitical level, within a changing multipolar world

order, various global and regional powers coexist, without any

one of them having exclusive hegemonic weight, although the

United States of America maintains its preponderance. Competition is

growing among State actors with different visions of security, and of the role

of multilateral institutions. Powers like China and Russia have taken a more active
role on the international scene, projecting their power beyond their regions. Both
of these countries have stepped up their defence spending and modernized their
military capabilities.

In addition to the diffusion of power at the State level, another phenomenon
that can be observed is a major shift of power towards non-State actors, thanks
to technology and growing connectivity. Individuals and groups are emerging as
relevant actors, gaining influence and changing the traditional State-dominated
system. Therefore, one of the notable trends in recent years is the frequency
with which jihadist terrorism has struck in several regions, including Europe.

In this context, global common spaces—such as cyberspace, maritime space, and
airspace and outer space—characterized by easy access and weak regulation
can easily become theatres of confrontation. Cyberspace is undoubtedly
an increasingly important theatre of operations, and outer space is acquiring
greater strategic importance. Likewise, maritime space is key for world trade.
International stability requires collective guarantees for the proper use of these
spaces.


31


-----

Such circumstances of greater geopolitical competition
affect the established international order, and blur the limits
between peace and conflict, which today take on forms
other than purely military ones. The growth in so-called
hybrid conflicts and actions is worth highlighting. These
kinds of actions are those involving both States and nonState actors, which combine the use of military means with
cyberattacks, elements of economic pressure, or influence
campaigns on social media.

The necessary consensus for multilateral cooperation and
strengthening of common rules is therefore more difficult
to achieve, as made manifest by such major security crises as
the conflict in Syria or the challenge of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. Globalization has accelerated
interdependence, but this has not been accompanied by
a strengthening of global organizations to better meet
the challenges of the times. There is a trend towards the
unilateralization of security, and resorting to individual
actions for resolving disputes. New forums and ad hoc,
regional, or sectoral groups can represent positive examples
of cooperation. They can also reflect a distancing from
established mechanisms for international peacekeeping and
security.

In terms of economic governance, there has been a surge of
protectionism within a globalized economy. The international
system’s plurilateral conventions, such as the Transatlantic
Trade and Investment Partnership, face uncertain prospects
for success. Bilateralism has come into its own in the
commercial arena. Meanwhile, the advanced economies’
slowdown in productivity growth, high levels of debt, and
the lack of investment could contribute to a pattern of
weak growth.


32


-----

33


-----

Linked largely to the situation of economic crises in recent years, the rise of groups
with protectionist and nativist visions is one of the predominant notes of this
period. This phenomenon has taken advantage of underlying factors, such as the
slowdown in economic growth, inequality, and social and identity polarization, and
has increased its international and strategic relevance. The influence of exclusionary
movements is growing, due to the massive use of social media. Furthermore, the
manipulation of information on the part of outside agents exercises influence in
the post-truth era, with negative effects on social cohesion and political stability.

The confluence of this set of contradictory dynamics and different kinds of tensions
increases pressure on the international system of which Spain forms a part, and
upon whose proper functioning Spanish security and wellbeing depend. At the same
time, such phenomena as demographic asymmetry between geographic regions,
migration pressures, and climate change have acquired even more importance for
security.

Therefore, Spain is committed to a rules-based international order and a more just,
inclusive, and effective global governance. Spain favours preventive diplomacy, the
peaceful resolution of international disputes, and dialogue—including intercultural
and interfaith dialogue. Spain conceives security as incorporating human dimensions,
such as respect for fundamental rights, and protection against sickness and poverty.

Additionally, one of the most notable dynamics, with an impact on people’s everyday
lives, is the accelerated rate of technology-driven transformation. The changes
that the technological revolution is bringing to people’s lifestyles are obvious. The
development of technology is an instrument of economic activation, growth, and
progress—but it also tests societies’ capacity to adapt to technological changes.

To a large extent, technology has given pride of place to connectivity, to the
detriment of security. Acts such as the theft, use, and dissemination of information
and sensitive data, and hostile actions that include disinformation activities and
interference in electoral processes represent a huge challenge today, for both
governments and citizens. In addition to the connectivity of the online world, which
includes the internet of things, such phenomena as artificial intelligence, genetic


34


-----

engineering, and robotization will have major security implications. Therefore,
efforts to design an effective system of governance for these emerging technologies
will be key for national security.

Climate change is also a key piece of the security picture, with major short- and
long-term political, economic, and social implications. Factors related to climate
change, together with the degradation of water resources, have an undeniable
security component. The conservation and improvement of biodiversity and the
natural heritage also pose a major security challenge, given that the loss of natural
resources could entail significant population displacements.

The international environment is therefore more unstable, characterized by fastmoving changes, strategic clashes, and the proliferation of crises. Spain and the
main organizations to which it belongs face a fundamental challenge: understanding
the root causes of these changes, anticipating their consequences, and managing
uncertainty by creating dynamic and flexible structures.


35


-----

#### 3


-----

Chapter 3

**SPAIN IN THE WORLD: A COUNTRY WITH**
**GLOBAL ASPIRATIONS**


-----

Chapter 3

SPAIN IN THE WORLD: A COUNTRY WITH
GLOBAL ASPIRATIONS

_This chapter analyses, from Spain’s geostrategic viewpoint, the national_
_security challenges present in different regions of the world, identifying_
_areas of special interest._

nterconnectivity is largely erasing borders. In a world where the proper use of glo­
bal common spaces is key, Spain’s national security continues to be affected by its
unique geostrategic situation, crucial for defining its priorities and for planning in this

## I

area. As a country with global aspirations, Spain is affected by everything that happens
in all of the geographic regions and security-related thematic areas.

Specifically, Spain’s status as a European and Mediterranean country determines
the importance of these regions for its security, stability, and prosperity. Today,
the fragmentation of the Mediterranean makes it more complicated for Spain
to address this strategic priority, within which so many potential national


38


-----

security challenges are concentrated. Moreover, Spain has on its southern border
a major differentiating feature: its land borders on the African continent. Its strategic
relations—involving political, security, defence, and intelligence cooperation—with
the neighbouring countries of France, Morocco, and Portugal are therefore especially
important.

Another noteworthy feature is Spain’s markedly Atlantic nature, as a maritime power
and as an actor with a long history of global interests beyond its natural borders. In
a global context of a shift in power towards such dynamic areas as the Asia-Pacific
region, and of such growing importance as Latin America and West Africa, the Atlantic
Basin is acquiring even greater relevance for Spain’s present and future, in geopolitical,
economic, and security terms. Spain’s Atlantic coast provides a maritime connection to
global markets, while also concentrating major economic and energy interests—as well
as a number of security challenges. This enhances the priority of strategic ties to the
United States and the countries of Latin America, as well as justifying the importance
of new diplomatic and security ties to the countries of West Africa.

Beyond Spain’s geostrategic field, contingencies and developments occurring on the
international scene in areas very far from its borders and traditional special-interest
zones can also have an impact on its national security. There is the growing interest in
the Asia-Pacific region, the new epicentre of global geopolitics. Another area worth
singling out is the Arctic, which has gained in strategic and security importance. The
melting of the Arctic ice marked the opening of this space to new maritime routes,
with new possibilities for exploration and international cooperation, and to new
challenges—such as possible geopolitical tension.

Considering Spain’s identity, commitments, and geostrategic situation, as well as its
interests and values and the possible impact of threats and challenges to its security,
the following areas are of special interest to Spanish national security: Europe, North
Africa and the Middle East, Sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, North America, and
Asia-Pacific. None of these areas is self-contained, and the threats and challenges they
present can easily spread beyond their borders. Therefore, it is necessary to take a
comprehensive and dynamic approach to their security conditions and to the strategic
developments occurring there, adapting and updating the approach regularly.


39


-----

Europe

The continent of Europe comprises a vast geostrategic space, whose security has
been weakened in recent years. It is also, with the EU at its heart, the cornerstone
of Spain’s democratic, political, and security model, and a key framework for
achieving its interests, expressing its values, and projecting its influence worldwide.

Recent years have seen a rise in the risk of fragmentation within the EU, due
both to the economic crisis, and to Brexit and the rise of anti-EU movements.
In this context, in addition to defending its national interests, Spain is committed
to playing a greater leadership role in building an effective, more integrated,
and more democratically legitimate EU—an EU with a response capability, as
set forth in the Global Strategy for the European Union’s Foreign and Security
Policy. This revamped European model can also have a transformative positive
influence on EU candidate and neighbour countries, which will contribute to
common stability.

In this regard, the growing demand for Europe to take on greater security
responsibilities will have political and economic implications, requiring greater
convergence among the European partners as they weigh the EU’s shared threats
and challenges. Spain, which has participated in all of the EU military operations
to date, as well as in most of the civilian missions, supports moving towards
a real Common Security and Defence Policy, including permanent structured


40


-----

cooperation. The Spanish position also advocates strengthening the European
framework for Justice and Home Affairs. The progress towards an EU with
greater capabilities and effectiveness in these areas—more cohesive and with
a closer relationship to NATO—benefits the security of European citizens as a
whole, and of Spaniards in particular.

Brexit also means that the British colony of Gibraltar—an anachronism in

today’s Europe—will be leaving the EU. As friends and allies with shared

interests, the United Kingdom and Spain, must broach security issues

through the search for positive cooperation, especially in an area

of maximum strategic relevance such as the Strait of Gibraltar.

NATO constitutes the foundation of collective defence in
Europe. Spain, as reflected by its participation in the missions

approved in recent years, both to the south and the east of the

Euroatlantic area, wants to continue contributing to a revamped

NATO adapted to the current environment, one that launches

different practical initiatives for cooperation on capabilities

and specialization. In this sense, Spain must take on the economic

commitments agreed to as part of the necessary sharing of responsibilities and
efforts among allies.

In an environment of greater tensions in Europe, where frozen conflicts
continue or even revive, the instruments of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe are more necessary than ever in order to prevent
and manage conflicts, establish confidence-building measures and launch new
collective initiatives.

Russia is an important strategic actor, and a Permanent Member of the UN
Security Council, which is why its participation is essential to the search for
multilateral solutions to the challenges facing international society. The illegal
annexation of the Crimean Peninsula by Russia, and its actions in eastern
Ukraine, have caused a deterioration in Europe’s security situation. Spain is
committed to a common strategic position within the framework of the EU and


41


-----

NATO, and to a critical but constructive dialogue with Russia—always in the
observance of international.

As to the Western Balkans and Turkey, it is necessary to

maintain an approach based on the respect for the EU’s

accession criteria, such as rule of law, good governance,

and human rights—essential parameters for any

approximation to the EU.


42


-----

Middle East and North Africa

This special interest area comprises a vast and diverse geographic region,
extending from the African continent’s northern Atlantic coast to Southeast Asia.

Instability and security crises threaten to become constants in this region in
coming years. The open conflicts in Iraq, Libya, and Syria have a negative regional
impact in terms of propagating threats related to terrorism, as well as the rivalry
between different regional powers. In these circumstances of declining regional
security, agreements such as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action for Iran
endorsed by the UN Security Council in 2015, and the search for multilateral
commitments in general are important.

The Mediterranean is an area where different States and international

actors are seeking to project their power, making it a linchpin

of strategic movements of global interest. Examples of this are

Russia’s strategic rapprochement to the western coast as a way

to support its fleet in the Mediterranean; China’s commercial
expansionism into ports as key points on its New Silk Road; the

EU and NATO sea operations to address security challenges

such as combating human trafficking networks; as well as the

permanent deployment of US warships with ballistic missile

defence capabilities.


43


-----

Within this region, North Africa is a strategic priority for Spain due to its
geographic proximity, political and cultural importance, and the potential for
economic and trade relations. North Africa is also a priority because of its
possible direct and indirect impact on national security, given the concentration
of threats and challenges in the area. The region’s stability and prosperity is in
Spain’s direct interest in order to ensure key energy flows, address irregular
immigration, combat drug trafficking, and prevent jihadist terrorism. To achieve
these goals and advance towards greater regional security, Spain is promoting
political stability, plural societies, and inclusive governments ruled by institutions
based on the rule of law and following good governance practices. Spain also
supports the integration of the region’s economies, and security sector reform.
Likewise, Spain is cooperating with these countries in the areas of security,
defence, and home affairs, through bilateral and multilateral programmes.

As a complement to its bilateral ties with the countries of North Africa, within
the framework of the EU, Spain supports revitalizing the southern dimension of
the European Neighbourhood Policy, especially as regards those countries most
committed to a closer relationship with Europe, as well as initiatives against
people smuggling and other means of protecting common borders. Spain also
supports a higher profile for NATO in the south—an initiative that has been
backed by the increase of NATO capabilities in the Mediterranean.

The case of Libya deserves a special mention, given its geographic proximity and
its condition as a port of entry for a large part of irregular Sub-Saharan
migration seeking a passage across the Mediterranean. The situation
in Libya is very delicate, and there is a real risk that the conflict will
intensify. As a key actor in the Mediterranean space, Spain will
continue to contribute to international efforts to make Libya a
safe place.

The Middle East is a Spanish and international focal point for
a number of reasons: its persistent instability; the proliferation
of conflicts with a high cost in human lives, which are also
contributing to the expansion of jihadist terrorism; and the subsequent


44


-----

intervention in the area by regional and global actors—often acting outside of the

common multilateral frameworks for the peaceful resolution of conflicts.

Taking into account the links between these internal conflicts and

global terrorism, the flow of refugees, and humanitarian disasters,

resolving this region’s multiple conflicts is one of the international

community’s most important challenges, and should remain a

priority in the coming years.


45


-----

Sub-Saharan Africa

Africa today is a continent with growing influence, major opportunities, and vast
resources, as well as considerable growth in the middle class of some countries.
At the same time, it is a continent with high poverty levels, weak institutions, and
social fragmentation, as well as environmental degradation, which contribute to its
instability and the proliferation of fragile States.

Therefore, any approach to Africa from a security standpoint requires a comprehensive
perspective emphasizing such vectors as good governance, economic sustainability,
and social pluralism, linking development to security and always by supporting African
efforts to address their own challenges. The circumstances of these territories
require, on the one hand, working closely with local partners, establishing more
solid diplomatic ties, and capacity-building through multilateral programmes, while
also contributing to regional security structures. In this context, cooperative security
is becoming more relevant, as are Spain’s preventive diplomacy initiatives and its
participation in international missions through the UN, the EU, and other bodies with
mandates for peacekeeping and combating jihadist terrorism.

From a strategic and security standpoint, the Horn of Africa, the Sahel, and the Gulf
of Guinea are especially noteworthy, comprising an arc that includes a number of
interrelated cross-border threats and challenges, as well as economic and energy
interests that are crucial for Spain.


46


-----

The Gulf of Guinea is important for Spain’s security, as it presents threats including
armed robbery and piracy on the high seas; illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing; and the illicit trafficking of people, narcotics, and weapons. It is, furthermore,
a major source of energy resources for Spain, and a focal point for investment in
infrastructure as well as agricultural, and industrial interests, and fisheries.

In the Sahel, the fragility of States and the lack of governance have contributed
to the proliferation of armed groups and jihadist terrorist and organized crime
networks. Moreover, the effects of climate change and desertification multiply

structural challenges such as the economy and governance, resulting in an

increase in violent conflicts, migration flows, illicit trafficking, and violent

radicalization.

The waters adjacent to the Horn of Africa concentrate a large

part of the trade between Asia and Europe, as well as the traffic

of oil coming from the Middle East. This is a region rife with such

challenges as fragile States, and threats including terrorism and

piracy. Therefore, it is essential for Spain to participate in protecting

the maritime routes criss-crossing this region, and to strengthen its

relations with coastal countries. A relevant example is the European

Union Naval Force Operation Atalanta combating piracy in the western

Indian Ocean and the Horn of Africa, in which Spain has played a leading role

for years as one of the countries providing the most troops and resources.


47


-----

Latin America

As an Atlantic country, Spain has been able to establish a close relationship with
Latin America, both as a whole and with the different countries on the continent.

The current international situation opens up opportunities for mutual
cooperation to strengthen this preferential relationship with Latin America.
This is a relationship that has transcended centuries-old political, cultural, and
historical ties, to become a project for the future, and a part of Spain’s strategic
development for the Atlantic, as a key actor connecting Latin America and the
EU. In this regard, the dynamism of this region and the formalization of trade
agreements between Latin America and Europe open up a new scenario with
great potential. The socio-cultural dimension also places Latin America among
Spain’s main strategic planning priorities, including in terms of development
cooperation policies.

The region itself still faces such security challenges as the crisis that has affected
Venezuela in recent years, and the everyday violence caused by organized crime
and illicit trafficking in several Central American countries. These conflicts pose a
threat to the region’s stability, and to the security of the more than one million
Spanish citizens residing there. In this regard, Spain supports the peace process
in Colombia, welcoming it as the beginning of a new chapter marked by the
absence of inter-State armed conflicts and border tensions.


48


-----

North America

The United States has historically been a key ally with a global presence, one with
which Spain maintains a wide-ranging strategic relationship involving political,
economic, cultural, and defence aspects. The bilateral defence agreements
between the United States and Spain provide the basis for addressing such
threats as jihadist terrorism, as well as hostile actions by third States. Therefore,
it is essential to preserve and deepen these agreements.

In the current scenario of pressures on the international liberal order, it is
important to reaffirm these transatlantic relations with the United States and

Canada based on shared values, interests, and principles, as well as on

the vitality of the common institutions enabling their preservation.


49


-----

Asia-Pacific

The economic resurgence of the Asia-Pacific powers and their increasingly active
role on the international scene make this region a focal point of growing interest.
These countries’ influence within the global governance system and their
impact on the resolution of threats of concern to Spain is growing
rapidly. This makes strengthening political dialogue with them
increasingly necessary.

Of particular note is the global influence of China at the
diplomatic, economic, military, and technological levels, as well
as in key areas for Spain, as reflected in China’s growing direct
investment in Africa and Latin America.

Regarding security matters, issues such as the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (DPRK), the restrictions on freedom of navigation in the
South China Sea, the development of cross-border terrorism, climate change, the
deterioration of the land and marine environment, as well as the preservation of
natural resources and the spread of pandemics, all go beyond the purely regional
and can affect the security of Spain. To face these threats, it is important for
Spain to adopt a higher profile in the development of European external policy
towards the Asia-Pacific region.


50


-----

Given these circumstances, Spain aims to extend progressively its networks for
diplomacy, consular affairs, trade, culture, scientific and technological cooperation,
and security in this region, including Southeast Asia, as well as its presence within
the main regional forums. Spain is also committed to strengthening closer strategic
relations with Australia, a democracy with a shared vision of international peace
and security, and a country with which Spain maintains an increasingly close and
mutually beneficial industrial cooperation on security and defence.


51


-----

52


-----

53


-----

#### 4


-----

Chapter 4

**THREATS AND CHALLENGES TO**
**NATIONAL SECURITY**


-----

Chapter 4

THREATS AND CHALLENGES TO

NATIONAL SECURITY

_This chapter identifies the principal threats and challenges to national_
_security, and the global common spaces as areas of particular vulnerability,_
_and highlights the importance of critical infrastructure._

ational security may be compromised by very diverse elements that can be
of a geopolitical, technological, economic or social nature, among others. This
strategy distinguishes between threats, which compromise or may undermine

## N

national security, and challenges, which, without being threats in themselves, increase
vulnerability, create situations of instability, or may foster the emergence of other
threats, aggravate them or accelerate their fruition. In today’s world, both threats and
challenges are usually interconnected and their effects know no borders.

Jihadist terrorism is one of the main problems faced by the international
community. As has happened in other European cities, with the August 2017


56


-----

attacks, Spain became the focus of the terrorist scourge, and the magnitude of

this threat for Spain was underlined.

Global common spaces, areas not subject to ownership and

governed by the principle of freedom, such as cyberspace,

maritime space and airspace and outer space, are of particular

importance today. The proper use of these spaces is crucial
to security. In an international context with growing tensions,

global common spaces are subject to increasing competition

and confrontation.

Likewise, it is important to highlight the exposure of critical

infrastructure to threats, given the impact that they might have on the

provision of essential services.

Threats

Armed conflicts

Armed conflicts remain one of the most significant threats to national security,
especially in the current context of geopolitical tension, competition and
fragmentation of the international order. One of the trends associated with this
context is the increase in the land, air and naval military projection capacities
of different States, as well as in capacities in other areas, such as cyberspace,
airspace and outer space.

Traditional armed conflicts are being compounded by additional forms of
aggression and influence, threats associated with the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, and other forms of hostile acts. Sophisticated high-precision
systems are combined with the functional fatality of cyberattacks, influence
campaigns and acts of disinformation. Ambiguity and the difficulty of attribution
are constant factors of what are known as hybrid conflicts: those that incorporate


57


-----

operations combining information, subversion, economic and financial
pressure and military actions. These actions, perpetrated both by
State actors and by non-State actors, aim to mobilize public
opinion and create political destabilization.

Moreover, the persistence of serious pockets of instability and
of failed or weak States, in particular in areas near Spanish
territory, provide a space for different armed groups to act. This
means that Spain is more exposed to other threats such as illicit
trafficking, piracy and terrorism.

Spain must maintain its own credible and effective defensive capacity, and
is committed to honouring its collective security responsibilities. This means
undertaking commitments to participate in operations in the framework of
international organizations of which Spain is a member, especially in those related
to providing stability outside its borders.

Terrorism

Terrorism—primarily jihadist terrorism—has assumed ever greater dimensions.
Jihadist terrorism acts and projects its radical ideology on a global level, including
on European soil, where it has carried out heinous attacks. In the current scenario,
the greatest threat is Daesh, which due to its operating capacity, resources, media
profile and rapid growth has become a byword for jihadist terrorism. However,
these groups are characterized by their rapid mutability and their capacity to
adapt to changes and to the strategies used against them.

Indiscriminate attacks in crowded places, targeting means of transport or critical
infrastructure represent a current trend in jihadist terrorism, which operates
both in organized cells and on an individual level to produce the highest possible
number of victims and have the strongest propaganda impact. In addition to
those individuals who become radicalized in Spain and other terrorist profiles,


58


-----

one of the greatest challenges faced is that of terrorist combatants who return
to the West from places such as Syria and Iraq after acquiring knowledge and
experience in handling weaponry, making contacts and gaining knowledge of
routes and agents facilitating terrorism. The escalation of terrorism also entails
other negative effects such as the risk of social tensions, political instability, or
violent reactions against minorities, which sometimes take the form of terrorist
acts.


59


-----

Radicalization and violent extremism, and recruitment and indoctrination for terrorist
purposes are threats that have also assumed a higher profile in recent years. This
is not only due to the ideologies that drive them, but also because these
activities constitute the first stage towards the targeted individuals’
connection with terrorist groups and organizations.

Technological development has also given terrorist groups greater
access to available resources, boosting their capacity in terms of
financing, recruitment, training, and propaganda. In general, in a
world of mass information and the widespread use of social media,
there is greater risk of terrorist propaganda being disseminated and
of radicalization and violent extremism taking root.

As regards home-grown terrorism, ETA is no longer a significant threat thanks
to the triumph of the rule of law and to the tireless work of the State Security Forces
in investigating criminal acts, defending the memory of the victims of terrorism and
conveying a narrative that highlights democracy’s battle against terrorism.

Spain is committed to combating terrorism with a response based on a comprehensive
model that incorporates its experience and coordinates action with its allies, in
international initiatives and particularly with the European Union.

Organized crime

Organized crime is a transnational, flexible and opaque threat. This is a phenomenon
with enormous destabilizing capacity, which weakens the State and undermines good
economic governance. Its most serious manifestations include criminal offences
related to trafficking in human beings or to illicit trafficking of other kinds, in addition
to money laundering and the use of tax havens.

In recent years, criminal networks have taken advantage of the migrant and refugee
crisis, and their extreme vulnerability, to open human trafficking routes to Europe.


60


-----

Moreover, at the international level, organized crime is increasingly
linked to terrorism, which heightens its effects and negative
consequences.

Organized crime is thus a catalyst for other threats to security
and its functional horizons have been expanded by the use of
technology, which is increasingly being used to carry out criminal
activities.

Spain is exposed to organized crime and its diverse manifestations
due, largely, to its geostrategic position as a point of access to the
European Union by criminal networks from Africa and America. It is therefore
a priority for the State’s action.

Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (nuclear, chemical, radiological
and biological) and their means of delivery (mainly missiles) constitutes a serious
threat to international peace and security, and directly affects national security.

The incalculable global repercussions of an inter-State conflict involving weapons
of mass destruction are compounded by the growing threat of the diversion of
State-based proliferation, whether deliberately or not, to non-State actors, in
particular to terrorist groups.

In this context, one of the major challenges is the control of dual-use materials,
to prevent products and technology that have both civilian and military uses
from being employed for illicit purposes.

The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the International
Atomic Energy Agency’s safeguards system have contributed to curbing—and
in some cases to reversing—the propagation of military nuclear capacity, but


61


-----

they have not been able to prevent it completely. The development
of a nuclear and ballistic programme by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is undermining the nuclear non-proliferation
regime and constitutes a growing threat for international peace
and security.

The security scenarios involving proliferation have changed
with the profusion and global availability of radioactive
materials, which are used for medical, industrial, agricultural and
environmental purposes, and may be used to perpetrate criminal
acts with a major impact.

The possibility of toxic chemical substances being used by non-State actors or
State governments is a matter of particular concern. In addition to the fact that
the use of chemical weapons against civilians in conflicts constitutes a violation
of international humanitarian law, there is also the risk of terrorist groups being
able to use chemical weapons outside the conflict zone to perpetrate terrorist
acts. Another significant threat is the possible use of biological agents by nonState actors, in particular by terrorist organizations.

Espionage

Espionage is a significant threat to security, and it has swiftly adapted to the
possibilities offered by modern technology. In this regard, cyberspace now
plays a more prominent role in espionage, and it is employed by States, groups
and individuals using highly sophisticated software that enables access to huge
volumes of information and sensitive data.

Industrial espionage, which aims to access technological and strategic knowledge
to gain an advantage over competitors, constitutes a major challenge. It is a
challenge regularly faced by companies, and which can harm the economic
system and affect citizens’ wellbeing. The best possible approach to counter this


62


-----

phenomenon is the collaboration between the public and the private sectors.

In recent years, there has been an increase in attacks against national interests by
foreign intelligence services. These acts of aggression are committed by traditional
means and, increasingly, using cyberspace intelligence. To respond effectively to this
phenomenon it is necessary to improve technological capacities and intelligence.


63


-----

Threats and challenges occurring in global common spaces

Cyberspace, maritime space, airspace and outer space are global common
spaces. They connect the world and enable the free circulation of people,
goods, information, services and ideas. These spaces are open to all States and
individuals—no one can be prevented from using them. They have no physical
borders, and in general are not subject to State sovereignty or jurisdiction.
Regulation of these spaces is weak and it is difficult to attribute liability for
offences committed them.

Therefore, global common spaces constitute an ideal playing field for the
development of threats to national security. The regulation and proper
management of these spaces has a collective dimension, for which international
cooperation and mutual assistance are key.

Moreover, in addition to any disruption occurring in global common spaces
it is important to consider the likeliness that any functional and informational
disconnection would lead to the wide propagation of a sense of uncertainty. This
scenario makes it advisable to develop crisis management mechanisms with a
wide-reaching vision and based on resilient structures.


64


-----

Vulnerability of cyberspace

Threats in digital space take on a global dimension that transcends technology.
Cyberspace is an arena with particular features, defined by a technological
component, easy access, anonymity, high levels of connectivity, and dynamism. In
recent times, negative actions involving cybersecurity have increased significantly
in terms of number, scope and sophistication. Such actions are becoming
increasingly relevant for Spain, which is a highly interconnected country and a
European leader in the implementation of digital networks.

From a technological point of view, the digital transformation of Spain’s public
administration is noteworthy. This heightens dependence on information
technologies and expands the possible surface of attack and, consequently,
the possible benefits for attackers. It is an environment where personal data
protection rights are essential to online relations between citizens and the public
administration.

In terms of cyberthreats, there is growing activity by States— which seek to
expand their geopolitical interests through offensive and subversive actions—and
by terrorist organizations, organized crime groups, and individual actors. These
groups take advantage of the anonymity offered by cyberspace to achieve their
goals at a minimum cost and taking fewer risks, given the difficulty of attribution.
Data and information theft, ransomware and DDoS attacks, the hacking of mobile
devices and industrial systems, and cyberattacks against critical infrastructure are
all examples of cyberthreats.

The use of cyberspace as a means to perpetrate illicit activities, disinformation,
propaganda, the financing of terrorism, and organized crime activities, among
others, has an impact on national security, heightening complexity and uncertainty,
and jeopardizes citizens’ privacy.


65


-----

Vulnerability of maritime space

Maritime space, which is of great importance to Spain as a maritime power,
has great strategic value. Among other aspects, maritime routes are crucial for
trading and transportation. Moreover, energy supply is largely dependent on it,
and a considerable part of digital information exchange in Spain takes place via
undersea cables.

Factors threatening maritime security can be generally categorized into two
groups: firstly, those threats that derive from deliberate criminal acts, and, secondly,
accidental acts due to the natural conditions of the maritime environment. The
first group includes acts such as piracy, terrorism, illicit trafficking, acts against
the conservation of underwater cultural heritage, irregular migration networks
using maritime routes, and the uncontrolled exploitation of marine resources,
e.g. through fishing. Piracy and organized crime at sea in the Horn of Africa and
in the waters of the Gulf of Guinea, as well as the increase in irregular migration


66


-----

flows using maritime routes, with tragic humanitarian consequences, reaffirm the
essential strategic importance of the maritime space—a priority for Spain—and
reinforce the need to protect it.

The delimitation of marine spaces between States is a frequent matter of dispute
that can generate crisis or conflict situations, due to the geopolitical importance
of access to and control of such spaces. This is the case of the ongoing dispute
in the South China Sea.

Moreover, technological advances make it possible to extract marine resources
in ever deeper and more remote areas. This situation may lead to the emergence
of tensions due to competition between countries wanting to increase their
access to maritime space.

The second group of threats includes maritime accidents and natural disasters.
Due to Spain’s geographic position, its areas of sovereignty and jurisdiction are
a crossroads for some of the routes with the most traffic, such as the Strait of

Gibraltar. Spain is also responsible for search and rescue in a wide area,

where the safety of human lives at sea and of maritime traffic require

constant attention. Aside from dealing with maritime accidents and

disasters, the preservation of marine, coastal and land ecosystems

is also an especially important activity.


67


-----

Vulnerability of airspace and outer space

Certain infrastructure, such as that related to energy,
financial information flows, or the normal operation of
certain services that are essential for society, are dependent
on the adequate use of outer space and cyberspace.

Airspace can be a scenario for violations of security and the
international order by State and non-State actors. Actions
against commercial aviation and navigation control systems, and
all kinds of illicit trafficking using air routes, are examples of how the
worldwide order could be disrupted.

The possible use of remote-controlled aircraft (drones) for aggressive
or illicit actions by States or non-State organizations constitutes another
current example justifying the protection of airspace.

Furthermore, far-reaching high-tech weapons, highly sophisticated

reconnaissance and surveillance equipment, navigation systems, and a
considerable part of digital information exchange all depend on satellite
communications. In this regard, the easier access to satellite technology
offered by the decrease in costs has opened up great opportunities in areas
such as space exploration, but at the same time involves significant risks,
such as the increase in space debris.

Competition among States for access to, and use and control of outer space
will continue to rise, given its great strategic and commercial value. The
deployment of anti-satellite technologies designed to disable or destroy
satellites could increase global tension.


68


-----

Threats to critical infrastructure

Critical infrastructure is strategic infrastructure that is indispensable and to which
there is no alternative. Strategic infrastructure includes the installations, networks,
systems, physical and information equipment and communication technology on
which the delivery of essential services depends. Essential services are necessary
for the maintenance of basic social services, such as healthcare, security, and
citizens’ social and economic wellbeing, and for the effective operation of the
public sector.


69


-----

Any interruption of the services provided by this infrastructure in strategic
sectors (public administration, space, nuclear industry, chemical industry, research
facilities, water, energy, healthcare, information and communication technologies,
transportation, food, and the financial and tax system) could have serious
consequences for the flow of vital supplies or for the operation of essential
services, in addition to creating grave security disruptions or malfunctions.

The most serious threats that could affect such infrastructure are those
stemming from deliberate acts, whether by means of a physical attack against
the infrastructure itself, or by means of a cyberattack, which is nowadays more
likely due to technological development.

Given that most of these essential services are provided by private operators, it
is crucial to continue to promote public-private collaboration in this regard, to
the benefit of society as a whole.

Challenges

Economic and financial instability

The factors that may destabilize the economic and financial system are very diverse
in nature, are not exclusively economic, and they normally have cross-cutting
impact, which can be felt in a number of areas. Hence the need to adopt a
comprehensive approach that does not only address strictly economic
and financial aspects, but also the security dimension.

These factors include any actions hindering the normal operation
of economic and financial policies and preventing their effectiveness,
as well as those undermining the continuity of economic activity.
The latter would include actions such as fraud, corruption, tax
havens, money laundering and the interruption of trade systems and
infrastructure underpinning trade flows. It is important to continue


70


-----

combating phenomena such as illicit trafficking, which endanger economic

stability, the financing of public services, social rights and citizens’ wellbeing.

Moreover, obstacles to the internationalization of Spain’s economy

or that jeopardize the security of Spanish companies or workers

abroad are challenges that must be addressed in order to guarantee

competitiveness.

Other challenges that need to be mitigated are any actions undermining

the effectiveness of the economic instruments at the service of

defending national security interests and commitments. Therefore, it is

especially important to guarantee the security of those sectors, companies,

services, technologies or information systems that are of special interest for national
security.

Energy vulnerability

Energy is a cornerstone of prosperity, of the wellbeing of society, and of the sovereignty
and continuity of the State itself.

Energy supply is key for a country like Spain, whose supply depends to a great extent
on areas such as North Africa and the Gulf of Guinea. The increase in geopolitical
instability in the main producing areas directly jeopardizes the supply of products and
may lead to a hike in oil and gas prices.

Moreover, the security of installations is an important factor for energy security.
Investing in energy infrastructure, and in its maintenance and modernization, is crucial
in this regard.

Furthermore, Spain’s low level of gas and electricity interconnection with the rest of
Europe increases its vulnerability to supply interruptions.

Spain’s geographic configuration also constitutes a challenge in terms of energy


71


-----

connectivity with its extra-peninsular territories such as the Canary Islands archipelago.

Therefore, it is crucial to guarantee energy supply and provision, in an environmentally
and economically sustainable manner, in a context of energy transition towards a more
secure and efficient model.

Irregular migration flows

Europe and the entire world are undergoing one of the greatest migration crises on
record since World War II. This human tragedy combines immediate causes such as a
rise in conflicts and regional instability, which has led to an exponential increase in the
number of people affected, together with underlying trends such as migration driven
by economic reasons or related to environmental factors. Forced displacements will
probably remain a constant in the coming years, often without immediate and lasting
solutions, and could affect the stability and political and social cohesion of the host
countries.

Spain, given its geostrategic position, is especially exposed to this challenge. After
several years of decline in the number of irregular immigrants arriving in its national
territory—due, to a great extent, to the economic recession—numbers are on the rise
again. This challenge will therefore continue to be a permanent focus of attention and
management, together with efforts to protect the human rights of those who are in the
most vulnerable situations.

The integration of immigrants into Spanish society and culture contributes to Spain’s
prosperity and diversity, always with full respect for people’s values, lifestyles and freedom.

Emergencies and disasters

Emergencies and disasters continue to be among the modern world’s main challenges.
Their impact not only affects people’s lives and health, but also their assets, the
environment, and economic development.


72


-----

Four factors are aggravating these challenges. The first of these is demographic. It stems
from the increase in urban population in areas with environmental or anthropogenic
dangers. The second factor is linked to the vulnerability of economic and technological
infrastructure. This allows risks to propagate more swiftly and have a domino effect, as in
the case of the earthquake in Japan in 2011. The third factor is ecosystem degradation,
which weakens natural defences. Lastly, it is important to consider how climate change is
having an impact on the magnitude and frequency of certain adverse phenomena (such
as heat waves, droughts, forest fires and erosion).

Spain has a wealth of experience to address this challenge as well as a significant
allocation of resources, commensurate with the new and continuing threats faced.
However, given the possibility of an increase in certain emergencies and disasters,


73


-----

it is necessary to continue strengthening the country’s preparedness in
order to facilitate the prevention and speedy recovery in the event
of a disaster.

Epidemics and pandemics

In recent decades, there has been an increase in the number of
emerging diseases identified, and in the risk situations associated
with them. . At least six global health alerts have been identified,
all of them with significant national impact: severe acute respiratory
syndrome, the A/H5N1 virus influenza, the A/H1N1 virus influenza
pandemic, the new international spread of wild poliovirus, the Ebola virus disease
in West Africa, and the Zika virus infection.

This increase in risk situations associated with infectious diseases is the result
of rapid global change that is altering human beings’ relationship with their
environment in several areas: population (size and fragility), use and occupation
of land, mobility and population displacements, conflicts, freight transportation,
and climate change.

Spain—a country receiving hosting more than 75 million tourists each year, with
ports and airports among those with the most traffic in the world, with a climate
increasingly favouring the spread of disease vectors, with an ageing population
and a polarized geopolitical situation—is not immune to threats and challenges
associated with infectious diseases, whether natural or deliberate.

Reducing the population’s vulnerability to infectious risks when feasible (e.g.
through vaccination), the probability of introducing infectious risks (e.g. through
border control and freight inspection) and the probability of the internal spread
of diseases (e.g. through good prevention and health promotion programmes,
or good sanitation systems) is fundamental in order to minimize risks and their
possible impact on the population.


74


-----

However, these risks cannot be completely eliminated. In addition to reducing
the population’s vulnerability, it is also necessary to develop preparedness and
response plans for health threats and challenges, both generic and specific, with
a multi-sector approach to ensure proper coordination of all the administrations
involved, both nationally and internationally.

Effects stemming from climate change

In recent years, the effects of climate change have become so significant that
they warrant an analysis from a security perspective.

On a global level, there is a growing link between the effects of climate change
and competition for access to resources, especially water, forced migration
movements, and the appearance of vectors that help spread diseases. These
factors have an especially intense impact in regions such as Africa and the AsiaPacific area, and at times constitute the structural causes of armed conflicts.

The most noteworthy consequences of global warming are an increase in the
frequency and intensity of diverse extreme meteorological phenomena, rising
sea levels, ocean acidification, desertification, soil degradation, decreasing water
resources, and food insecurity.

The Mediterranean region is identified as one of Europe’s most vulnerable

regions vis-à-vis climate change. In Spain, the scarcity of water resources and

the increase in the frequency and severity of droughts, floods and forest

fires are noteworthy.

Reducing greenhouse gas emissions, combating the loss of

biodiversity, revising energy supply systems and use, joint

management of shared assets such as water and fishing resources,

as well as a global compact between industrialized countries and

emerging countries, are all essential requirements to address

the consequences of climate change. Hence the importance


75


-----

of fulfilling and strengthening the commitments undertaken in multilateral
organizations and positive agreements such as the Paris Agreement. Thus, on
a national level, the integration of efforts towards an efficient and sustainable
model, which will be set forth in the future Act on Climate Change and Energy
Transition, must be guided by a comprehensive vision that incorporates all those
dimensions that have an impact on security.

In addition, the deterioration of environmental quality, through the pollution
of air, water and soil, the loss of biodiversity, and the degradation of natural
habitats are affecting people’s quality of life and may lead to significant migration
movements by those seeking greater environmental security.


76


-----

77


-----

#### 5


-----

Chapter 5

**NATIONAL SECURITY: GENERAL OBJECTIVES**
**AND LINES OF ACTION**


-----

Chapter 5

NATIONAL SECURITY: GENERAL OBJECTIVES
AND LINES OF ACTION

_This chapter sets forth five general objectives guiding the State’s action,_
_and identifies 15 areas, each of which is assigned a specific objective_
_and lines of action._

n a complex and uncertain security environment such as today’s, in which threats
and challenges are interconnected, it is necessary to adopt a comprehensive,
non-compartmentalized, security approach.

## I

Consequently, the Strategy defines general objectives common to all areas
of national security, strengthening the necessary synergies among all of its
components and elements. These objectives respond to the National Security
Policy guiding principles: unity of action, preparedness, efficiency and resilience.


80


-----

In addition, given that threats and challenges may affect different fields and
areas with different intensity, 15 national security areas of action have been
established. Some of them have always been national security areas, such
as national defence and counterterrorism, whereas others respond to the
new security scenario, such as cybersecurity, combating climate change, and
security in the event of epidemics and pandemics. Each of these areas has a
specific objective and lines of action.

These objectives and lines of action organize, position and prioritize State
action in the field of national security, together with the appropriate allocation
of resources, capacities and efforts, always under the rationale of their
optimization and efficient use.

General objectives

General objectives respond to the National Security Policy guiding principles.
They are common to all the areas of this Policy and reflect the need for Spain
to position itself adequately in order to deal with the security implications of
the new international context.

Five general objectives have been established:

-  Develop the comprehensive crisis management model.

-  Promote a culture of national security.

-  Foster the proper use of global common spaces.

-  Emphasize the security dimension in technological development.

-  Strengthen Spain’s international profile.


81


-----

Develop the comprehensive crisis management model

Most of today’s crises affect very different areas of national security. Their
evolution and impact are unpredictable, and they may require measures that
have not yet been tested as well as reinforced coordination. Moreover, there
has been an increase in the intensity of hybrid actions.

It is, therefore, a priority to further develop and adapt the comprehensive crisis
management model within the framework of the National Security System in order
to provide effective
and timely responses
to today’s threats and
challenges. Specifically,
addressing terrorist
and hybrid threats
requires constant
efforts involving

analysis, information
exchange and the
sharing of best

practices. Given

that these threats are not limited by national borders, coordination at the level
of the EU and NATO is important.

Crisis management comprises several phases on a timeline ranging from early
warning to response. It is important to foster a preventive and anticipatory
approach, in which it is particularly crucial to monitor permanently the everchanging security environment, to have intelligence and information systems,
to develop risk analysis methodologies and instruments contributing to
protection against disinformation, and to conduct crisis management training
and exercises.

Moreover, the response phase to crisis situations must include appropriate
participation mechanisms for all levels of public administration and the private
sector. More closely related to the areas of special interest for national


82


-----

security, this response must involve strategic companies, critical infrastructure
operators, research and prospective research centres, and civil society as a
whole.

In the current scenario of constant crises, fostering the resilience of society
and of the public administrations is of paramount importance. It involves
strengthening recovery capacity in the face of possible crises, preserving the
necessary stability to ensure the continuity of Government actions aimed at

protecting citizens and providing essential
services, in order to return to normality as
quickly as possible, minimizing any negative
consequences for citizens’ security and
wellbeing.

Strategic communication is one of the
critical dimensions in this type of situation,
in order to convey accurate, appropriate
and timely information to society.

Promote a culture of national security

Spain has high security standards because of the State’s absolute and resolute
commitment to this policy, which is mainly directed towards its citizens.
However, exposure to ever-changing threats and challenges is inevitable; there
is no such thing as zero risk, and security efforts must continue.

It is a priority to bring National Security Policy closer to society in general,
because nowadays no one is a passive subject of security. A society that is
aware of security threats and challenges is a society that is better prepared
and more capable of overcoming any crises it may have to face. An aware
society is, therefore, a more secure, robust and resilient society. This means that


83


-----

citizen participation is one of the pillars of action underpinning
the true effectiveness of this public policy.

The Government will promote channels to facilitate society’s
awareness of the efforts of the actors and organizations involved
on a day-to-day basis in safeguarding national security, in areas
such as national defence, counterterrorism, cybersecurity, and
public safety. It will also foster knowledge of current threats and
challenges, and awareness of collective responsibility regarding the
preservation of security.

Foster the proper use of global common spaces

The global interconnected fabric of cyberspace, maritime space, airspace and
outer space constitutes a set of functional networks whose security is key to the
international order.

Any action contravening the proper use of these spaces is critical, given the difficulty
in conducting surveillance, monitoring and responding to any illicit act, and the
significant impact that different forms of functional and informational disconnection
may have.

Proper management in such multipurpose spaces requires coordinated processes
and flexible structures that take into consideration the interests and responsibilities
of international organizations, States, and non-State actors. Furthermore, given that
global common spaces can nowadays operate as scenarios for confrontation, Spain
needs to adapt the national strategic framework to this reality.

Emphasize the security dimension in technological development

Today’s society is largely dependent on technology. Technological development
and automation are transforming entire production and management systems.


84


-----

Cyberspace and easy access to technology have reduced the cost of information
and broadened access to it, but have also increased its vulnerability.

This is why it is crucial to have secure technology. Regulation, quality control,
training and secure development are among the necessary measures. It is important
to foster the incorporation of security aspects in technological development and
innovation from the outset, and to mitigate any existing vulnerabilities and ensure
that systems are protected, well configured and well managed. Another aspect which
is becoming increasingly important is the governance of emerging technologies,
whether in relation to the data revolution—given the huge volumes of data being
generated and which may be exploited—or to artificial intelligence, robotization
and computerization, and biogenetics.

Where possible, the State must preserve certain technological capacities that are
strategic for security. The development of a State’s own technological industries is,
therefore, an area of national sovereignty that aims to avoid dependency on third
countries.

Strengthen Spain’s international profile

Protecting Spain’s interests abroad is key to national security. In the international
sphere, Spain is an important partner that contributes to international peace and

security through the strengthening and stability of the organizations of

which it is a member, while at the same time safeguarding and prioritizing

its interests with a voice of its own. This responsibility requires a

profound strategic reflection on positioning within each of these

organizations, and the commitment and proactive participation

in the defence of national interests and of the security and
prosperity of Spain and of Spanish society, as well as to foster

greater international cooperation. This involves coordinated work

among the competent ministries to identify relevant interests

and actions, and an effort towards integration with the private

sector.


85


-----

In the European context, Spain is committed to an EU that reaffirms its
foundational values and that wants to work towards greater integration, as
required by today’s challenges, in particular in the sphere of security, to the
benefit of its citizens. Spain is also committed to a NATO adapted to common
threats and challenges, with responsibilities shared among allies, and to a
secure and democratic European space, based on the rule of law.

Moreover, Spain will continue to protect the interests of its citizens and
companies beyond its borders, through the State Foreign Service, thus
promoting increased exports and investments by Spanish companies abroad.


86


-----

Objectives and strategic lines of action for areas of National
Security

In addition to the general national security objectives, it is important to detail the
objectives of each area. Strategic lines of action contribute to the realization of the
priorities established for each area and to the evaluation of progress in terms of
implementation.


87


-----

NATIONAL DEFENCE

OBJECTIVE

Ensure

the defence of

Spain’s sovereignty and

integrity and the protection of

its population and territory against

any conflict or threat originating

externally, either autonomously or in

collaboration with partners and allies. In

addition, contribute to the creation of a

more stable and secure international

environment by projecting stability

and strengthening cooperation

with partners, in particular in

Spain’s areas of special

interest.

88


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Improve the capacity for autonomous defence, in oder to effectively deter any external threat.

Provide the Armed Forces with the capacities required in the current security environment,
and make decisive progress on convergence with the defence objectives established by NATO
and recommended by the European Parliament, as part of the necessary distribution among
allies of the responsibilities, economic contributions and resources required at all levels. Ensure
the sustainability of effective long-term defence.

Promote an industrial defence strategy, that fosters autonomy in the acquisition of strategic
capabilities and bolster the global competitiveness of the Spanish industry.

Strengthen Spain’s position in the international security system, providing positive leadership
in collective security organizations and international coalitions of which Spain is a member, as
well as in bilateral relations.

Assume an active leading role in the relaunch of the EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy
and remain a committed NATO ally. In addition, participate in new forms of cooperation and
specialization. At the bilateral level, extend and further develop the collaborative framework
with the United States.

Contribute to the establishment of a regional environment of peace and security, prevent
conflicts and contain emerging threats by projecting stability and participating in cooperative
security activities, particularly in Spain’s areas of special interest.

Bolster defence diplomacy, especially with neighbouring countries and countries with which
Spain shares interests and values—particularly those on the southern Mediterranean coast
and in Latin America.

89


-----

COMBATING TERRORISM

OBJECTIVE

Neutralize the terrorist threat to

Spanish citizens and interests at home

and abroad, reduce the vulnerability of

society, and address processes of violent

radicalization.

90


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Prevention

-  Promote the development and full implementation of the National Strategic Plan to Combat

Violent Radicalization (PEN-LCRV) throughout Spanish territory.

-  Strengthen the mechanisms established to combat the financing of terrorism.

-  Bolster Spain’s contribution to the fight against terrorism at the international level in the

organizations of which it is a member—especially the UN, the EU and NATO—and within
the initiatives to which it contributes.

-  Reinforce testimony from victims of terrorism as the best way of countering the terrorist

narrative.

-  Promote intercultural and interfaith dialogue.

Protection

-  Reinforce national counter-terrorism capacities, and cooperation and coordination of counter-

terrorism efforts among the different bodies involved at the national level.

-  Cooperate with Spain’s partner countries that are most affected by terrorism, working

particularly closely with the EU. Adopt measures to improve border controls.

Tracking

-  Improve investigation and intelligence capacities, ensure the technological development of

intelligence and information services in order to address the intensive use of new technology
by terrorist groups, and prevent access to the capabilities and materials required to perpetrate
attacks.

-  Strengthen legal instruments in the fight against terrorism, both at home and abroad, especially

with the support provided by the creation of an International Criminal Court for terrorists.

Response preparation

-  Bolster the adoption of the measures and plans required to ensure synergy and coordination

of all of the responsible bodies, in the event of a terrorist attack.

-  Minimize consequences and provide immediate and ongoing support to victims of terrorism.

-  Consolidate the unity of the political parties as regards the fight against terrorism, by

supporting the Agreement to strengthen unity in the defence of freedoms and in the fight
against terrorism.

91


-----

COMBATING ORGANIZED CRIME

OBJECTIVE

Neutralize threats linked to

organized crime, through strategies

aimed at dismantling existing groups,

preventing the establishment of new

groups and preventing their interaction

with terrorist organizations.

92


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Maintain open channels for continuous training on the methods and resources used by
criminal organizations, through the collaboration and participation by specialized public and
private stakeholders.

Bolster strategic intelligence and exchanges of information as anticipatory tools to combat
organized crime, and strengthen the mechanisms for seizing proceeds, as a means of limiting
operational capacity.

Improve cooperation and coordination of international efforts to address the challenges
posed by organized crime.

93


-----

NON-PROLIFERATION OF WEAPONS OF
MASS DESTRUCTION

OBJECTIVE

Counter the proliferation of

weapons of mass destruction, their

means of delivery, related material and

related technology. Prevent non-State

actors’ access to such weapons—

especially terrorist organizations.

94


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Promote and bolster effective multilateralism and the fulfilment of commitments, compliance
with legal provisions, and realization of the organizations that constitute the international
framework for non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and means of delivery.

Guarantee the physical security of nuclear and radioactive materials and facilities.

Combat trafficking of material and technology related to weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. This entails strengthening national and international policies and
practices concerning control of the international trade in dual-use materials that may be used
for illicit purposes, as well as promoting international measures and cooperation to combat
illicit transfers of know-how, technology, goods and related equipment.

Enhance and promote international cooperation to strengthen security in the international
logistical chain and to bolster border controls to identify potential trafficking of such material,
improving detection and reporting of suspicious transactions.

Strengthen national capacities in the area of non-proliferation through the application of
international law and the development and updating of national law.

Further develop mechanisms to prevent, detect and control financial flows related to
proliferation and step up support for international efforts in this area, in line with United
Nations Security Council resolutions and EU Regulations.

Collaborate on and develop customs controls in the field of risk analysis.

Promote effective media campaigns to inform and raise awareness in civil society, for example
in universities, research centres and businesses, regarding the moral and criminal liability arising
from the appropriation of dual-use materials that may be used for illicit purposes.

95


-----

COUNTERINTELLIGENCE

OBJECTIVE

Adopt measures to defend

Spain’s strategic, political and

economic interests, in order to

prevent, detect and neutralize covert

attacks, including those perpetrated

from cyberspace by other States, the

intelligence services thereof, or by

groups or persons, with the aim of

illegally obtaining information.

96


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Strengthen the capacities of the national intelligence bodies, in order to ensure that the
necessary human and technical resources are available to effectively counteract this threat.

Bolster the protection of classified information.

Increase international cooperation in the field of counterintelligence, at the bilateral level
and within the international security and defence organizations of which Spain is a member,
to offer a comprehensive response in the defence of national interests.

Intensify counterintelligence activities in cyberspace.

97


-----

CYBERSECURITY

OBJECTIVE

Guarantee the

secure use of networks and

information and communication

systems by strengthening the capabilities

to prevent, detect and respond to

cyberattacks, bolstering and adopting

specific measures to contribute

to a secure and reliable

cyberspace.

98


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Strengthen prevention, detection, reaction, analysis, recovery, response and investigation
capabilities with regard to cyberthreats. Bolster coordination at the technical and strategic
levels of the National Security System in the field of cybersecurity.

Reinforce, bolster and promote legal, organizational and technical mechanisms, and the
application of measures, services, best practices and continuity plans to enhance protection,
security and resilience in: 1) the public sector; 2) strategic sectors (especially key infrastructure
and basic services); 3) the business sector, and; 4) the general population, to ensure a secure
and reliable digital environment.

Strengthen and improve national public-public and public-private partnership structures in the
field of cybersecurity.

Achieve the required technological capabilities by fostering the Spanish cybersecurity industry,
promoting an environment that favours research, development, innovation, and participation
by academia.

Promote the acquisition and retention of know-how, skills and experience, and the technological
and professional capabilities that Spain requires to achieve the cybersecurity objectives.

Contribute to security in cyberspace within the EU and internationally, to defend national
interests, by promoting cooperation and compliance with international law.

99


-----

MARITIME SECURITY

OBJECTIVE

Promote a security

policy in the maritime space, both

nationally, internationally, and especially

in the EU, in order to protect human life at

sea; maintain freedom of navigation and protect

maritime traffic and critical maritime infrastructure;

prevent and respond to criminal activity and

terrorist acts at sea; protect and preserve

the coast, marine resources, the marine

environment and underwater cultural

heritage; and prevent and respond

to disasters or accidents at

sea.

100


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Promote a comprehensive approach that enhances coordinated and cooperative action by
the public administrations in resolving problems that affect maritime security.

Adopt measures to strengthen the State’s capacity for action in the maritime space and on
its coasts, making the best and most effective use of resources.

Foster collaboration with the private sector.

Enhance international cooperation, in particular by applying International Maritime
Organization initiatives, the EU Maritime Security Strategy, and the NATO Maritime Strategy.

Improve cybersecurity in the maritime environment.

101


-----

AIRSPACE AND OUTER SPACE SECURITY

OBJECTIVE

Guarantee security

in airspace and outer

space within a shared framework

aimed at counteracting the threats and

challenges that arise in these environments,

and neutralizing the consequences thereof, in

accordance with the principles of efficiency

and utmost coordination, in both the use

of analysis and evaluation capabilities

and of capacities to respond to

challenges.

102


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Promote coordinated action by all public administrations and ministries with responsibilities
in matters concerning airspace and outer space, allowing for the establishment of synergies
and the identification of common solutions.

Strengthen the capacities of national bodies and institutions—both public and private—
with responsibilities in these areas, to address the different threats and challenges inherent
in airspace and outer space.

Continue risk analysis and assessment of measures to counter cyberattacks, terrorist acts,
crimes and other conflicts affecting airport facilities or air transport within or outside Spanish
airspace.

Bolster development of legal provisions concerning civilian use of remotely piloted aircraft,
ensuring the necessary balance between the safety and security of people, facilities and other
airspace users, and the technological and economic development of a thriving industry in
Spain.

Support Spain’s role at the international level in terms of the commitments and responsibilities
undertaken in the field of security in airspace and outer space.

103


-----

PROTECTION OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

OBJECTIVE

Ensure the correct provision of

basic services for society, making the

underlying system of critical infrastructure

more robust and resilient.

104


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Proceed with compliance with regulations concerning protection of critical infrastructure and
with the staggered planification process established in the regulations.

Bolster the comprehensive security of critical infrastructure through the necessary planning,
prevention, reaction and damage mitigation actions and service reestablishment measures.

Increase the capacities and resilience of the systems linked to critical infrastructure, and
promote the establishment of risk management programmes, in line with the priorities set
forth in the National Critical Infrastructure Protection Plan.

Promote coordination in terms of critical infrastructure protection, the fight against terrorism
and cybersecurity, among all of the responsible organizations, improving their capacities.

Stimulate public-public and public-private cooperation within the National Critical Infrastructure
Protection System. Encourage exchanges of information by establishing secure and reliable
procedures and channels.

Favour innovation in security, progressively equipping critical infrastructure with security
systems and components at the design stage. Commit to Spanish technology, development
and R&D&I.

Promote international collaboration and move forward with the development of structures
and systems for information exchange and early warning systems between countries, in
particular between the Member States of the EU.

105


-----

ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL SECURITY

OBJECTIVE

Promote balanced

economic growth, based on

competitiveness, as the basis of

an inclusive, sustainable and resilient

socioeconomic model that is capable of creating

quality employment, favouring innovation

and productivity in economic and business

activity and strengthening the defence

of national security interests and

commitments.

106


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Further develop the bodies, organizations, resources and procedures (Economic Security System)
that promote coordination, collaboration, cooperation and information exchange among the
different public administrations that are responsible for security, safety and economic-financial
matters, and with the private sector, in order to effectively respond to the challenges that hamper
the development and competitiveness of the Spanish economy, and that are a threat to national
security.

Strengthen generation and efficient use of information and intelligence, technology, legislation, training
and strategic alliances, to safeguard and promote national economic interests and foster shared
responsibility for dealing with the threats and challenges to the continuity of economic activity.

Promote the effectiveness and independence of the administrative bodies related to economic
security and regulation.

Continue to improve the international exchange of information as a tool to prevent and combat
tax fraud.

Advance the Economic and Monetary Union as a source of confidence, growth and prosperity. .

Advocate a Single European Market and international free trade, especially within international
institutions and forums and through cooperation, adopting a proactive position that guarantees
security and prosperity in national economic activity.

Encourage fair international governance that supports transparency and combats corruption,
encourages inclusive, equitable growth and favours more effective and representative regulatory
institutions.

Promote innovation in the economy, accompanied by regulation that is appropriate to the pace of
technological change, that allows for increased differentiation of the goods and services offered by
Spanish companies.

107


-----

ENERGY SECURITY

OBJECTIVE

Diversify the sources of energy, ensure

security in transmission and supply, and

promote energy sustainability.

108


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Contribute to strengthening energy security in the EU as a whole.

Ensure the diversification of the national energy mix, with an appropriate representation
of energy sources and promoting the use of domestic energy sources, in order to reduce
external dependence on foreign sources.

Ensure security of supply, in order to guarantee access to the necessary resources at all times,
and security of transpotation, both overland and maritime, to provide the required resources
in a timely manner.

Encourage an energy transition to a model based on efficiency and the integration of
environmental factors into decision-making processes.

Promote the security of energy infrastructure vis-à-vis natural disasters, technical accidents,
human error and, above all, cyberthreats.

Strengthen the comprehensive security of energy sector infrastructure—and particularly
critical infrastructure—protecting it against physical threats and cyberthreats that may put it
at risk.

109


-----

ORGANIZATION OF MIGRATION FLOWS

OBJECTIVE

Prevent, control and organize

irregular migration flows at borders,

and ensure appropriate reception and

integration of immigrants and those

who are seeking or under international

protection.

110


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Encourage collaboration within public administrations and, where appropriate, with non-
governmental organizations and the private sector, in order to mitigate the risks linked to
irregular immigration.

Monitor and control access through Spain’s external borders, as part of the EU’s Integrated
Border Management System.

Defend the rule of law and safeguard public safety by combating discrimination and promoting
social integration. Specifically:

-  Gradually adapt the integration model in the different fields to which it applies.

-  Combat discrimination and ensure that the principle of equality is upheld, with a special

focus on the most vulnerable sectors of society.

-  Provide appropriate reception, assistance and protection for those seeking and benefitting

from international protection, in accordance with applicable legal provisions.

Promote the development of a common migration and asylum policy in the EU and comply
with agreements.

Cooperate with countries of origin and transit, to favour their development, promote channels
for legal immigration, address irregular immigration at the source and combat immigration
networks and human trafficking.

111


-----

PROTECTION AGAINST EMERGENCIES AND
DISASTERS

OBJECTIVE

Consolidate the National Civil

Protection System, as an instrument

that combines all of Spain’s capabilities

to manage responses to emergencies

and disasters. Ensure that said system is

integrated into the National Security

System.

112


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Prepare, approve and implement the National Civil Protection System Strategy, by means of
cooperation between all the administrations with related responsibilities, following approval
of said plan by the National Security Council.

Complete the legal framework for protection against emergencies and disasters, with the
development of regulations for Act 17/2015.

Promote public-private collaboration, especially as regards prevention.

Strengthen the integration of capacities throughout the National Civil Protection System,
increasing cooperation and coordination between all public administrations with related
responsibilities, by means of specific actions:

-  Establishing and implementing a National Civil Protection Alert Network, to improve

prevention, with a comprehensive, multi-risk approach.

-  Maintaining directories of capacities.

-  Jointly designing actions to offer comprehensive assistance to victims.

-  Establishing management and communication protocols at the national and international

levels, in coordination with the EU and other international organizations.

Promote international coordination and cooperation in the area of civil protection, with a
special focus on the EU Civil Protection Mechanism and the UN International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction, and at the bilateral level, with third countries.

113


-----

SECURITY VIS-À-VIS PANDEMICS AND
EPIDEMICS

OBJECTIVE

Adopt plans

to prepare for and

respond to health risks,

both generic and specific, in

accordance with the principle of

coordination between the General

State Administration, the administrations

of the Autonomous Communities, and

international organizations, such as the

World Health Organization, or, within

the EU, the European Centre for

Disease Prevention and

Control.

114


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Adapt the public healthcare services offered by the State and by the Autonomous Communities, to
ensure that there is an appropriate operational response capacity.

As regards improving the capabilities and mechanisms for action:

-  Periodically revise and update plans to prepare for and respond to specific risks.

-  Promote development of a generic national plan to prepare for and respond to biological

risks, with a multi-sector approach.

-  Establish the necessary mechanisms for coordination of the Armed Forces, the State Security

Forces, heads of the judiciary and healthcare authorities, in order to provide an effective
response to intentional attacks involving infectious agents.

-  Adapt the network of hospitals for treatment of confirmed cases of Ebola, to respond to any

high-risk infectious disease.

-  Expand and maintain the systems for monitoring and controlling the entry of exotic and

indigenous vectors, and extend the National Plan for Preparation and Response to Vector-
borne Diseases, to include all vectors of interest.

-  Develop and improve, through collaboration between the ministries involved, the protocols

for preventing entry into the country of animals or goods that may contain dangerous
pathogens, and for ensuring appropriate assistance for people who have entered the country
with high-risk infectious diseases.

-  Strengthen the response capabilities of external health response teams as regards health

incidents at the borders.

-  Adopt protocols for management and communication of food crises, in coordination with the

EU and other key international organizations.

Promote international coordination to exchange information and insight into management and
treatment of new diseases.

Develop the Spanish Technical Emergency Assistance and Response Teams, and promote their
participation in international missions.

115


-----

PRESERVATION OF THE ENVIRONMENT

OBJECTIVE

Ensure the preservation of

a healthy environment and the

protection of the natural heritage

and biodiversity, as a means to improve

the quality of life and contribute to a

sustained and sustainable development,

with particular emphasis on combating

climate change.

116


-----

LINES OF ACTION

Strengthen compliance, within the framework of the EU, with the commitments adopted
to preserve the environment and biodiversity, prevent water insecurity, and combat climate
change, intensifying international cooperation.

Enhance coordination between the different components of the public sector in a way that
favours the creation of the necessary synergies between those with responsibilities involving
the preservation and improvement of the environment. This will also be extensive to public-
private collaboration.

Strengthen and expand capabilities, both general and specialized, aimed at combating
aggressions against the environment that constitute a threat to natural settings and human
quality of life. To this end, actions shall be carried out to:

-  Integrate the variables related to climate change adaptation and mitigation, and the

reduction of air and noise pollution, into all sectoral planning, with the goal of promoting
the least polluting actions, so as to better adapt to the impact—both physical and
economic—of climate change.

-  Improve capabilities for preventing and responding to pollution of the marine environment.

-  Support the use of less polluting technologies and processes and promote new

alternative energies that lessen the environmental impact of all sectors of economic
activity.

-  Develop preventive response and recovery initiatives to address damage from forest

fires, and promote forest carbon sinks.

-  Continue with planning efforts for appropriate management of scarce water resources,

paying special attention to the risks of flooding and drought.

117


-----

-----

Chapter 6

**NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEM**


-----

Chapter 6

NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEM

_This chapter sets out initiatives to strengthen the National Security_
_System, improve the coordination and effectiveness of State action, and_
_the participation of society as a whole._

he strategic concept of national security in Spain includes, since the previous
Strategy, an organizational dimension. Towards this end a National Security
Council, headed by the President of the Government, was created.

## T

Since this initiative was launched, great strides have been made in such sensitive areas
for Spain as cybersecurity, maritime security, and energy security, and many action
plans have been approved in areas that are equally essential for national security.

At the same time, the structures that contribute to effective decision-making, through
bodies that lend support to the National Security Council have been strengthened


120


-----

121


-----

with the creation of the National Cybersecurity Council, the National Maritime
Security Council, the Immigration Committee, and the Situation Committee, as well
as the new Non-proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction Committee and the
Energy Security Committee.

The National Security Council’s duties includes, among others, directing and
coordinating crisis management actions, under the terms set forth in the National
Security Act. To this end, its membership is open and flexible, allowing for the inclusion
of political party representatives.

The National Security Council is assisted by the Situation Committee, which seeks to
improve coordination among the different public administrations, in order to achieve
greater speed and flexibility in the response to crisis situations.

Moreover, on a legislative level, the Joint Congress-Senate National Security Committee
guarantees an appropriate level of participation on the part of public representatives
in the area of national security.

Finally, the approval with a wide parliamentary consensus of Act 36/2015, of 28
September, demonstrates that in Spain, national security is a matter of State policy.
The National Security Strategy is the benchmark framework for this policy.


122


-----

New initiatives in support of the general objetives for
national security

The Government will promote the following initiatives in line with the general
objectives for national security described, to strengthen the basic components and
areas of national security. It will actively involve the public administrations and other
public sector entities and society as a whole.

-  The crisis management model within the National Security System will be
completed, at a national scale, based on a comprehensive approach that
is preventive, anticipatory, and resilient, in order to guarantee an effective,
coordinated and optimal response. This will be done in alignment with the
development of regulations on the contribution of resources to national
security, pursuant to the provisions of the National Security Act.

-  A Comprehensive National Security Culture Plan will be approved to serve
as a catalyst for the progressive implementation of an inclusive, participatory,
and collaborative culture of national security.

-  The design of a national strategic position regarding the governance and use
of global common spaces will be addressed. To this end, the architecture of
the National Security Council’s support bodies will be completed with the
creation of the National Aerospace Security Council. Moreover, the sectoral
strategic framework for these common spaces will be adapted to this new
National Security Strategy, which will involve revising the National Maritime
Security Strategy and the National Cybersecurity Strategy, as well as
approving a National Aerospace Security Strategy. In this sense, the National
Energy Security Strategy will also be revised.

-  As part of the goal of promoting technological development that incorporates
the national security dimension, the National Security Council will be the
single point of contact in the area of information networks and systems
security with the competent authorities of other EU Member States.


123


-----

124


-----

125


-----

Published by:

© Author and publisher, 2017

NIPO (print edition): 785170432
NIPO (online edition): 785170448
Publication date: December 2017
Printed by: imprenta Boletín Oficial del Estado

Translation by the Language Interpretation Office of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

The exploitation rights for this work are protected by the Spanish Intellectual Property Act.
No part of this publication may be copied, stored or broadcast in any form nor in any medium,
whether electronic, mechanical or print, including photocopies, or by any other means,
without the prior, written, express consent of the holders of the © Copyright.


www dsn gob es


-----

