# Spanish Security Strategy

## Everyone’s responsibility


-----

#### TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .............................................................................................. 1

Chapter 1. A NECESSARY STRATEGY ....................................................................... 7

Chapter 2. SPAIN‟S SECURITY IN THE WORLD ...................................................... 12

Our specific profile................................................................................................... 12

Spain in a globalised world ...................................................................................... 15

_The European Union, identity and influence ............................................................ 16_

_The United States and the new transatlantic relations ............................................. 17_

_Russia, European strategic partner ......................................................................... 18_

_Iberoamerica, a common destiny ............................................................................. 19_

_Our Southern neighbourhood .................................................................................. 20_

_Africa, key to Spanish security ................................................................................ 21_

_Spain in Asia ........................................................................................................... 21_

_The UN, NATO and other multilateral fora ............................................................... 22_

Chapter 3. RISK MULTIPLIERS................................................................................. 25

Globalisation´s drawbacks ....................................................................................... 25

Demographic imbalances ........................................................................................ 26

Poverty and inequality ............................................................................................. 28

Climate change ....................................................................................................... 29

Technology´sperils .................................................................................................. 29

Radical and non-democratic ideologies ................................................................... 30

Chapter 4. THREATS, RISKS AND RESPONSES .................................................... 32

_Domains .................................................................................................................. 32_

Armed conflicts ........................................................................................................ 34

Terrorism ................................................................................................................. 41


-----

Organised crime ...................................................................................................... 46

Financial and economic insecurity ........................................................................... 48

Energy vulnerability ................................................................................................. 53

Proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .......................................................... 56

Cyberthreats............................................................................................................ 59

Uncontrolled migratory flows ................................................................................... 65

Emergencies and disasters ..................................................................................... 68

_Critical infrastructures, supplies and services .......................................................... 72_

Chapter 5. AN INTEGRATED INSTITUTIONAL MODEL ........................................... 75

LIST OF ACRONYMS ................................................................................................. 80


-----

### EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Ensuring the security of Spain, its inhabitants and its citizens is an essential

responsibility of the Government and the Public Administrations, but also of

society as a whole. Security today is everyone´s responsibility.

It is a complex task in an interdependent and changing world, in which the worst

economic crisis in more than 80 years has converged with a shift in economic

power from the West to Asia.

We face crosscutting, interconnected and transnational threats and risks.

Preserving security requires international and national coordination as well as

the involvement of society as a whole.

The border between domestic and external security has become blurred.

National policies in the traditional areas of security are no longer a sufficient

safeguard in the 21[st] century. Only a comprehensive and interdisciplinary

approach to security at national, European and international levels can address

the complex challenges we face.

The core objectives of this first Spanish Security Strategy are to analyse the

threats and risks to our security, identify courses of action and define

coordination mechanisms. It has a scope of one decade and will be reviewed

every five years or when required by circumstances.

The security policy will be based on six basic concepts (Chapter 1):

  - Comprehensive approach to the different dimensions of security.

  - Coordination between Public Administrations and with society.

  - Efficient use of resources.

  - Anticipation and prevention of threats and risks.

  - Resilience of systems and instruments.

  - Responsible interdependence with our partners and allies.

This Strategy has been conceived with a national, European, international and

global perspective, and from the standpoint of Spain‟s standing as a medium
1


-----

sized power with a specific profile and important comparative advantages. Our

capacity for action is enhanced through our membership of a European Union

(EU) that shares our interests, and our recognised standing as a country

committed to effective multilateralism. We have global interests to defend and

transnational threats and risks to face, many of which will come from abroad. In

order to preserve our security, we will occasionally have to become involved in

actions far away from our borders. (Chapter 2)

Globalisation´s drawbacks, demographic imbalances, poverty and inequality,

climate change, technological dangers and radical and non-democratic

ideologies are all transnational drivers that can multiply the effects of risks and

threats or even transform their nature. (Chapter 3)

This Strategy identifies the most important threats and risks to our country‟s

security and outlines how they might be addressed. They can occur in different

domains where action would be required: on land, at sea, in the air, in space, in

cyberspace and in the information sphere. This analysis constitutes the basis for

formulating strategic lines of response, developing capabilities and carrying out

organisational reforms. (Chapter 4)

The Strategy identifies the following threats and risks, and strategic lines of

action in response:

_Armed Conflicts. Spain could be required to participate in three types of conflicts_

where the role of the Armed Forces is central: conflicts not shared with our

allies, multilateral conflicts directly affecting Spanish interests and conflicts

derived from our international commitments in multilateral frameworks not

directly affecting our interests. The defence of our interests and values will

guide Spanish efforts in this sphere, from the threefold perspective of conflict

anticipation and prevention, conflict management and resolution, and

subsequent peace consolidation. To this end, Spain will follow a comprehensive

approach combining diplomatic, military, police and foreign aid tools. An

Integrated External Response Unit (URIE) will be created for this purpose.

_Terrorism. Terrorism directly threatens the security of all citizens, seeks to_

undermine democratic institutions and could cause severe damage to our

2


-----

critical infrastructures. ETA‟s terrorism has been a scourge that has plagued

Spain for over 40 years. Yet its end is nearer than ever before thanks to the

maturity and unity of Spanish society, and the effectiveness of the police and

the judiciary. Transnational terrorism, particularly _Jihadist, takes advantage of_

the features of the new global society in the hope of disrupting its normal

functioning. Although neither of these represents an existential threat to the

State, preventing, impeding and defeating terrorism is a national, European and

international priority. To fulfil this goal, a specific and integrated strategic

response is necessary, based on respect for democratic values, human rights

and the rule of law. The main axes of this response are anticipation, prevention

and protection, together with availability of means, the joint effort of democratic

parties and their support for the work of the State Security forces and

intelligence services, and international cooperation.

_Organised crime. It is one of the most serious, though at times least recognised,_

threats to our security. It is increasingly interconnected with terrorism, violent

groups and local crime in a way that makes them all mutually reinforcing. A

threefold approach is needed to confront this threat: increasing personnel and

means, continue developing efficient legislation in this area, and improving the

coordination between national and international organisations. The Centre for

Intelligence against Organised Crime (CICO) has been reinforced to meet this

challenge.

_Economic and Financial Insecurity._ Economic security is an integral and

essential part of our security. The threats and risks related to economic and

financial activity can originate in public or private macroeconomic imbalances,

market volatility, the destabilising, speculative or even illegal activities of

different economic agents, the poor performance of supervision and regulatory

entities, economic interdependence, competition for resources or an

unbalanced growth model. The prevention and mitigation of their effects

requires us to: prosecute criminal activities; ensure the correct supervision and

regulation of markets; make progress in European and global governance;

enhance the international presence of Spain; guarantee the functioning of

critical economic and financial services and infrastructures; and promote a

sustainable economic development that minimizes imbalances and guarantees

3


-----

economic growth and social cohesion. An Economic Intelligence System (SIE)

will be created to analyse relevant information and equip the State for better

decision-making and action in this area.

_Energy vulnerability._ Our high dependence on fossil fuels and the

unsustainability of the current energy model worldwide, for environmental

reasons among others, make of the energy factor a key component of our

security. The lines of action to enhance our energy security include:

diversification of energy sources; energy savings and efficiency, with the dual

aim of reducing external dependence and improving our economic

competitiveness; security of supply at a reasonable price, limiting dependence

on supply from a single country, developing strategic reserves, as well as

international interconnections, boosting infrastructures and liberalizing markets.

The best guarantee of energy supply and security for Spain is an integrated

European electricity and natural gas market.

_Proliferation of weapons of mass destruction._ The proliferation of nuclear,

radiological, biological or chemical weapons is one of the major threats of our

times, particularly if uncontrolled agents such as terrorist organisations gain

access to these weapons and use them. Preventing and neutralizing this threat

requires intense multidisciplinary work. Spain supports the various international

initiatives in this direction, including the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT),

and the creation of an appropriate collective defence capability against the

proliferation of ballistic missiles.

_Cyberthreats. An ever increasing part of our daily activity takes place in_

cyberspace, where cyberthreats can cause severe damage or even paralyze

the activity of a country. Most cyberattacks are perpetrated for commercial

interests, but we are also exposed to the aggressive actions of criminal groups,

terrorists or even other States. New information and communication

technologies offer novel and more sophisticated means of espionage and

counterintelligence. Improving security in cyberspace entails reinforcing

legislation, strengthening the resilience of our infrastructure and critical

service´s management and information systems, and enhancing public-private

4


-----

cooperation. Coordination of the different agents and greater international

cooperation in developing cyberthreat control agreements is essential.

_Uncontrolled migratory flows._ The impact of massive and illegal migration can

generate social conflict and create urban ghettos because of lack of integration,

which may become breeding grounds for extremist, religious or ideological

radicalisation. There is also the possibility of economic exploitation by criminal

organisations or the destabilisation of certain productive sectors. Prevention of

the risks associated with this phenomenon requires cooperation among Public

Administrations, social organisations and the private sector, in order to develop

adequate legal immigration and social integration policies. It also entails

strengthening cooperation with countries of origin and transit, control and

surveillance of borders, as well as an on-going fight against human trafficking

networks.

_Emergencies and disasters. Threats and risks caused by either human activity_

or natural phenomena, aggravated by climate change, health problems such as

pandemics, or the scarcity of water and other basic resources could become

first-magnitude risks to the security and the welfare of citizens. Spain has

sufficient preventive and management means to respond adequately, such as

the National Civil Protection System and the Emergency Military Unit (UME).

Perfecting our response capability calls for deepening the cooperation among

Public Administrations and promoting a „culture of prevention‟ among citizens.

The security of critical infrastructures, supplies and services is particularly

important. It is essential to ensure their ability to function and their resilience

against all possible threats. Cooperation should be enhanced with the private

sector, which already manages many of these critical infrastructures, supplies

and services.

All of the above underscores the need for an institutional and legislative

modernization of the Public Administrations in order to respond to the

requirements of this Strategy. For that purpose, a Spanish Security Council will

be established, which will convene the appropriate Ministers and senior

authorities for each circumstance. It will be supported by a number of inter
ministerial committees that will develop the different working areas, and a

5


-----

Support Unit within the President of the Government´s Office. Cooperation with

the regional Autonomous Communities will be enhanced. A Social Forum of

experts will also be promoted as a consultative body. The necessary legislative

instruments will be updated, especially in the area of crisis management, civilian

protection, official secrets and planning for effective response to emergencies

and disasters. (Chapter 5)

**The Spanish Security Strategy, at a glance**

**Objective** **Actors involved** **Method**

The security of Spain, its The National State **1.** Statement of key concepts and of
citizens and inhabitants Administration, Autonomous our values and vital and strategic

Communities (Regional interests
Governments), Local Authorities

**2.** Outline of Spain´s unique profile

and society as a whole

and its security implications

**3.** Study of risk multipliers that
spread and intensify threats and risks

**4.** Analysis of threats, risks and
strategic lines of action to address
them

**5. Organisational implications**

6

|The Spanish Security Strategy, at a glance|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Objective|Actors involved|Method|
|The security of Spain, its citizens and inhabitants|The National State Administration, Autonomous Communities (Regional Governments), Local Authorities and society as a whole|1. Statement of key concepts and of our values and vital and strategic interests 2. Outline of Spain´s unique profile and its security implications 3. Study of risk multipliers that spread and intensify threats and risks 4. Analysis of threats, risks and strategic lines of action to address them 5. Organisational implications|


-----

### Chapter 1. A NECESSARY STRATEGY

Ensuring the security of Spain, its inhabitants and its citizens is an essential

responsibility of the Government; and also of society as a whole. It is the

responsibility of the National State Administration, which must lead and

coordinate, of the Autonomous Communities (Regional Governments) and of

the Local Authorities, as well as of citizens, social organisations, businesses

and the media. Security today is everyone´s responsibility.

The borders between external and internal security have become increasingly

blurred. Since we must now deal with mutually reinforcing threats and risks that

transcend national borders, security today cannot be compartmentalised. Spain

faces national, global, regional and internal threats. An effective security

strategy must go beyond our borders. Responses must necessarily be national,

European, regional and global.

In this new, multipolar and changing world, we must be prepared for the

unexpected. The challenges to security are ever more complex and dynamic in

a time of shifting paradigms. This period of uncertainty can also be a time of

great opportunities, if we can come together to manage them effectively. We

should face these changes with the confidence, responsibility and effectiveness

that correspond to an open and dynamic society such as ours.

Spain‟s security policy will always be guided by the defence of our vital and

strategic interests and our values. Vital interests include the fundamental rights

of life, liberty, democracy, and the welfare and development of the Spanish

people; as well as those related to the constituent elements of the State, such

as our sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, constitutional order

and economic security.

We also have strategic interests concerning the pursuit of a peaceful and safe

environment: the consolidation and good functioning of the EU, a stable and fair

international order, based on peace, security and respect for human rights,

preserving freedom of exchange and communication, and constructive relations

with our neighbours.

7


-----

These interests must always be defended within the framework of democratic

values and the rule of law, along with the defence of peace, liberty, tolerance,

solidarity, sustainability, global progress and the preservation of a way of life

underpinned by the welfare state. These values reflect the convictions of our

society and are set forth in the Spanish Constitution and the Charter of the

United Nations.

Spanish security is based on six key concepts that this Strategy seeks to foster:

  - **Comprehensive approach: All dimensions of security must be**

integrated, with an understanding of the multiple relations existing among

each and every one of them, in order to achieve convergence towards

common objectives.

  - **Coordination:** Cooperation and collaboration among Public

Administrations is essential to achieve maximum performance from the

resources available. Since many critical infrastructures, supplies and

services are in private hands, cooperation between the State and the

private sector is crucial, along with the cooperation of citizens and social

organisations.

  - **Efficient use of resources:** In a context of constraints on government

expenditure, the State must ensure the proper use of resources while

rationalizing the use of existing instruments. In cooperation with our

partners and allies, the objective is to make security requirements

compatible with tighter budgets, which requires wiser spending.

  - **Anticipation and prevention:** Not all threats can be foreseen, but

prevention will allow some to be avoided. The State should have the

necessary means to issue alerts and provide prevention for whatever

might endanger the security of Spain and its citizens.

  - **Resilience:** New and unforeseen challenges, risks and threats are

certain to arise. To respond, it is essential to have resilient and flexible

systems and instruments that are adaptable to diverse circumstances.

8


-----

  - **Responsible interdependence:** Governance mechanisms should be

established in collaboration with our European and international partners

in order to build and strengthen multilateral frameworks and instruments

to guarantee security. Because of its recognised capability as an

interlocutor, Spain has important attributes to contribute to these

objectives.

Spain has the necessary tools to defend both, interests that are exclusively

national and those that are shared with our partners and allies. The latter could

arise as a result of our bilateral relations or of our membership of the EU, the

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Organization for Security and

Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and other organisations. The most important

instruments, which should be used in a joint fashion, are:

  - Diplomacy

  - Armed Forces

  - State Security Forces

  - Intelligence services

  - Civilian protection services

  - Development cooperation

  - Economic and trade relations


**Information and Communication**


Free access to information and the development of a responsible

communication policy is crucial to security. Public authorities should encourage

information transparency in these issues and make citizens aware of the

threats and risks to security. Yet they should do so without promoting a

discourse of fear or furthering the visibility or prominence of the activities of


violent people or groups.


This changing security scenario and the absence of an integrated analysis of

the threats and risks that affect our country or our response capabilities, make

this first Spanish Security Strategy necessary. The Strategy analyses the

9


-----

current security context, provides a forward-looking vision and establishes the

lines of action to defend the interests of Spain and its contribution to a national,

European, regional and international environment that is safer, fairer and more

peaceful. The various ministries and organisations involved in security, political

parties, the private sector and civil society have all participated in its drafting,

through an open and consultative process.


**A Security Culture**


The threats and risks to our country have dramatically changed in recent

decades, originating in multiple and heterogeneous sources that range from

Jihadist terrorism to organised crime networks and cyberattacks. Living in a

modern society requires unprecedented developments in attitudes, skills and

knowledge. It is important to promote a greater security culture and encourage

education and awareness on these issues among professionals in different


fields, as well as among the wider citizenry.


The horizon of this Strategy is a decade. Given the changing nature of our

world, it will be revised at least every five years or when required by

circumstances.

10


-----

11


-----

### Chapter 2. SPAIN’S SECURITY IN THE WORLD

The transition to a multipolar world order, the growth of the emergent

economies, the worst economic crisis in 80 years, and many other factors have

brought about new challenges and opportunities to which we must respond.

Four basic observations will serve as a starting point in the quest to guarantee

our security:

  - Spain is a medium-sized power with its own particular profile and great

potential for external action. However, like any other country, what Spain

can achieve by itself is limited. The defence of our interests and security

is enhanced within a European Union that strengthens its influence in the

world.

  - Spain has global interests to defend and promote. The challenges

associated with these interests should be addressed through national,

European and global responses. We must foster and consolidate

legitimate and efficient multilateral systems.

  - The cross-border nature of the threats and risks we face could require

Spain to commit to actions in far-away places, wherever these risks are

found, in order to preserve our security and defend our interests.

  - The external action of the National Government is complemented by the

activity of regional Autonomous Communities, local authorities, civil

society and the private sector. The pursuit of security requires us to work

together in a coordinated manner.

#### Our specific profile 

As an open country and a member of the EU, Spain plays its part in the

international order while seeking to promote and defend national, regional and

global interests. We are an influential and respected voice. In overall figures

Spain is among the top ten countries in the world in terms of foreign investment

12


-----

and aid. Spanish is spoken by 450 million people as a first, second or foreign

language. It is the second language in international communications.


**Principles of international action**


**European framework:** The EU promotes policies that conform to democratic

values, the rule of law, and international law. Shared sovereignty in certain

matters and cooperation in European institutions have created an

unprecedented common action framework, from which Spain protects and

projects its interests. Its reference points are the European Security Strategy,


the EU Internal Security Strategy and NATO‟s Strategic Concept.


**Multilateralism, legitimacy and international legality:** Individual or joint

responses to situations that Spain might face will always be carried out within

the framework of international law, formal bilateral and multilateral

commitments, and parliamentary approval of actions as established in Spanish

legislation. The legitimacy of these actions will also depend on the firm

adherence to the principles of international institutions, particularly the Charter


of the United Nations.


**Peacebuilding: Peace and security should be built on solid societies and with**

States that protect people, guarantee their rights and liberties and promote

their well-being. With a perspective that covers every phase of a crisis

(prevention, management and resolution, peace consolidation and post-conflict

reconstruction), Spain will proactively contribute to strengthening fragile

societies and States that have difficulties fulfilling these functions. Various

means will be made available for these purposes in the socio-economic,

political, justice and gender spheres. We will continue providing technical

assistance to other States for security sector reform, as we have been doing

successfully for some time. Spain will continue to promote the role of women in


peacebuilding.


**Civilian protection and the Responsibility to Protect:** The protection of

civilians is a basic pillar supporting the action of the international community in

cases of serious violations of human rights that could lead to a response by the

13


-----

international community, in line with the principles of the United Nations

Charter. In most conflicts civilians do not receive adequate protection, as

established by international humanitarian law, and thus become victims, either

directly or indirectly. Spain also supports the principle of Responsibility to

Protect, approved at the UN World Summit in 2005, which establishes the

collective responsibility of the international community to protect populations

whose own States fail to do so in extreme cases of genocide, war crimes,

ethnic cleansing or crimes against humanity. The military response of the

international community must always be the last resort, and the importance of

conflict prevention should always be emphasised, as well as the prior use of


negotiation or other pressure tactics such as political or economic sanctions.


Situated at the crossroads between Europe and North Africa, between the

Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean, with the weight of its history and its

language, Spain has a unique profile, full of potential in the area of security. We

must build on our comparative advantages, which are among our major assets.

The ability to command attraction and credibility will be increasingly important,

and it will be determined by the values and policies that each State applies

within its borders and abroad. Apart from our geographical situation, which is

itself of great geostrategic value, we also have the history of our exemplary

transition to democracy, our competence as a „reliable mediator‟ between

cultures and regional blocks -such as the Arab world and Spanish-speaking

countries-, EU membership, our bonds with Iberoamerica, good relations with

the United States and a firm commitment to development cooperation.


**Development cooperation and security**


In recent years Spain has been the country that has increased the most its

Official Development Aid (ODA), making cooperation one of our hallmarks. It is

treated as both a strategic need and a moral duty, especially towards Africa,


which is the prime beneficiary of this effort.


Many of the threats and risks we face in Spain and Europe are intimately linked

14


-----

to poverty and extreme inequality in this and other regions. Spanish investment

in development cooperation also contributes to our security, by dealing with the

structural causes -socio-cultural, economic and environmental- of the conflicts


and the frail situations of many States.


Countries where the State fulfils its obligations to its citizens are safer and

more stable. By investing in their national and regional institutional

reinforcement we can prevent and respond to situations of general insecurity

which could affect our interests, as in the cases of Afghanistan and Somalia.

These efforts should be carried out jointly with relevant multilateral

organisations such as the UN, the World Bank or NGO‟s, while respecting their


independence and neutrality.


#### Spain in a globalised world 

Globalisation and the emergence of new powers are forging a multipolar world;

a tendency that has been accelerated since the start of the economic and

financial crisis in 2007 and will likely continue in the coming years. This new

world order brings with it risks to stability and security if it is not accompanied by

regional and global governance based on the promotion of democracy and

human rights. Multipolarity without effective multilateralism could lead to serious

conflicts. Spain advocates a responsible interdependence that can lead to

synergies which can be of assistance in seeking joint solutions to common

challenges. We cannot and should not work alone.

As a country committed to world development, peace and security, Spain works

through the EU, UN, NATO and the OSCE, the G20 and other organisations to

design and achieve a stable international order that promotes justice, prosperity

and global security.

In order to keep advancing in that direction, Spain must act on several fronts:

  - Encourage the reform of international organisations in order to increase

their representativeness and effectiveness.

15


-----

  - Reinforce Spain‟s influence in multilateral fora and initiatives and promote

the presence of its citizens in the most relevant organisations.

  - Strengthen bilateral relations to make Spain a more influential

international actor.

**_The European Union, identity and influence_**

As power shifts from the West to Asia, the European Union, with a population of

500 million and 22% of the world‟s Gross Domestic Product (GDP), should play

a decisive role as a point of reference for stability and progress. This requires

advancing in in its integration process, so as to maintain and expand its

capacity for international action.

An essential dimension of security in our country involves the EU, and Spain‟s

bilateral relations with its partners, particularly with neighbouring France and

Portugal. Spanish interests are best served by a European Union with

reinforced influence in the world. In turn, EU projection is bolstered by

strengthening the external action of its Member States, including Spain.

The Treaty of Lisbon provides new instruments for the European continent to

continue being an influential player, capable of speaking with a single voice and

acting with a common foreign policy. This common policy should serve

European purposes and also Spanish interests in the governance of

globalisation, and our relations with Iberoamerica, the Maghreb, the

Mediterranean and other existing or emerging world powers.

The European External Action Service (EEAS) will be a fundamental tool in this

sphere. If Europe wishes to continue playing a significant role in the

international arena, it must provide itself with the necessary political will to act

jointly outside its borders, with a true European Defence Policy and with

adequate and credible military means that include its own strategic transport

capability. Defence budget cuts in Member States are an opportunity to promote

integration in this field. Less money can be spent more advantageously if

resources are used on a European scale. Progress should continue in the joint

planning of major defensive capabilities projects and existing possibilities should

16


-----

be used and developed, from the European Defence Agency (EDA) to the

pooling of available national assets.

Although conflicts between States are no longer regularly solved in the

battlefield, many countries suffer crises and internal conflicts with consequences

that affect us all. In order to address them, we fully support the European

Security Strategy, which advocates a management model that integrates the

use of both military and civilian means in conjunction with political, diplomatic,

trade and development instruments.

Spain supports the enlargement of the EU, as it contributes to increasing

stability and security in Europe. The gradual adhesion of candidate countries,

namely Turkey, Croatia, Iceland and the Former Yugoslav Republic of

Macedonia (FYROM), will enrich the vision and the capabilities of a constantly

renewed European project.

Europe should continue advancing in order to successfully address many

common future challenges, such as: overcoming demographic aging, regulating

and organising the significant and necessary flow of immigration through a

common European border and immigration policy, decreasing energy

dependency through a common European policy and an integrated energy

market, fighting for sustainable development, competing with other social and

economic models that weaken the achievements of the Welfare State, and

rising to the challenge of the competition from Asian research and innovation.

The British colony of Gibraltar is an anomaly in today‟s Europe. It poses security

problems for Spain and Europe in several domains, which require effective

solutions.

**_The United States and the new transatlantic relations_**

Spain coexists in the Euro-Atlantic space with a large set of countries linked by

deep historical and political roots and important trade and economic relations. It

is critical for the world, and crucial to Spain, that this environment is kept stable,

peaceful and secure. Within this framework, the United States continues to be

17


-----

the largest economic, military, scientific and cultural world power. In addition to

being a solid ally, it is an indispensible and priority partner.

Our two countries share common values and are linked by close human,

historical, cultural, linguistic, economic, political and military ties. The Defence

Cooperation Agreement between Spain and the United States and the High
Level Bilateral Defence Committee ensure bilateral coordination and

cooperation in the area of defence.

Together with Washington, we can empower a broader vision of Transatlantic

relation in areas of security that include Iberoamerica and the African continent

alongside Europe, Canada and United States. A new framework would allow us

to face more effectively our shared threats and risks, such as terrorism, illicit

trafficking and organised crime. Spain could play a key role in this due to its

geographical position, good relations and diverse but close ties with the

Americas and Africa.

This new vision would provide new solutions for bringing both shores of the

Atlantic closer together. It would also contribute to dealing with security issues

affecting both sides of the Atlantic. Illegal immigration in particular must not

become an uncontrolled phenomenon; and we must work together to combat

drug-trafficking, guarantee energy supplies and improve air and sea traffic.

**_Russia, European strategic partner_**

Russia, as a major Eurasian power, should reaffirm itself as a strategic

European partner. Its prominence in the world, its energy resources, important

trade relations and its proximity to the EU make Russia a primary reference

point in the design of Spain‟s security. The Government fully supports the active

participation of Russia as a global partner and as an EU and NATO strategic

partner in a common space of peace and stability, to the benefit of Europe and

of global governance.

Russia will be particularly significant in the years to come for European security

in strategic regions, such as the Caucasus and Central Asia. Tension hotspots

are foreseeable in these unstable regions, where Russia plays an important role

18


-----

due to its historical, political and trade ties. A priority objective for all the parties

involved is the establishment of a closer relationship between the EU and

Russia, based on mutual trust and dialogue, and from which to address these

issues.

**_Iberoamerica, a common destiny_**

Iberoamerica constitutes a common space with Spain, and has had a shared

destiny. It is of fundamental strategic importance for our country. As an

emergent region, with economic and political powers of first magnitude, it plays

an increasingly visible role in the regional and world stage, such as in the G20.

Based on strengthened bilateral relations and more solid regional clusters,

Spain will continue working to create deeper and more constructive ties

between Iberoamerica and the EU, which are essential for global governance.

Spain maintains historical, cultural and political relations of singular importance

and depth with the countries of this region. Economic exchanges -which must

continue to be supported- and strategic investments by Spanish companies in

this area favour the mutual economic growth, stability and security that are

important to us all.

This shared road is also strengthened by a common language; a wealth shared

not only with Iberoamerican society, but also with the United States, which has

a Spanish-speaking population greater than that of Spain. This facilitates

cultural exchanges, the work and business interests of our citizens throughout

the entire continent and will have a huge political and economic impact in the

future. Migratory flows between Spain and Iberoamerica have moved in both

directions throughout history and created new bonds that deepen the human

dimension of the relationship and our shared interests.

The region has gone through very positive changes in the last decade, such as

the consolidation of democracy and economic growth. Some countries still find

themselves in a precarious situation and need political support and economic

assistance to secure democracy and correct social inequalities. Institutional

weakness, the power of criminal groups, illegal immigration and human

19


-----

trafficking pose important challenges to security, including security in Spain. The

Iberoamerican Summits provide a unique and privileged forum to debate these

and other issues.

**_Our Southern neighbourhood_**

The peace and prosperity of the southern Mediterranean shore remains

essential to our security and to that of Europe. These countries are

characterised by young societies (60% of the population is under the age of 25)

aspiring to changes that will improve their future. Based on the conviction that

development will promote peace and security, Spain and the European Union

will contribute to their democratic, economic and social development in accord

with the needs and expectations of their people.

With two Autonomous Cities in the North of Africa, Spain is also present in this

region. The Maghreb is a priority zone for Spain, due to its geographical

proximity and the historical and human ties on both shores. Another priority

zone is the Eastern Atlantic, where the Autonomous Community of the Canary

Islands is located. Important challenges must be met in collaboration with all

countries in the area: strengthening democracy and the rule of law,

consolidating a dynamic and inclusive economic and social model, regulating

and controlling migration, combating terrorism and drug-trafficking, stabilising

energy flows, and a negotiated, fair and definitive solution to the Western

Sahara issue, with the approval of the UN.

Bilateral relations are not enough in this region. Spain must also foster, and if

necessary reform, wider cooperative frameworks, especially in connection to

regional integration. These would include the Union for the Mediterranean

(UpM), the European Neighbourhood Policy, and fora such as the “5+5

Initiative” or NATO‟s Mediterranean Dialogue.

As for the Middle East, a fair and lasting agreement between Israel and a

Palestinian state is indispensable. It would contribute to regional and global

security, and eliminate the breeding ground for the spread of radical Islam.

Spain has been and will continue to be one of the most active players in the

20


-----

dialogue and search for solutions through the international organisations in

which it participates. We will also work alongside the UN and the EU to ensure

that Iran complies with international rules and regulations as it develops ties, in

a stable and constructive manner, with neighbouring countries and the

international community.

**_Africa, key to Spanish security_**

Africa is becoming an undeniable reality for Spain in the global and regional

context, for humanitarian, economic, environmental and security reasons. This

culturally diverse, demographically dynamic continent has the lowest human

development rates on the planet, and very worrying phenomena such as

uncontrolled immigration and climate change are particularly intense there.

Spain has promoted important bilateral and multilateral social, as well as

economic and institutional strategies to promote development in Africa and

increase security in and around this continent.

Three areas will be vital to Spanish interests in the next decades: the Sahel, the

Horn of Africa and the Gulf of Guinea. We must work with our international allies

in all three places. In the first two, problematic and serious realities converge,

such as illicit trafficking, ethnic conflicts, terrorism, failed States and

underdevelopment. The vastness of the Sahel makes it a key space, as it

provides fertile ground for crime networks and Jihadist terrorist groups under the

nebulous organisation of Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb. Piracy in the Indian

Ocean is a clear example of how the weakness of a State like Somalia can

create insecurity that affects Spanish interests. The political instability in the

Gulf of Guinea States can also generate maritime insecurity and breed banditry,

both of which are very negative for energy supply and trade flows.

**_Spain in Asia_**

During the 20[th] century, world economic and political power was first centred in

Europe and later in the United States; now its gradual shift towards Asia is

generating a new geopolitical order. Neither Europe nor Spain can maintain a

21


-----

detached view of a region that is already decisive for the future, but where

several hotspots exist, such as Afghanistan, Pakistan, North Korea, as well as

others related to the territorial claims of China.

In only three decades, China and India have experienced accelerated growth

and now make their presence and global interests felt. Both are becoming

increasingly relevant international actors in areas where, until recently, they

were barely present, such as Africa or Iberoamerica. China, India and Japan,

play an active role in the security of Asia, where the Association of Southeast

Asian Nations (ASEAN) provides an important stabilising framework.

Economic and political relations with countries of the Asia Pacific basin are now

greater than ever and will only increase. There are Spanish companies located

at the main trade points of the region and which are leaders in their respective

sectors. There is also intense collaboration with security services in strategic

countries like Pakistan, India or Indonesia, and in counter-terrorism and

immigration control with Australia and New Zealand, two main countries of the

Pacific region. Economic and political relations should continue to grow.

**_The UN, NATO and other multilateral fora_**

The UN is an essential source of legitimacy in international actions and the most

relevant forum for world cooperation; its role is vital in order to maintain

international peace and security. Its organs and agencies should be updated in

order to adapt to new times without losing their essence. Spain, as the ninth

contributor and an active member of the UN, is more committed than ever to

multilateralism, which still seems to be our best instrument to move forward in

the 21[st] century.

In the Euro-Atlantic space, NATO, the largest intergovernmental defence

alliance, is essential to security in the region and for specific actions abroad,

such as in Afghanistan. It must keep working to define and implement

responses to today‟s world and create instruments that promote understanding,

stability and peace. In its Strategic Concept, NATO establishes collective

defence, crisis management and cooperative security as its fundamental tasks.

22


-----

Its challenge is to develop these three assignments in a balanced manner, and

with a broad understanding of security.

Likewise, Spain recognizes the value of the OSCE, the only pan-European and

transatlantic organisation, whose concept of security is shared by this Strategy:

multidimensional (political-military, human rights, economic and environmental)

and cooperative. Within the context of a stronger OSCE, confidence building

measures should be encouraged and a new stimulus given to the disarmament

process and arms control.

Spain also actively participates in other multilateral security fora, in areas such

as the environment or transportation. The State will continue to support and

promote the participation of Spanish civil society in these contexts.

Our presence in the G20 and the Financial Stability Board gives Spain a leading

role in laying the foundations of a new economic and financial order that should

also serve to establish a safer global context. This is proof of our commitment

and international recognition for being at the front line of the innovative effort

required in today‟s world.

23


-----

**The Alliance of Civilizations**


The Alliance of Civilizations is an initiative for inter-cultural understanding and

co-existence, to help counteract the underlying causes of potential conflicts,


and thereby contribute to peace.


Its objectives are:



- To reinforce mutual understanding among different cultures, reaffirming


reciprocal respect and recognition.



- To counteract the influence of those who promote intolerance and


confrontation.



- To promote the idea that security cannot be compartmentalized and that


global cooperation is essential for world stability and human development.


Co-sponsored by Spain and Turkey, it became a UN program in 2005 and now

over one hundred countries and organisations constitute its Group of Friends.

The Alliance of Civilizations has encouraged national and regional plans that


should be increased and strengthened in coming years.


24


-----

### Chapter 3. RISK MULTIPLIERS

Global phenomena in our societies today can spread and transform the threats

and risks we face, thus increasing our vulnerability. These phenomena affect

the threats and risks, but in many cases they also provide the necessary

instruments to counter them. As explained in the strategic lines of action

outlined in the next chapter, it is necessary to take advantage of the new

opportunities these phenomena offer in order to tackle the threats and risks we

face.

THE EFFECT OF MULTIPLIERS

SPREAD

RISKS  AND

RISK MULTIPLIERS THREATS

TRANSFORMATION

#### Globalisation´s drawbacks

Globalisation is a defining feature of our times. Its impact has been and still is

positive to a great extent. The increased international flows of people,

information, goods and services have facilitated the spread of knowledge and

greater economic growth all over the world. Hundreds of millions of people are

being incorporated into the global economic system and leaving poverty behind.

Many are heard who once had no voice. A new global middle class has

emerged that can act as a stabilising element.

Spaniards have enjoyed the benefits of globalisation and will continue to do so.

Technology and communications have improved the quality of our lives and

have put the world within our reach. Our companies export to the five

25


THE EFFECT OF MULTIPLIERS

SPREAD

RISKS  AND

RISK MULTIPLIERS THREATS

TRANSFORMATION


-----

continents. The door has been opened to global governance mechanisms that

address problems directly affecting us.

Globalisation also has a less positive side. Economic interconnection can

facilitate macroeconomic imbalances and highly contagious systemic crises. It

has increased income inequality, which can cause political and social instability.

Hundreds of millions of new consumers can lead to depletion of resources and

increased competition to obtain them, thus generating conflicts. In such a

context, Spain can be affected by circumstances and events generated in very

distant places.

At the same time, the capacity of States to solve global problems is ever more

limited. For this reason, we should contribute to the creation of global

governance mechanisms that will allow us to cooperate with other States and

international organisations, with new actors in civil society and with private

sector entities, to better manage globalisation´s risks and opportunities. If

globalisation without proper regulation seems dangerous, protectionism and

uncontrolled _de-globalisation_ would be even more so. Likewise, more flexible

and resilient systems are needed to manage increasingly interconnected

economic, institutional and technological systems, which are more effective but

also more complex and vulnerable.

#### Demographic imbalances

According to the UN, world population will reach 7.6 billion people in 2020,

compared to the current 6.9 billion. This demographic growth will occur primarily

in poor countries of the Near East, Africa and certain areas of Asia, and will

generate tensions over resources due to the legitimate desire of these new

population masses to attain the same levels of consumption and well-being as

developed societies. Natural disasters could also cause further convulsions in

these areas.

Growth in these regions already coexists alongside aging populations in Europe

and other developed societies, as well as China, due to low birth rates and

26


-----

increased life expectancy. In Spain, the Short Term Population Projection of the

National Statistical Institute for the 2009-2019 period foresees a deceleration in

the growth rate that will stabilise from 2010 to 2018, reaching a total of 47

million inhabitants in 2019. The imbalance between active and passive

population poses the challenge of preserving social cohesion and Welfare State

models in our country and in much of Europe.

It is likely that the immigrant population will ease this process and help supply

many essential services. Migratory pressures will continue to increase on

Spain‟s borders due to the frustration and lack of opportunities faced by the

dense population of youth in the poorest countries. We have to manage this

phenomenon in an appropriate way in order to sustain the European social

model and generate a high level of competitiveness. At the same time, it can

generate effects such as racism, xenophobia and integration problems, which

must be addressed.

Parallel and simultaneous to this, for the first time in history most human beings

live in cities: more than half of the current world population, compared to only

10% a century ago. In certain areas of Africa, Asia and America, _mega-cities_

are emerging, where refugees of numerous conflicts live alongside one another,

the problems of city life are multiplied, crime increases and groups become

radicalised, especially youth.

27


-----

|Col1|2010|2020|
|---|---|---|


_Source: UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (2008)_

#### Poverty and inequality


Poverty and inequality exclude many human beings from the advances and

possibilities offered by progress. Currently, over 1 billion people in the world live

in conditions of extreme poverty, which, besides being a grave injustice, is a

major barrier to progress and international stability and security. This is the case

in areas of geographical or cultural proximity to Spain, such as the Southern

Mediterranean, Africa or parts of Iberoamerica.


Spain cannot ignore this striking economic inequality between the two shores of

the Mediterranean. Sub-Saharan Africa has been excluded from an increasingly

affluent world to the extent that 23 of the 25 countries with the lowest Human

Development Index are found in this area. Most of the current conflicts are

occurring in Africa, where such dire conditions are a breeding ground for all

kinds of radicalism.


Poverty and inequality also exist in more prosperous regions, including Europe,

where 17% of the population lives at risk of poverty and the 20% of the

28


-----

population with the highest income has five times more than the 20% with the

lowest. One of the objectives of the EU 2020 Strategy is to reduce poverty in the

EU and relieve 20 million people from destitution and social exclusion.

#### Climate change

The variability of global climate in recent years is the result of a very real

process; its impact is already being felt, and it requires immediate responses.

It also poses medium and long-term challenges of particular significance to

global society. Conflicts will arise over scarce resources, the number of climate

_refugees will skyrocket and poverty will be intensified in many societies,_

increasing the weakness of some States as well as the threats to global

security.

Climate change affects all of us, though its effects vary. Spain faces risks

inherent to the Mediterranean habitat, such as floods, droughts, forest fires or

desertification. Our proximity to Africa, one of the areas most exposed to this

phenomenon, may exacerbate the incidence of health problems coming from

that continent.

Climate change is a worldwide phenomenon that ought to be addressed by

coordinating the actions of the different actors involved. Solidarity is needed and

we must all assume our part of the responsibility. In recent years, Spain has

made efforts to mitigate the effects, decrease the danger and limit the impact of

climate change. We have developed legal and planning instruments and have

actively participated in multilateral fora, particularly within the EU and the UN.

#### Technology´s perils

Technology is a growing source of progress. The internet and cellular phones

are part of our daily life; they connect us to the world and create wealth. But

29


-----

they also make us more vulnerable. Technology can create or empower new

threats and risks to security.

With today‟s technology a terrorist group or a hostile country could collapse

traffic in cyberspace and paralyse, for example, the financial system or some

public services. That is why cybersecurity, and its key role with respect to the

infrastructures for the functioning of a country, has become a primary security

concern for all States.

Advances in biotechnology, nanotechnology, genetics or artificial intelligence

open new worlds with countless possibilities that represent great progress for

humankind. Yet they also bring risks and even ethical dilemmas yet to be

identified.

For many years, military technological innovation was the pioneering field and

produced civilian applications of great value; today civilian discoveries and

inventions are often in the lead. It is essential to have a strategic relationship

between the two sectors that benefits security. To fall behind our competitors in

our capacity for innovation would seriously impact our overall competitiveness,

our development and therefore our security.

#### Radical and non-democratic ideologies

In relative terms, the West, with its base in democracy and the supremacy of the

rule of law, has lost some of its influence in the wake of the economic success

of certain authoritarian regimes that do not respect human rights. This might

lead to the emergence of alternative models that might become attractive to

many people in developing countries.

There is the parallel risk that extremist ideologies will impose themselves on

societies that are frustrated with the ineffectiveness of their States, their elites

and the international community in addressing their basic needs. This could

lead to internal social conflicts and the proliferation of violent groups and actions

that could even spread within our society. This radicalism is spurred by our

30


-----

demographic makeup and is easily propagated by new information

technologies, as well as by certain conflicts and the inability of the international

community to solve them.

The complex nature of global society further accentuates the radicalisation of

loyalties and identity claims, whether religious, nationalist, ethnic or cultural,

both within and beyond our borders. These reactions can lead to the

establishment of groups and political organisations that may grow not only in

other parts of the world, but also in certain areas of Europe.

31


-----

### Chapter 4. THREATS, RISKS AND RESPONSES

In today‟s world, classic threats and risks coexist with new ones and others still

unknown. The complex nature of today‟s challenges ads to the difficulty of

guaranteeing the degree of security demanded by 21[st] century societies. In a

future that will probably resemble the past less that we can imagine, unexpected

events will continue to define our security context.

For the purposes of this Strategy, a threat is any event or agent endangering

the security or stability of Spain. Risk is the contingency or probability that a

threat materialises and causes damage. An understanding of Spain‟s vital and

strategic interests and an analysis of the threats and risks that affect them,

along with the existing response capabilities, are the foundations upon which

the guidelines and strategic lines of action necessary for reinforcing Spanish

security and welfare have been elaborated.

#### Domains

Threats and risks occur in certain domains, which require examination and

within which we must operate. There are six specific domains or environments.

In addition to the classic land, sea and air domains, where most threats and

risks have taken place until very recently, others like space, information, and

particularly cyberspace are now vitally important.

The protection of these environments is oriented towards guaranteeing their

free use, without interference from events or agents seeking to prevent or

condition their use. For this purpose it is essential to consolidate and promote

national and international initiatives along with prevention and response policies

in these areas.

**Land:** As the place where citizens live and develop most of their activity, land

constitutes the core domain of this Strategy. This is where most threats and

risks appear and are dealt with. It includes the national territory and any land

spaces where Spanish interests can be found and where threats and risks could

arise that directly concern Spain or international security and peace.

32


-----

**Sea: Due to the geographical discontinuity of the national territory and because**

90% of Spanish imports and 65% of its exports pass through our ports, maritime

protection is of primary significance. Maritime surveillance and security should

involve effective integration of civilian and military means at the national and

European levels. Spain must encourage international initiatives aimed at

ensuring safe means of communication (transportation, undersea cables and

gas pipelines) for the supply of basic resources, as well as improving the

governance of maritime spaces.

**Air: Airspace is a primary security issue, not least because air traffic continues**

to increase. Adequate control of Spain‟s airspace is essential to guarantee the

free movement of people and goods within the national territory as well as

internationally. We must protect national airspace against aggressions or

violations from other States or from terrorists, which can be carried out using

aircraft and ballistic or cruise missiles, which might even carry weapons of mass

destruction.

**Space: Space is a common heritage of humankind and may not be**

appropriated by any State. It provides the setting for many infrastructures and

has different civilian, commercial, military and security uses (often involving

satellites), which are of great relevance to security.

**Cyberspace: It is the virtual space shared by users, communication networks,**

web pages, fora, Internet services and other networks. Human-made space, it is

a unique domain in terms of security: with no geographical borders, it is

anonymous, asymmetric, can be used almost clandestinely and does not

require travel. In addition to the Net, it also incorporates cellular phones,

terrestrial television and satellite communications.

**Information: The free flow of information is essential to daily life in our society.**

Interruptions, manipulations or illicit use of the media or of the flow of

information can seriously endanger security.

33


-----

#### Armed conflicts

Spain could be affected by, or engaged in, armed conflicts related to national or

transnational threats against our territory, citizens, interests or values. Global

interdependence has decreased the probability of classic armed conflicts

among States. Most violent conflicts are now intra-State and are related to failed

States, illegal activities of State and non-State actors, inter-ethnic and cultural

tensions, and competition for scarce natural resources. In many cases, their

consequences spill over their borders.

The global dimension of security makes it necessary to apply a comprehensive

approach to present-day conflicts in faraway places. This includes diplomacy,

the military, police, intelligence and development cooperation. As one of its

fundamental commitments, Spain will continue working to protect those who are

most vulnerable and to prevent the resurgence of conflicts, as has often been

the case in recent years in places like Afghanistan or the Middle East.

In the current economic context, it is especially important to rationalize

expenses in line with the threats and risks we face. This calls for a coordinated

effort with our partners and allies to optimise existing European instruments,

pool capabilities and make better use of the limited resources available.

In the coming years Spain may have to participate in different types of armed

conflicts, in which the role of the Armed Forces will be essential. Our partners

and allies may not be directly involved in some of these conflicts. Our

geographical location, including the two Autonomous Cities and other territories,

and our history could directly affect the Spanish territory, citizens or interests.

Therefore, we should maintain our own defence capability.

Spain may have to participate with its allies and partners in conflicts that directly

concern our interests, due to a direct threat to the security of our territory, our

citizens or Spanish, European or Western interests. Such participation may

result from the ties between us, as well as the interests and obligations of

mutual defence that we share with our EU and NATO partners and allies or

others with whom we maintain strategic bilateral relations.

34


-----

Likewise, and not excluding the above, our participation might also derive from

Spain‟s commitments in international organisations such as the UN and the

OSCE. They could lead our country into multilateral participation in

peacekeeping, civilian protection or other operations that might not affect our

interests but could derive from our shared values, yet complying always with the

United Nations Charter.

In any case, Spain‟s military missions abroad will be developed with the proper

Parliamentary control and according to the United Nations Charter, as

established in the National Defence Law 5/2005, and by a proportionate threat

or use of force.


**International commitments**


The United Nations Charter stipulates among other binding principles, the

settlement of international disputes by peaceful means, refraining from threats

or the use of force, and supporting the UN in any action it undertakes. Member

States will accept and carry out the decisions of the Security Council, which is

responsible for taking the appropriate steps to maintain and restore international


peace and security, under Articles 41 and 42.


The North Atlantic Treaty basically establishes two obligations for its 28

Members. In accordance with Article 4, they will consult together whenever, in

the opinion of any of them, the territorial integrity, political independence or

security of any ally is threatened. In accordance with Article 5, an armed attack

against one of them shall be considered an attack against them all, and

consequently, each ally will assist the Party or Parties attacked. This

commitment to collective defence (only in the area defined in Article 6) is


essential for the security and defence of Spain and Europe.


The European Union Treaty establishes the competence of the Union in the

Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), and lists the obligation of

Member States to consult each other on any issue that is of general interest in

this field. The Treaty of Lisbon includes the obligation of mutual defence among

35


-----

the 27 countries, which is outlined in Article 42.7. The modalities of application

must also be developed for the Solidarity Clause set out in Article 222 of the

Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), by which the Union

and its Member States will act jointly in the spirit of solidarity if a Member State

is the object of a terrorist attack or the victim of a disaster. Both provisions

include the possible use of military means.


**Strategic lines of action**

Peacebuilding is a basic axis of the Spanish security policy and is based on the

threefold approach of conflict anticipation and prevention, conflict management

and resolution, and post-conflict peace consolidation. Therefore, it involves

actions before (to avoid), during (to resolve) and after (to restore normality and

create conditions that would prevent recurrence) a conflict.

A comprehensive approach should serve to prevent wars, to manage crises and

to establish lasting peace. Given the likely increase of peace missions, Spain

must endow itself with the appropriate military and civilian means.


**The Armed Forces and their capabilities**


Given the foreseeable constraints on public resources in the coming years, we

should prioritize the consolidation of inter-operable Armed Forces, able to

provide rapid deployment of expeditionary capabilities. As a European and

Atlantic ally, Spain‟s Armed Forces must continue their transformation process


to effectively address the complex strategic scenario we face.


In carrying out the missions established by the Constitution and the National

Defence Law, the Armed Forces contribute militarily to the protection of the

territory, citizens and national interests of Spain and its allies, within the

framework of our international agreements, and contribute to international

peace, security and humanitarian assistance. In addition, the Armed Forces will

be in a position to cooperate with Public Administrations to preserve the

36


-----

security and welfare of our citizens in situations involving emergencies or


exceptional needs.


Given the complexity of our strategic environment and the wide range of tasks

to be carried out, the Armed Forces must be multi-functional, deployable,

flexible and inter-operable. They should be able to act with synergy and

coordination at three levels: between the Air Force, Army and Navy, with the


Armed Forces of our allies, and with civilian elements.


Participation in international missions, which could take place in any phase of a

conflict, also requires expeditionary capability. Specifically, forces must be

deployable at a great distance from the national territory and sustainable for a

long period of time with the appropriate logistical support. Likewise, they should

have the necessary level of availability for timely deployment, be

technologically advanced for effective completion of the assigned tasks and


logistically efficient to ensure flexible and effective operational support.


**The Civil Guard and the Police,**


**major assets in international missions**


The Civil Guard (Guardia Civil) and the Police, as Armed Entities and part of

the State Security Forces, are key actors in international missions. Their role is

increasingly significant and valued by our allies and the local populations in

which they operate. It deserves continued support and development.


The tasks and police training to which these forces contribute are essential for

the comprehensive approach required by new contexts involving insecurity.

They have already participated in completed missions and will take part in

future ones. Both forces carry out crucial and valued tasks such as criminal

investigation, border control or training of similar forces in States undergoing

re-construction and consolidation processes. The Civil Guard is recognised

among the few existing European gendarmeries as having particularly useful

capabilities in unstable contexts.


37


-----

Anticipation and prevention of conflicts should always be the first objective.

Investments in creating stability and security before a crisis erupts are not only

less costly, but also more effective. This requires all the means inherent to a

comprehensive approach. Diplomatic and intelligence activities are central to

foreseeing a crisis. In addition to our external action service, the work of the

National Intelligence Centre and the Armed Forces Intelligence Centre are

crucial. We must continue strengthening capabilities for early detection,

especially in complex scenarios. Deterrence is complementary to anticipation

and prevention. Any potential aggressor must be made aware of the fact that

the consequences of starting a conflict would far exceed any potential gains.

Spain‟s membership of international organisations, the availability of military and

non-military means and the firm and decisive will to employ them when

necessary are factors that provide adequate deterrence.

It is essential to ensure a response capability. Spain must have the capability to

react against any aggression to its interests, those of its allies within the

framework of signed agreements or in support of the international peace and

security. It must do so with a comprehensive approach, with the appropriate

combination of military and civilian means. In a context of limited resources and

within the European framework, Spain should ensure its own appropriate and

properly prioritized military and civilian means for handling diverse scenarios.


**The** **industrial and technological base of defence and security**


The industrial and technological base associated with security and defence

constitutes a key element in our response capability in the face of threats and

risks. The Armed Forces, the State Security Forces and other agents

responsible for security within a comprehensive approach need a reliable,

competitive and autonomous supplier whose functioning and activity responds

to the strategic guidelines for security and defence established by the National


Government.


The effective application of security guidelines requires the adequate

organisation of industrial and technological capabilities, as well as the

38


-----

mobilisation of the necessary financial and material resources.


A comprehensive and crosscutting concept of security requires the inclusion in

its strategic definition of the institutional authorities responsible for industrial

policy, key industry players and university scientific-technological research


centres.


This industrial and technological basis for comprehensive security is not limited

to the provision of systems, assets and equipment to security authorities. Much

of the resulting technological development and innovation will find other


applications that will benefit society at large.


**Integrated External Response Unit (URIE)**


A strategy based on a comprehensive approach to conflict prevention, crisis

management and peace consolidation requires the participation of civilian

elements. Judges, prosecutors, police forces, experts in disaster management

and civilian protection, physicians, fire brigades, engineers or experts in

logistics, prisons and gender contribute to these situations in an exceptional


way, usually in synergy with the military.


The EU Civilian Capabilities Objective identifies six priority areas for civilian

crises management: strengthening the rule of law, police, public administration,

civilian protection, monitoring and surveillance, and support for EU Special

Representatives. The UN has initiated a reflection process to improve the

capabilities of Member States and thus provide civilian personnel to its


integrated missions.


A number of countries are creating inter-ministerial units, some of which have

an assessment and planning function, in order to boost these capabilities by

training, recruiting (which involves developing data bases, incentives, and


regulations) and deploying units, as well as compiling the lessons learned.


Until now, Spain has not been able to develop its full potential as a civilian actor

due to the lack of an appropriate agency. To address this shortfall, an inter
39


-----

ministerial Unit will be created for the swift and effective deployment of civil

servants and others with expertise in specialized areas. The Unit will explore

the possibilities of incorporating existing structures in this field and personnel

from the regional Autonomous Communities, or groups such as reservists and

retired personnel from the Armed Forces, the Civil Guard, the Police, the


Justice Administration, the Ministry of Economy and Finance and other bodies.


It will contribute to foreign missions where national or multinational civilian

personnel may be required for conflict prevention, peacekeeping or peace

consolidation, electoral monitoring, civilian protection, consular emergencies or

humanitarian assistance. Through co-participation with military forces, the Unit


should promote civilian-military coordination.


This initiative will make Spain a more effective and committed actor by

expanding the range of available instruments and speeding up State responses

to international emergencies that affect the security of the citizens and interests


of Spain, Europe and the societies concerned.


40


-----

#### Terrorism

Terrorism directly threatens the life and security of our citizens, seeks to

undermine our democratic institutions and puts our strategic interests,

infrastructures, critical supplies and services at risk. To prevent, impede and

defeat domestic or transnational terrorism, is both a national and a European

priority.

Terrorism carried out by ETA has been a scourge to Spain for more than forty

years. The maturity and strength of Spanish society, the unity of democratic

political parties, the effectiveness of the State Security Forces and the

intelligence services, together with international cooperation have brought us

closer than ever to the end of ETA. The only path left to ETA is to

unconditionally renounce violence or its end by police and judicial means.

International terrorist organisations, especially Al-Qaeda-type Jihadist

movements, benefit from certain features of the new global society, such as

technological developments or ease of movement, to recruit members, obtain

resources, execute attacks and kidnappings and multiply their impact.

The perception of Spain as a target for international terrorism could increase, for

reasons such as:

  - Spain‟s increased participation in international missions.

  - The insistence of Islamic fundamentalist groups on including Spain in

their Islamic proselytism and recruiting project, pushing for a Muslim Al
Andalus that disappeared over five centuries ago.

  - The proximity to the Maghreb, which is subject to considerable and

conflicting demographic, political, and economic forces, and violent

extremism.

  - The existence of failed States, a serious concern in the Sub-Saharan

area due to its relative geographical proximity to the Spanish coasts, and

one which facilitates the development and activities of terrorist groups.

41


-----

  - The possible „contagion‟ of radical ideologies to population groups from

troubled areas who have settled in our country, particularly second

generation residents.

  - The growing interconnection of organized crime activities with the actions

and methods of terrorist groups.

**Strategic lines of action**

Spain has dealt with national terrorism for over forty years, and more recently

with international terrorism, which revealed itself in the terrible attacks of March

11, 2004. We thus have ample experience dealing with both types of terrorism,

with more and better means and intelligence. This, together with the

determination and persistence of its citizens and institutions, and robust

international cooperation, are essential to opposing and confronting the

objectives and demands of terrorists.

The means for combating terrorism have notably improved with measures such

as:

  - Consolidation of the principle of „immediate availability‟ of counter
terrorism and intelligence data.

  - The entry into force of the EU solidarity clause (Article 222 of the Treaty

on the Functioning of the EU), under which the Union and its Member

States will take joint action if a Member State is the object of an attack,

including a terrorist attack.

  - The establishment of the National Counter-Terrorism Coordination

Centre with the participation of the State Security Forces, the National

Intelligence Centre and National Prison Institute, in cooperation with the

Police Forces of the Autonomous Communities and similar entities in the

EU, its Member States and other strategic allies.

  - Involvement of the judicial system in order to reinforce the effectiveness

of State punitive actions against terrorism, with a criminal law policy to

42


-----

prevent attacks, international judicial cooperation and measures against

activities for financing terrorism.

  - Development of the joint Counter-Terrorism Operational Plan for the

State Security Forces, with the participation of regional and local police

forces, and which foresees the cooperation of the Armed Forces in

surveillance and protection of critical infrastructures and strategic

objectives in specific situations and threat-levels.

  - A significant increase in human, material and economic resources for the

counter-terrorism units and services of the State Security Forces. Since

mid-2004, the number of Police and Civil Guards has increased 40% and

a robust counter-terrorism network has been created abroad.

  - Empowering the National Intelligence Centre to counter terrorist threats

and promoting informative and operational cooperation with similar

bodies in other countries.

  - Development of specific plans and resource allocation for the prevention

and response to nuclear, radiological, biological and chemical attacks

(NRBC), as well as for security in national and international transport and

effective control of external borders.

  - Development of a specific prison policy for terrorists, particularly Jihadist.

  - The participation of Spain in international missions, notably the

Afghanistan mission which, among other achievements, is preventing the

Afghan territory from being used as haven for terrorist actions against our

territory and interests and those of our neighbours.

Neither ETA nor Jihadist terrorism has the capability to destabilize the rule of

law or democracy in our country. However, the possibility of attacks and the

severe damage they can cause require an integrated strategy for prevention

and response within, and complementary to, the EU framework.

This counter-terrorism strategy must always be based on respect for human

rights, the rule of law and the exercise of freedom and constitutional

43


-----

guarantees. These principles and values are the inalienable foundation of our

freedom and welfare, and ultimately, the foundation of our security. They are

also what terrorists seek to undermine through attacks intended to spread social

alarm and provoke responses that are not in line with our values, in order to

feed their discourse. A policy of assistance to the victims of terrorism has been

recognized as a decisive contribution in the fight against terrorism.

The goal of this counter-terrorism strategy is to keep Spain –its citizens,

institutions, companies, organisations, interests and infrastructures– safe and

protected from any attack and its consequences. It should also contribute, in a

manner that is effective and solidary, to EU security and that of the international

community. Based on these objectives, the main lines of this strategy are:

  - Anticipating the development of terrorist actions against Spain and any

other EU or allied country. This requires increasing the coordination of

the services that integrate our intelligence community and cooperation

with the European Union, its Member States and other allies.

  - Prevention by acting on the different factors that increase threats and by

engaging the entire population, especially those groups exposed to the

infiltration of terrorist ideology. It is essential to work at bridging the gap

and decreasing the polarisation between our societies and the Arab
Muslim world, by supporting the moderate elements and isolating the

most radical ones.

  - Protecting Spanish citizens and interests, implementing the necessary

plans, legal frameworks and public and private resources to ensure

safety for everyone and the resilience of the strategic sectors and

activities that could be affected by a terrorist attack.

  - Ensure that the different security bodies are provided with the necessary

operational and legal resources and are ready to respond to any

contingency at any time.

Regarding the terrorism of ETA, our strategy will remain steadfast in the same

principles that have guided all of Spain‟s democratic governments:

44


-----

  - Consensus and political firmness against its attacks and objectives,

undermining the support for ETA offered by certain minority sectors of

Basque society.

  - Strengthen and support State counter-terrorism work and intelligence

services, in cooperation with the regional police.

  - Political, judicial, police and intelligence cooperation in the international

arena, especially with France and countries where terrorists seek refuge

or logistical support for their activities.

Each line of action in the fight against terrorism will be developed into specific

plans, without prejudice to those already in existence.

45


-----

#### Organised crime

Organised crime is one of the most serious threats to the security of our State

and its citizens. Its various forms can become a factor that destabilises the

political and economic foundations of Spanish and European society. Of

particular concern are drug, weapons and human trafficking, economic crime,

money laundering, the smuggling of legal or illegal goods, technological crimes

and counterfeiting.

Its increasing connection with terrorism, violent groups and local crime tends to

strengthen both threats. Organised crime can corrupt institutions, generate

illegal economic activity and harm legitimate trade and tax collection.

Public awareness of organized crime is clearly insufficient. This type of crime is

opaque and often hides behind legal economic activities that do not attract

public debate as terrorism does. The UN estimates that organised crime

accounts for 10% of the world GDP.

This figure illustrates not only the extent of the activities and profits of organised

crime, but also its ability to access all sorts of means and instruments to evade

State action, especially that of the intelligence services and the police. The

International Monetary Fund (IMF) estimates the total volume of money

laundering by organised crime at between 2% and 5% of global GDP. One EU

study estimates the total sales of illegal drugs to be at least €100 billion per

year.

**Strategic lines of action**

To respond to this threat Spain has undertaken a series of measures in recent

years that are aimed at:

  - Improving information and intelligence systems against organized crime

in its different forms. The Intelligence Centre against Organized Crime

(CICO) has been created with criminal intelligence and operational

coordination functions. It integrates the National Police Force and the

46


-----

Civil Guard, with the participation of Regional Police, the Customs

Surveillance Service and the Armed Forces as needed.

  - Establishing new operational units, such as the Central Unit for Economic

and Fiscal Crime, to investigate different forms of economic crime and

Internal Revenue fraud, in addition to corruption in urban development. In

the territorial sphere, Groups and Teams for Response to Organized

Crime (GRECO and ECO) have also been created, including experts

from the Police and the Civil Guard.

  - Increasing human, material and technological resources for the

specialised units against organised crime.

  - Enhancing police, intelligence, customs and judicial collaboration and

cooperation at a national level, and with intelligence services abroad.

  - Giving the Special Prosecution Office against Corruption new

competencies, extending to organised crime of particular relevance.

These advances will complement each other in three ways:

  - Enhancing the resources and intelligence capabilities of the Centre for

Intelligence against Organised Crime. A committee will be created to

coordinate with the specialised services of the State Attorney General‟s

Office and other Public Administration bodies.

  - Improving the coordination between national and international

organisations, through communication with the police and intelligence

services from other countries, and by reinforcing inter-institutional

cooperation. Joint operations with the EU will allow access to data and

information and will facilitate exchange with other specialised services.

  - On-going adaptation and improvement of the required legal instruments

in order to effectively combat all forms of organised crime.

47


-----

#### Financial and economic insecurity

Economic security is integral and essential to national security. A sustainable

economic model is the basis of social stability and provides the resources

necessary for security. It is the responsibility of the State and economic agents

to ensure market integrity, the resilience of the financial system, the security of

trade, and to promote balanced economic growth.

The threats and risks to economic security can result from: the functioning of the

State itself, public or private macroeconomic imbalances, destabilizing or illegal

actions by economic agents, poor functioning of supervisory bodies, or other

external causes. They can have their origin in economic interdependence,

market imbalances and volatility, speculation, systemic financial crises, failures

in critical infrastructures, or in criminal activities. Lack of economic security and

the outbreak of systemic crises can generate nationalism or economic

protectionism. The rapid growth of emergent economies and the competition for

resources could affect their normal supply and/or lead to abrupt price increases.

**Strategic lines of action**

The dynamic nature of a market economy brings with it unavoidably a degree of

instability that must be managed, in addition to addressing potential threats and

risks. The following courses of action are therefore necessary:

  - Promote sustainable economic development:

     - Develop a growth model that minimizes public and private

imbalances, encourages productivity and competitiveness, fosters

sectors with high-added value, creates quality jobs and maintains

sound public finances over the economic cycle, as well as price

stability.

     - Ensure social cohesion and fair income distribution, which are pillars

of national and international stability and economic growth.

48


-----

   - Promote an open international economy, with free trade and a stable

and functional investment system.

- Mitigate market imbalances:

   - The economic and financial crisis that began in 2007-2008 has again

demonstrated the importance of preventing and correcting the effects

of market failures. The _normal functioning of the system and some_

actions of economic agents, even if legal, can generate disturbances.

Mitigating them requires effective regulation and supervision, which

should incorporate economic and social agents. The financial system

is particularly important due to its systemic risk.

- Combating criminal activities:

   - In addition to imbalances generated by the legal functioning of the

system, there are also threats derived from financial crime. It is crucial

to combat organised crime´s money laundering.


**The role of the private sector in security**


The role of the private sector is crucial, since many private companies own or

manage services and infrastructures linked to security. Companies have the

responsibility to protect the areas that fall within their competency; therefore,

their responsibilities should be identified and assigned. Associations and

public/private protocols must be developed to coordinate services and

infrastructure security. This is also in the interest of the companies themselves

for a number of reasons: first, due to the costs that these security threats could

represent; second, because the companies themselves have become direct

targets; and third, because insecurity does not create a climate conducive to

economic activity. The private sector can provide important capabilities, such as

global presence, technological expertise and economic, material and human

resources. A recent example of this can be seen in the private security firms


that are protecting ships from piracy in the Indian Ocean.


49


-----

- Progress in economic governance within the EU and globally:

   - The EU, the major world economic block alongside the United States

and China, has been the motor driving the growth, stability and

economic security of Spain. It has opened markets and enabled us to

diversify our economy. It has also encouraged reforms, which have

made our growth sustainable. The Euro has been an anchor of

stability and has attracted investment.

   - Spain must continue contributing to an effective economic and

financial governance of the EU that ensures sustainability and the

proper functioning of the Economic and Monetary Union, as well as

the strength of the Euro. To this end, it should actively cooperate in

the construction of a European economic government, with common

instruments and coordinated economic policies. Spain must also

comply with the Stability and Growth Pact, the objectives of the

“Europe 2020 Strategy” and other jointly established criteria that

define EU macroeconomic cooperation. It should also support the

work and independence of the European Central Bank (ECB),

guarantor of price stability in the Euro zone, and the proper

functioning of the European financial system, in collaboration with the

European System of Central Banks, the European System of

Financial Supervisors and the European Systemic Risk Board.

   - It is also necessary to establish supervisory and regulatory

mechanisms that guarantee effective global economic and financial

governance, such as those proposed by the G20. Spain participates

as a permanent guest of the G20, which has become a key forum for

policy coordination and for addressing economic and financial crises,

such as the one that has taken place since 2008.

- Enhance the international economic presence of Spain:

   - Spain‟s economic strength, and therefore its security, depends largely

upon our ability to defend and project abroad Spanish economic

interests and those of our companies. That is why it is crucial to

50


-----

strengthen Spain´s presence in international fora and institutions, and

support Spanish firms and entrepreneurs in international markets.

   - Within the domestic sphere, and in line with what has been done in

other countries, a Financial Intelligence System (SIE) will be

established to analyse and provide relevant, timely and useful

economic, financial and business information to support the actions of

the State and enable better decision-making. This System will make

knowledge sharing easier, create synergies, avoid redundancy and

facilitate the adoption of common positions within the Public

Administrations. In close cooperation with the different economic

actors, it will contribute to State security tasks by helping to identify

and prevent actions that are contrary to Spain‟s economic, financial,

technological and commercial interests in strategic sectors.

   - Economic interdependence makes Spain more prosperous, but also

more vulnerable. Doubts regarding our standing may have

repercussions in the markets, particularly in times of uncertainty or

crisis. Countering this effect involves promoting the “Spain” brand with

on-going strategic action and communication efforts, to which both

State and private firms should contribute. It is necessary to maintain

the difficult balance between protection of strategic information and

transparency, since a lack of information can generate unjustified

uncertainty and lead to a worse perception than reality justifies.

   - The security implications stemming from the presence of foreign

companies in critical services and infrastructures should be properly

managed, in a way that respects EU legislation and international

norms without hindering direct foreign investment.

- Ensure the capability of critical economic and financial services:

   - Some economic and financial services and infrastructures are

essential for the normal functioning of the country. It is sufficient to

imagine what would happen should, for example, credit cards or inter
bank transfers stopped working for 24 hours. Increasing technical

51


-----

complexity, natural disasters or criminal activities pose threats that

must be managed. Information exchange should be intensified

between regulation and supervisory authorities and private operators;

more contingency and business continuity plans are needed against

financial and operational risks; and a map of risks, capabilities,

experts and best practices should be developed.

- The security of infrastructures and financial services is the

responsibility of the private entities themselves, as well as of public

authorities. The Financial Stability Committee (CESFI), composed of

the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the Bank of Spain and the

National Stock Market Authority (CNMV), is responsible for the

coordinated development of preventive and action plans in the area of

financial stability and prevention, as well as crisis management.

52


-----

#### Energy vulnerability 

Energy supply is essential for the functioning of the economy and society.

Energy security is thus a key element of our overall security. Worldwide, the

current energy model is difficult to sustain in the medium and long term. Both

the guarantee of fossil fuel supply and its price could be exposed to significant

tensions in this decade. Contributing factors include the high demand from

emerging economies and the concentration of oil and gas deposits in politically

unstable areas, such as North Africa or the Middle East, which will undergo

important changes in the next few years. Environmental factors should also be

considered, such as the risk of disasters while extracting reserves that are

difficult to access and the need to reduce world CO2 emissions.

This situation is a serious concern for countries with a high degree of energy

dependence such as Spain, where oil accounts for almost half of the primary

energy we consume and natural gas accounts for nearly one fourth. We depend

on other countries for 74% of our primary energy. Coal, which we support as a

strategic reserve for economic, social and self-sufficiency reasons, will

contribute to reduce our energy dependence if technological solutions are

developed to reduce its polluting emissions. Renewable energies already

contribute to this end, and will do so increasingly.

SPANISH PRIMARY ENERGY COMSUMPTION, 2010

NATURAL GAS

OIL

NUCLEAR

RENEWABLES

COAL

53


SPANISH PRIMARY ENERGY COMSUMPTION, 2010

NATURAL GAS

OIL

NUCLEAR

RENEWABLES

COAL


-----

Our energy dependence has serious implications for security. Any major

disruption of supply -for example, due to a serious international geopolitical

event- could have repercussions in strategic sectors. To these supply risks we

must add the possible threats to the energy system infrastructures and transport

networks that could arise from natural disasters, terrorist attacks or

cyberattacks.

**Strategic lines of action**

Spain is addressing with determination both the energy risks affecting its

security and its commitment to reduce CO2. The lines of action to do so are: to

diversify energy sources and supply, by increasing substantially the contribution

of renewable energies to our energy mix; energy savings and efficiency; market

liberalization; and the development of infrastructures.

In order to expand its energy sources beyond fossil fuels and nuclear energy,

Spain has made a strategic move toward renewable energies, which is already

paying off. In 2010 renewable energies accounted for one third of electric power

generation and more than 11% of primary energy consumption. We are among

the world leaders in wind and solar energy.

Promoting energy savings is a priority, with the double objective of reducing

external dependence and improving our energy intensity, and thus our

competitiveness. Additional responses to our energy vulnerability include the

diversification of energy sources and the use of alternative transportation fuels.

The use of public transport will also be encouraged and the quota for rail freight

transport will be increased. Likewise, different forms of energy storage will be

enhanced by increasing the installed hydraulic pumping capacity and gas

storage.

Finally, guaranteeing the security of energy supply is essential. To this end,

Spain has located regasification plants at different ports, diversified the sources

of fossil fuel supply, and limited the maximum quota of natural gas from a single

supplier country.

54


-----

Spain also has a robust and operationally flexible national system of energy

transportation networks, an effective management regime for its strategic oil

reserves, and plans to channel demand in the event of supply disruption or

shortage, in coordination with the International Energy Agency.

The best guarantee of energy supply, security and quality for our country is a

fully integrated European electricity and natural gas market. Spain will therefore

remain fully committed to a European energy policy that encourages

interconnections among Member States, particularly between the Iberian

Peninsula and the rest of Europe.


**Supply lines and networks**


A large part of our energy resources reaches the national territory by sea, in

ships or by gas pipeline. Therefore, guaranteeing our control of maritime space


and reinforcing it if necessary, is a priority.


Ensuring energy supply also involves guaranteeing the service of critical energy

infrastructures: the natural gas system, the oil transportation and distribution

system, and the electric power system, mainly the eight nuclear reactors under

the control of the Nuclear Security Council (CSN), and some thermal and


hydraulic power plants.


These infrastructures have been identified as strategic assets to security in the

Critical Infrastructure Protection Plan, since their functioning is absolutely

necessary and does not offer alternative solutions. Therefore, it is necessary to

guarantee their security, equipping them with redundant and independent


systems from other technologies and operators.


55


-----

#### Proliferation of weapons of mass destruction 

The proliferation of nuclear, radiological, biological or chemical weapons of

mass destruction and their launching systems, and the risk of their falling into

the hands of terrorists ready to use them, is a major threat of our time both to

the international community and to Spain.

Spain works against proliferation and towards a world free of nuclear weapons.

This path is full of obstacles, including the nuclear programs of North Korea and

Iran. The Iranian case deserves particular attention: the International Atomic

Energy Agency (IAEA) has repeatedly indicated that its nuclear program has

many aspects that raise concern and that are hardly consistent with an

exclusively civilian program. It could unleash a nuclear proliferation race in the

Middle East and the Mediterranean.

The threat could further increase if some States improperly exploit the peaceful

use of nuclear energy for civilian purposes, as expressed in in the Nuclear Non
Proliferation Treaty (NPT)

Biological weapons and agents have some unique features. Apart from being

lethal, they can spread by contagion and are difficult to detect in their early

stages, which makes them very dangerous and destabilising. Chemical

weapons are also very powerful and some of them are easy to acquire and

hide, since many of their components have other uses.

It is widely known that Al-Qaeda and related groups seek nuclear material,

especially radiological, biological and chemical materials, as they are more

affordable. Such materials could be obtained by theft or clandestine purchase.

We must remain alert to the evolution of politically unstable areas, such as the

Sahel or Central Asia, where illegal trafficking networks and _Jihadist_ terrorist

cells can be found.

56


-----

**Strategic lines of action**

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction requires preventive work in

several areas. Spain and other countries are concerned with nuclear,

radiological, biological and chemical weapons or dangerous agents, and will

work within the framework of the UN and the European Strategy against

Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction.

We aspire to a world without nuclear weapons, which is no small task. Spanish

adhesion to the NPT in 1987 defined our policy in this matter: to renounce

nuclear weapons, to prohibit their transit through national territory, to combat

proliferation and to pursue global nuclear disarmament. Spain supports

initiatives such as the elimination of fissile material for weapons or the

establishment of Nuclear Weapons Free Zones. We are also signatories of the

Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, both for civilian or military purposes.

We firmly support the Proliferation Security Initiative, the Global Initiative to

combat Nuclear Terrorism, and the Nuclear Suppliers Group, whose main

objective is to guarantee that uranium trade for peaceful purposes will not be

diverted towards nuclear weapons proliferation. The Nuclear Security Summit

held in Washington in 2010 increased the commitment of States to safeguard

and protect nuclear materials and facilities as a new pillar in international non
proliferation policies. Spain advocates introducing a verification regime in the

Biological Weapons Convention.

Spain supports efforts to restrict the proliferation of medium- and long-range

missiles, which would allow the launching of weapons of mass destruction from

great distances. Missile defence capabilities must also be developed. We

embrace NATO‟s doctrine for harmonising minimum nuclear deterrence with

disarmament commitments. Negotiations between the United States and

Russia, who together possess 95% of the world‟s nuclear arsenal, offer a

hopeful outlook that should be extended to other nuclear powers.

As a member of the most relevant fora, Spain will promote the universal

application of the prevention regimes for the proliferation of missiles and

associated technology. It will continue to develop national measures to prevent

57


-----

the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their launching systems

through the effective control of their export, transit, transport, and re-export.

Likewise, it will adopt all measures necessary to fulfill UN resolutions on

weapons sanctions and embargoes and EU legislation on the control of exports

of military equipment, as well as the export, transfer and transit of dual use

goods.

Spain‟s participation in NATO‟s Missile Defence Program is an adequate

backup measure to the efforts being carried out against the proliferation of

launching vectors for weapons of mass destruction. The proliferation of ballistic

missiles is a growing threat to NATO´s Member States and requires an

adequate collective defence capability. With the aim of expanding the protection

system to the population, the territory and the Armed Forces of all European

members of the Alliance, Spain will participate in shaping this program to extend

it beyond deployed troops, and will benefit from it.


**The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)**


As the UN High Level Group already warned in their 2004 Report on threats,

challenge and change, the “erosion of the non-proliferation regime” is the most


serious threat to international peace and security.


The absence of certain countries from the 1968 NPT generates regional

instability and could challenge global security. This is the case with India and

Pakistan, both of which possess nuclear weapons and are outside the control of

the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA); of Israel, with its ambiguous

nuclear statute; and of North Korea, which has withdrawn from the NPT after


carrying out nuclear and ballistic missile tests.


It was acknowledged at the 2010 Review Conference that complying with the

“grand bargain” between nuclear and non-nuclear countries, upon which the

NPT is founded, and guaranteeing the sovereign right to nuclear energy without

promoting proliferation risks, continue to be two of the greatest challenges for


the international community.


58


-----

#### Cyberthreats

Cyberspace and information and communication networks are a source of new

possibilities for citizens and governments. They facilitate the provision of widely

used services, such as search engines, e-mail and the management of many

private infrastructures and services along with a growing number of Public

Administration services. They have become indispensable, which makes their

protection, resilience and vulnerability issues of vital importance.

Cybersecurity is not a mere technical aspect of security, but a key axis of our

society and economic system. Given the increasing importance of information

systems in the economy, much of the country‟s stability and economic

prosperity will depend on the security of our cyberspace.

It could be affected by technical causes, natural phenomena or illegal attacks.

Cyberattacks are a growing threat with which possible aggressors - terrorists,

organized crime, companies, States or isolated individuals – could disrupt

critical infrastructures. Estonia in 2007, Georgia in 2008 or Iran in 2010 offer

precedents illustrating how the loss of the operational status of infrastructures

through cyberattacks can cause severe damage to a country. Cyberspace has

also become a domain for espionage by criminal agents and other States.

While Spain is as exposed as any other country to cyberattacks by terrorists, by

other criminals and even by other States, the most widespread attacks are

commercially motivated. Collection of personal information and data on the

Internet, often to be sold to third parties, is increasingly worrisome. Apart from

the economic cost, it generates a loss of trust among citizens regarding the use

of electronic payment systems, which could have a negative effect on the

economy.

There are legal and technological factors that increase the chances of

cyberthreats. Among the first is the absence of common legislation and global

security that would facilitate more effective defensive action. Technologically,

the Internet was created to be useful and simple, not to be safe. Growing

electronic interconnection necessarily includes critical infrastructures, supplies

59


-----

and services, but increases the level of risk they are exposed to. Anonymity and

difficulties in tracking cyberattacks also hinder their elimination.

Spain is an important hub in many networks; hence, guaranteeing security in

this area is especially important for our country. Efforts must continue to

increase awareness and education regarding risks, to reinforce specific policies

and security procedures in the information and communications systems of

citizens, companies and institutions, and to reduce reliance on security

technology from third countries.

**Strategic lines of action**

Improving security in cyberspace implies strengthening legislation without

threatening privacy, and promoting cooperation between the public and private

sectors. Voluntary or mandatory certification systems are already being fostered

and contingency plans are being developed.

In addition, it is necessary to increase risk awareness in Public Administrations,

companies and citizens, improve national and international cooperation, map

risks and compile lists of experts, resources and best practices.

In this area, Spain has reinforced the security of the infrastructures and

electronic services of Public Administrations, equipping them with their own

network for internal communication and coordination with European institutions

and those of other Member States. More than 18 million electronic identification

documents have been issued, thus providing citizens with safe electronic

identification and signature, and placing us at the forefront of global efforts in

this field.

The State has several bodies that ensure preventive and response capabilities

against cyberthreats, including the National Cryptographic Centre (CCN), the

Armed Forces, and the National Centre for the Protection of Critical

Infrastructures. The National Communications Technology Institute (INTECO)

promotes appropriate use of and trust in the services that make the information

society possible.

60


-----

The main companies and technical operators for essential supplies and services

also have their own security resources in this area. Entities such as the National

Electricity Grid (Red Eléctrica), the National Gas Company (ENAGAS), the

Spanish Airports and Air Navigation Authority (AENA) or the Spanish Railway

Infrastructures Authority (ADIF), as well as the financial sector, all have

redundant control centres and contingency plans for ensuring that their systems

remain operative.


**Prevention and Response Organisations**


The National Cryptologic Centre (NCC), under the National Intelligence

Centre, has had since 2007 its own response capability for incidents

related to information security. The main response tool against


cyberthreats is the Computer Emergency Response Teams (CERT).


The NCC-CERT prepares handbooks and instructions, offers support and

coordination and trains national, regional and local Public Administration

personnel. It also certifies product security, grants security accreditations to

systems, promotes national security development based on best practices and

provides information on vulnerability, alerts and warnings of new threats to


information systems.


There are other national, regional or private CERTs in Spain. The INTECO
CERT develops services in order to raise citizen and company awareness and

disseminate best practices for information security, prevention and response to

security incidents. The IRIS-CERT has the mission of protecting the RedIRIS


and the national academic and research network.


Ensuring our security in cyberspace and in information and communication

networks calls for more national means and better coordination, with measures

aimed at:

  - Investing more in security technologies and the training of specialised

personnel.

61


-----

  - Consolidating and expanding the courses of action established in the

National Critical Infrastructure Protection Plan.

  - Developing the National Security Scheme (which will establish a security

policy for the use of electronic means), reinforcing its application and

performing audits to verify the security of the Administration systems.

  - Devising a „risk map‟ and catalogues of experts, resources and good

practices.

  - Supporting the development of private national companies in this

strategic sector, where reliance on foreign firms could be dangerous.

  - Promote education on cyberspace use and security.

  - Increasing training and awareness regarding the development and safe

use of information technologies, with initiatives like INTECO‟s already

created Security Office for the Internet User (OSI).

  - Promoting the use of security standards and certification of information

and communication products and systems, in the public and private

sectors.

The development of a safe cyberspace can give our country a competitive edge.

If Spain can present itself as one of the safest countries in this field, firms from

around the world will locate here confident that they are operating in a protected

environment. This calls for a comprehensive approach to cybersecurity, with the

participation of the various CERTs (NCC, INTECO, RedIRIS), coordinating the

initiatives of the various organisations with responsibilities in this area, and the

telecommunications, hardware, software and service providers. Spain is a world

leader in telecommunications and should use that position for this purpose.

At the international level, it is necessary to:

  - Foster cooperation to develop agreements on cyberarms control, as has

been done with nuclear weapons.

  - Combat cyberthreats at a European level by expanding and consolidating

existing means. In 2004, the European Network and Information Security

62


-----

Agency (ENISA) was established for the double purpose of achieving

greater security in EU networks and information, and facilitating the

development of a network and information security culture for the benefit

of society as a whole.

- Standardize criminal law for EU Member States in areas such as illegal

access to all or any part of information systems, intrusion, disruption,

obstruction or damage to an information system, or illegal access to its

data.

- Expand the fight against cybercrime beyond the EU, given the global

nature of networks and information systems.

- Improve our system in line with what has been outlined by NATO strategy

and doctrine in this area. Allied efforts have developed an agreement

regarding the concept and future implementation of a cyberdefence

policy and the establishment of a Management Authority and a Security

Incident Response Centre.


**Espionage**


Aggressions by States, groups or individuals, with the goal of obtaining

information for political or economic gain have been a constant feature in

history and continue to be a first-magnitude threat to our security. Espionage

has adapted to the new security scenario, taking advantage of the

possibilities offered by the new information and communication technologies

and the globalisation process. Cyberspace intrusions to obtain information


are becoming increasingly common and unsettling.


Economic espionage is particularly important and consists of unlawfully

obtaining information, patents, critical technologies, and even illegal

influence on political decisions of an economic nature. Its potential impact

is increasing due to its capacity to damage the economic system and affect


the welfare of citizens.


63


-----

Espionage is a real and constantly evolving threat. Its clandestine nature

makes it almost invisible, but the impact of these covert actions can have very

negative effects on security. We must take action to address the activities of

foreign intelligence services and groups or individuals who threaten or violate

the rights, liberties and well-being of Spanish citizens, the sovereignty,

integrity and security of the State, the stability of its institutions, or our national

interests. In line with neighbouring countries, Spain will work to strengthen the

State‟s human and technological intelligence and counter-intelligence


capabilities.


64


-----

#### Uncontrolled migratory flows

Migratory flows have always existed, but their present intensity and

characteristics, together with the causes and possible consequences of illegal

immigration, make this phenomenon an important security issue.

In this decade, the increase in global population will be concentrated in the

poorest countries, especially in Africa and Asia. Illegal migratory flows are likely

to continue or even increase if poverty, inequality, ethnic conflicts, over
exploitation of natural resources, environmental risks, institutional weakness,

totalitarian regimes and/or armed conflicts persist.

In recent years, Spain has not remained aloof from this phenomenon. We have

shifted from being a country sending emigrants to becoming an immigrant

receptor country with one of the most diverse populations in Europe. While the

economic crisis could slow down the arrival of citizens from Iberoamerica, illegal

immigration from Africa may increase due to our geographic proximity and the

economic, social and political conditions in that continent. Illegal immigration

from Asia to Europe by any route or method will also increase.

The impact of excessive and uncontrolled migratory movements on Spain, as a

destination society or as an external border for entry to the EU, has a variety of

security implications, some of which give cause for concern:

  - Social conflict which, in spite of the plural and open character of Spanish

society, could be exploited by racist or xenophobic groups, especially in

times of economic crisis.

  - The emergence of urban ghettoes, which are one of the biggest threats

to coexistence and social cohesion, may potentially create exclusion

areas that encourage insecurity, violence, or ideological and religious

extremism.

  - Economic exploitation of immigrants by crime organisations through

prostitution, drug rings, extortion, criminal gangs and/or illegal vending or

hawking.

65


-----

  - Destabilisation of certain productive sectors of the national economy due

to the use of an illegal immigrant workforce, which expands the shadow

economy and increases unemployment.

  - Extremist radicalisation around identity issues, lack of integration and

subjection of some immigrant groups to radical and intolerant creeds as a

result of economic vulnerability.

  - The presence of non-nationals, for which there is no information

regarding their true identity and nationality, making it difficult to determine

their numbers or control their activities.

**Strategic lines of action**

Spain has implemented a significant set of measures in recent years to prevent,

control and respond to illegal migratory flows at our borders, which also

constitute a portion of the external borders of the EU.

Important cooperation agreements have been signed with countries in

Iberoamerica, Africa and Eastern Europe for the management of migration flows

and readmission; cooperation actions have been implemented with several

African countries; nine Alien Detention Centres have been set up; and the air

and maritime means of the State Security Forces have been increased.

The prevention of risks associated with illegal immigration requires close

cooperation between Public Administrations, and, when appropriate, with

NGO‟s and the private sector, in order to develop policies like:

  - Fostering legal immigration, according to our demographic and labour

needs, and in line with our reception capacity.

  - Encouraging cooperation with countries of origin and transit to foster their

development, promote paths for legal immigration and prevent illegal

migration at its origin.

  - Law enforcement and preservation of public safety, to help combat

organized crime, illegal immigration and human trafficking networks, and

66


-----

to prevent certain groups from taking advantage of or attracting

immigrants for illegal ends.

- Effective control and surveillance of access to Spain‟s external borders,

within the framework of the EU Integrated Management System for

External Borders.

- Social integration, by continuing with the efforts of the 2007-2010

Strategic Citizenship and Integration Plan. This integration policy should

promote spaces of coexistence and support the most vulnerable

immigrants. We must also encourage responsible management by

immigrant communities of their own interests within a context of shared

political and social interests. This in turn ensures respect for the rule of

law and the open, plural and democratic values of Spanish society.

- Defence and protection of fundamental human rights, in order to combat

all forms of intolerance, racism and xenophobia, endorsing the objectives

put forward by the Alliance of Civilizations and improving dialogue with

the religious organisations of immigrant populations, especially with

Islam.


**A shared immigration strategy**


The undesired potential effects of migratory movements are a risk shared by all

EU countries, especially when it comes to illegal migration. Spain will continue


encouraging the development of a common EU immigration policy, aimed at:



- Ensuring an effective management of migratory flows and fair treatment


for third country nationals legally residing in Member States.



- Preventing and combating illegal immigration and human trafficking, as


emphasized in the Treaty of Lisbon.


Spain considers it a priority to develop the political objectives and strategic


guidelines of the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum.


67


-----

#### Emergencies and disasters 

Despite technological and social advances, natural risks continue to plague

humankind and produce disasters such as the earthquake in Haiti, the floods in

Pakistan, hurricane Katrina, or certain illnesses like malaria. Disasters can also

be man-made, such as the Chernobyl nuclear disaster, or result from a

combination of both, as was the case with the tsunami and subsequent accident

at the Fukushima nuclear power plant in Japan.

Spain is no stranger to natural threats and risks. The most widespread and

almost endemic ones are floods and forest fires. Earthquakes and volcanic

eruptions are also possible and could cause substantial human and material

losses, as the earthquake in Lorca shows. We have been exposed to accidents,

some of which have had serious environmental consequences, such as resulted

from the sinking of the oil tanker _Prestige. As an industrialised country,_

technological risks could also affect us.


**Environmental Risks**


Adverse meteorological conditions can endanger the security of citizens.

Draughts, floods, storms, wind storms, heat waves or cold fronts have always

existed and can now be even more intense due to climate change. Other

disasters, which combine weather conditions and environmental degradation,


such as landslides, forest fires or the spreading of epidemics, can also be fatal.


A proactive approach based on the establishment of early warning and

protection systems for prediction and prevention have consistently reduced the

number of victims. This contrasts with the increased economic loss associated


with these and other types of risks, which correlates with increased wealth.


Other risks that deserve ongoing attention by national and international

institutions are accidents involving dangerous substances or genetically

modified organisms, land and water contamination, unsustainable use of water


resources or the spread of pathogen and chemical agents by air.


68


-----

The responsibility of Spain in civilian emergencies also has a European

dimension. The “solidarity clause” in the Treaty of Lisbon requires Member

States to provide mutual assistance if any Member is the victim of a natural or

human-caused disaster or terrorist attack.


**Health Risks**


Illnesses, and especially pandemics, pose a great challenge to our economy,

security and welfare. In addition to known illnesses, new illnesses such as

severe acute respiratory syndrome have appeared; and others which we

thought had been eradicated are re-emerging, such as tuberculosis. Illnesses

such as foot and mouth disease or swine flu can cause huge damage to


national economies.


Facing pandemic risks requires adherence to readiness and response plans.

Coordination between national authorities, regional authorities and international

organisations such as the World Health Organization (WHO) or the European

Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) is essential. During a

pandemic, the communication strategy plays a key role for both citizens and


health professionals.


**Strategic lines of action**

Civilian protection is the area where cooperation between national, regional and

local authorities and governmental institutions is most intense. The National

Civil Protection System articulates the means to respond to different types of

civilian emergencies within the framework of the National Crisis Management

System, which must be redesigned in light of the priorities established in this

Strategy.

69


-----

**Emergency Military Unit (UME)**


The UME is the First Intervention Unit of the Armed Forces, designed to

contribute to citizen security and welfare in the event of serious risk, disaster,

catastrophe or other public need, anywhere in the national territory. It is

available to cooperate with the national, regional and local governments. Its

territorial deployment at seven military bases across Spain allows for rapid


intervention throughout the national territory.


Its main task is to act in emergencies derived from natural (earthquakes,

floods, forest fires or adverse winter weather) or technological risks. If needed,

it can assimilate and coordinate the participation of other Armed Forces Units

or be assigned to manage other State, regional or local entities, in the event of


emergencies declared to affect the national interest.


The UME has carried out over 90 operations since 2007. Its first action abroad

was in the aftermath of the January 2010 earthquake in Haiti, within the


integrated Spanish response to alleviate the suffering of the Haitian people.


Spain has procured itself with substantive preventive, natural and technological

risk management instruments. Spain‟s new Land Law makes risk assessment

compulsory in urban planning, in order to limit certain land uses in potentially

dangerous areas. We also have at our disposal scientific and technical bodies

such as the National Geographical Institute and the Geological and Mining

Institute of Spain. This is complemented by the State Meteorological Agency‟s

effective warning system for adverse climatic events, and flood and earthquake

warning networks.

As with natural hazards, our country has institutions and specific regulations for

industrial accidents and the transit of dangerous goods. Of special interest are

those related to nuclear security and radiation protection, which are the

responsibility of the Nuclear Security Council, as well as emergency plans,

70


-----

population warning systems and domestic warning networks, such as the

Radiation Alert Network.

Significant progress has been made in maritime rescue and marine pollution

response. Spain has equipped itself with better operational means, through the

Spanish Maritime Safety and Rescue Agency (SASEMAR), and improved

operational protocols.

Finally, our National Health System, which coordinates the systems of the

National State and regional governments, has an effective epidemiological

warning network that is connected at a European level and with the World

Health Organization. It also maintains other networks, such as the Biological

Warning Laboratory Network, and a specific action plan for health emergencies

resulting from epidemics and pandemics, working in tandem with the Spanish

Food Safety and Nutrition Agency (AESAN).

The lines of action and improvement in this area involve enhancing the legal

framework for civil protection, revising the current Law, which dates from 1985,

and emphasizing prevention, inter-administrative coordination, adequate

support for local civil protection and citizen participation. It also calls for

improved international cooperation, particularly with the EU or other

organisations with responsibilities in this matter, such as NATO.

It is also important to promote a culture of prevention among citizens, establish

cooperation programmes between State and regional authorities for mapping

risks, and improve instruments for cooperation and coordination among the

various Public Administrations dealing with environmental disasters. However,

we should also consider our contribution to better European integration in this

matter or to enhancing the EU policy on humanitarian aid to third countries.

71


-----

#### Critical infrastructures, supplies and services

Natural hazards, terrorist or cyberattacks, and other threats and risks discussed,

can damage critical infrastructures, supplies and services, which sustain our

lives and the development of our society. We must protect and ensure their

normal operation to avoid damaging the welfare and economy of an advanced

country like ours.

The ownership or management of these critical areas has been shifting from the

public to the private sector, and this trend will continue. Therefore, the response

to any contingency requires a joint effort by public institutions and the relevant

companies in order to guarantee the protection of such a large and complex

network.

Apart from the critical supplies and services already mentioned, such as energy,

communication networks and finance infrastructures, other relevant

infrastructures include transportation, water, health and food.


**Transport network**


Efficient mobility of people and goods is a decisive factor for competitiveness,

territorial balance and welfare. Ensuring the security and integrity of transport is

therefore a priority responsibility of both the Public Administrations and private


operators.


Risks can vary from illegal acts or accidents to natural disasters. Spain also has

particular features which, if not well managed, can make us more vulnerable.

Among these are our peripheral geographical location, proximity to shipping

lanes with heavy oil tanker traffic such as Cape Finisterre and the Strait of

Gibraltar, the very high level of inland freight transport by road, inadequate rail

connections to ports and major logistical centres, and limited land transportation


connections with the rest of Europe.


Increasing the security of our transport network involves reinforcing

infrastructure protection and improving access control systems to prevent illicit

72


-----

traffic. It also requires a more integrated transport network, an increase in the

transport of goods by rail, improved access to key logistical centres, more land


connections with Europe and the development of marine highways.


**Water and security**


Water scarcity can generate or aggravate tensions or conflicts in many areas of

the world. Ensuring quantity and quality of water supply to the growing world

population is one of the great challenges of the 21[st] century; one with serious

implications for security. Due to its geographical location and climate, Spain is

a country historically affected by water problems, with cyclical droughts, floods,


torrential rains, and rivers generally carrying low volumes of water.


To meet this challenge, our country already has a large storage and water flow

control capacity through dams. New national and EU regulations have also

been proposed to consolidate a model of integrated water management based

on natural hydrographical basins. Water management has been improved

through various plans and actions for risk areas, such as dam and reservoir

security, flooding, droughts, water quality, and especially prevention of


contamination.


Security of water supply involves greater efforts at efficient and sustainable

use, measures for management of demand, water-saving technologies 
especially in agricultural irrigation - and water treatment and re-use. Spain is

one of the world´s leading countries in water treatment, purification and


desalination technologies.


Spain has established a National Critical Infrastructure Protection Centre

(CNPIC) and approved a National Catalogue of Strategic Infrastructures, as well

as a first plan for protecting them. Protection and action plans to ensure

functioning have also been developed.

73


-----

To improve the resilience and recovery capability of these critical assets, further

progress is required in:

  - Consolidation of instruments for the protection of facilities.

  - Better regulation of the critical sectors, introducing safety standards.

  - Establishing measures to increase their strength, resilience and ability to

adapt to adverse conditions.

 - Ongoing dialogue and cooperation between Public Administrations and

operators of infrastructures and services.


**The effect of a volcano**


The violent, April 2010 eruption of the Eyjafjallajökull volcano in Iceland

disrupted the airspace of virtually the entire European continent. Ash clouds

several kilometres high forced several major airports to close. Up to 20,000

flights a day were cancelled and the air chaos spread to other continents.

This example illustrates how the growing complexity of critical infrastructures

and services introduces new and greater vulnerability factors in our lifestyles.

Systems with greater resilience and recovery capabilities are needed to


address these challenges.


74


-----

### Chapter 5. AN INTEGRATED INSTITUTIONAL MODEL

The Spanish Security Strategy defines the pillars on which a comprehensive

and effective response to the complex security challenges of today's world must

be built. The dynamic context of security and the responses that are necessary

require both a progressive transformation of the organisational structures that

direct and coordinate the security of our country and a review of the existing

legislation upon which security is based.

The overall analysis contained in this Strategy leads to the following general

conclusions, which justify priority organisational changes:
```
- The challenges and complexities of today's security make it necessary to

```
overcome the compartmentalization, duplication and overlapping of policies

and existing institutional frameworks. The aim is to build a more integrated

vision of the various factors affecting security and of response mechanisms,

in order to ensure a more coordinated and effective management of them.
```
- It is necessary to improve inter-ministerial coordination, as most ministries

```
are in some way involved in security. This requires enhancing the capacities

of the President of the Government´s Office for the coordination and

leadership of security management.
```
- To ensure the development of this Strategy, the implementation of the

```
strategic lines of action defined should be monitored and evaluated

periodically.
```
- The collaboration and cooperation of all actors participating in the

```
preparation of this Strategy, from Public Administrations to private

companies and civil society, is essential to guarantee our security.
```
- Security cooperation with the regional Autonomous Communities will be

```
particularly promoted.
```
- This Strategy will be reviewed at least every five years, and whenever

```
circumstances demand it. These reviews should involve a consultative

process at all levels.

75


-----

It is necessary to promote organisational changes at the highest level of the

State, to ensure the implementation, management and monitoring of this new

integrated security approach.

For that purpose, the following structure will be developed:


**President of the**

**Government**


**Spanish Security Council**


**President of the**

**Government´s Office**

**Spanish Security Council**

**Support Unit**


Spanish Security Council

In the current institutional map there is no collegial body with executive

capacities to carry out the decision-making, advisory, recommendation,

monitoring and controlling functions necessary to coordinate the security tasks

as defined in this Strategy.

Although there is a core of institutions more directly related to security, all

ministerial departments are closely involved with security at different levels.

Their role will vary depending on circumstances.

76


-----

It is necessary to establish a single political body with the highest

responsibilities with regards to presidential counseling and crisis management.

It should incorporate relevant Ministers and senior officials and facilitate a

coordinated response to the various challenges highlighted in this document.

For this purpose, a Spanish Security Council will be created.

H.M. the King will chair the Spanish Security Council at least once a year. The

Council, which will convene both regularly and when required by circumstances,

will usually be chaired by the President of the Government, who may delegate

this duty to the First Vice President. The Council configuration will vary

according to the needs of the issues at hand, with the participation of relevant

Ministers, as well as the Chief of Defence Staff and the Director of the National

Intelligence Centre. The Director of the President of the Government´s Office

will act as Executive Secretary. Other senior officials and experts may be

requested to attend as needed.

Inter-ministerial Committees

The work of the Inter-ministerial Committees will be of particular importance,

given the many areas considered in this Strategy to be related to security. They

will be composed of representatives of the various ministries and will support

the Spanish Security Council as necessary. Their focus will be on specific

working areas and precise tasks.

Spanish Security Council Support Unit

The Spanish Security Council will have a Support Unit which will act as an

operational and counseling body, assisting the President of the Government in

the coordination and leadership of this area, providing support in crisis

management and in monitoring this Strategy. The Spanish Security Council

Support Unit will comprise a multidisciplinary team that reflects the wide scope

of the Strategy. It will count upon the staff of the President of the Government´s

Office and of the Department of Crisis Infrastructure and Monitoring (DISSC),

which will be reformed along with the current Crisis Management System to suit

the new needs identified in this Strategy.

77


-----

Social Forum

As an advisory body, its aim will be to bring together representatives of the

Public Administrations, field experts, academics, researchers, universities,

specialized institutions, business firms and social organisations to carry out joint

analyses on security matters.

Regulatory reforms

All of the above highlights the need to incorporate a security dimension to future

regulatory developments and to update existing normative instruments. This

effort is essential if we are to truly implement the comprehensive security

concept described in this Strategy, and is of particular relevance to norms

related to crisis management, civilian protection, safeguarding of official

documents and secrets, and emergency and disaster planning.

Other initiatives

This Strategy mandates some other specific operational initiatives in various

areas to ensure our security:

 - Creation of an Integrated External Response Unit (URIE) for the

deployment of Spanish civilian experts in national and multinational

missions abroad, conflict prevention, peacekeeping, emergencies or

humanitarian aid. It will increase Spanish civilian capabilities and a civilian
military approach, making Spain a more effective and committed

international actor.

- Development of an Economic Intelligence System (SIE), in collaboration with

the private sector, for collecting and analysing economic, financial and

business information relevant to security, detecting and preventing acts

against our interests, and supporting the action of the State and better

decision-making in this area.

78


-----

- Establishment of a Coordinating Committee to further strengthen the fight

against organized crime and coordinate the various specialised bodies of the

Public Administrations in this area.

- Coordinated design of the second-level strategies necessary for the

deployment of this Spanish Security Strategy, including a National

Cybersecurity Strategy.

79


-----

### LIST OF ACRONYMS

(AED) European Defence Agency (EDA)

(AENA) Spanish Airports and Air Navigation

(AESAN) Spanish Food Safety and Nutrition Agency

(ADIF) Railway Infrastructures Authority

(AIE) International Energy Agency (IEA)

(AOD) Official Development Aid

(ASEAN) Association of Southeast Asian Nations

(BCE) European Central Bank (ECB)

(CCN) National Cryptologic Centre

(CERT) Computer Emergency Response Team

(CESFI) Financial Stability Committee

(CICO) Centre for Intelligence against Organised Crime

(CIFAS) Armed Forces Intelligence Centre

(CNCA) National Counter-Terrorism Coordination Centre

(CNI) National Intelligence Centre

(CNMV) National Stock Market Authority

(CBAN) Spain-USA High Level Bilateral Committee

(CNPIC) National Centre for the Protection of Critical Infrastructure

(CSN) Nuclear Security Council

(ECDC) European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control

(EES) Spanish Security Strategy

80


-----

(ENAGAS) National Gas Company

(ENISA) European Network and Information Security Agency

(GSN) Nuclear Suppliers Group

(IAEA) International Atomic Energy Agency

(IDH) Human Development Index (HDI)

(IGTN) Global Initiative to combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT)

(INE) National Statistics Institute

(INTECO) National Communications Technology Institute

(ISAF) International Security Assistance Force

(NRBQ) Nuclear, Radiological, Bacteriological and Chemical Defence Plan

(ONU) United Nations (UN)

(OSI) Security Office for the Internet User

(OTAN) North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)

(PCSD) Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP)

(PESC) Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP)

(PIB) Gross Domestic Product (GDP)

(PRT) Provincial Reconstruction Team

(PSI) Proliferation Security Initiative

(SASEMAR) Spanish Maritime Safety and Rescue Agency

(SEAE) European External Action Service (EEAS)

(TFUE) Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU)

(TNP) Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)

(TPCEN) Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT)

81


-----

(TUE) Treaty on European Union (TEU)

(UME) Emergency Military Unit

(UE) European Union (EU)

(UpM) Union for the Mediterranean

(URIE) Integrated External Response Unit

82


-----

