SWEDISH GOVERNMENT BILL 2004 / 05:5
# Our Future Defence

– The focus of Swedish defence policy 2005–2007


-----

Production: Swedish Ministry of Defence

Graphic design: Typisk Form designbyrå

Printed by EO Print, Stockholm, October 2004

Paper: Scandia 2000

Item no. Fö2004.03


-----

## TABLE OF CONTENTS

**Introduction** **5**

**Security policy starting-points** **6**

The UN 7

The EU 8

NATO / PFP 8

Peace-promoting efforts 9

**The focus of Swedish defence policy** **10**

**Developments in Swedish military defence** **12**

New planning instructions for
the Swedish Armed Forces 13

International capability 14

A network-based defence 14

The issue of personnel supply is central to
Sweden’s defence reform 15

A new national service training system 15

Officer training 16

Personnel costs and downsizing 16

Reserve officers 17

Gender equality in the armed forces 17

Voluntary defence organisations 18

Military equipment issues 18

Research and technical development (RTD) 18

National niches 19

International cooperation 19

Support to the Swedish export trade 20

Decommissioning 20

VÅRT FRAMTIDA FÖRSVAR


-----

The basic structure of the Swedish Armed Forces 20

Reduced expenditure 21

The most important changes 21

Joint total defence authorities 28

**Further development of overall crisis preparedness** **29**

Conscripts completing civilian national service 30

A new set of funding principles
for crisis preparedness in society 31

International civilian peace-promoting,
confidence-building and humanitarian operations
– civilian aspects of crisis management 31

**Financial management in expenditure area 6:**
**Defence and preparedness against vulnerability** **32**

**Frameworks for expenditure area 6:**
**Defence and preparedness against vulnerability** **33**

The financial framework 33

Reduction in appropriations 33

**Regional consequences** **34**

**Some examples of measures to be implemented in Öster-**
**sund, Arvidsjaur, Karlstad / Kristinehamn and on Gotland** **35**

Assignments given to certain county administrative
boards / county governors 35

Special contact persons 35

The Regional Location Committee 35

Funding for research and innovation 35

State-owned companies 35

Funding to municipalities 36

Property and establishment issues 36

**Some examples of measures targeted specifically at:**

Östersund 36

Arvidsjaur 36

Karlstad / Kristinehamn 37

Gotland 37


OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

## INTRODUCTION

The overall aim for the Swedish Armed Forces is to be able to
defend Sweden and Swedish interests against current and possible
future armed threats. Achieving this demands a modern and flexible operational defence. This is why the work to implement the
defence reform started in 1999 is now continuing. More resources
will be earmarked for actual operational capability and less for
administration.
Military defence is a key resource in an active Swedish foreign
and security policy, aimed at peaceful and sustainable development
in the world through the promotion of democracy, human rights
and social justice.
Today's threats and conflicts are not restricted to a single country or region. They produce ripple effects and have an impact on all
of us. By participating in international operations for peace and
security in the world, Sweden also enhances its own security.
The same military forces that are to protect Sweden in the event
of changes in the world around us must have the equipment, preparedness and capability to support international crisis management where and when necessary. We must be able to react rapidly
in order to prevent or stop conflicts at an early stage. In this way
we can save more lives.
In order to meet the threats of today and tomorrow – threats that
are more or less common to all of us – we shall continue to develop
our cooperation with other countries, not least through the EU.
Sweden shall have a modern defence to ensure the security of
the Swedish population both in Sweden and in the world at large.

_Leni Björklund_
Minister for Defence

OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

### SECURITY POLICY STARTING-POINTS

Large-scale, significant changes continue to characterise the world
around us. Since the beginning of the 1990s, international tension
has decreased both in Sweden’s immediate surroundings and globally. On the other hand, other threats and challenges have grown
stronger. These are often complex and more difficult to anticipate
than previous threats of armed attack.
Wider European integration, in particular as a result of Estonia,
Latvia, Lithuania and Poland joining both the EU and NATO, has
decisively strengthened Sweden’s security. Despite this positive
development, there are serious, transboundary threats to our security. These must be assessed in a wider perspective and not just
nationally. They can best be met through international cooperation
and multilateral solutions. Strengthening our capacity to participate in international projects and crisis management efforts will
promote international peace and security for Sweden, the EU as a
whole and the world at large.
There is much to indicate a continued high number of international conflicts. The need for conflict-prevention and other international crisis management efforts is expected to increase further.
Since 1990, war has claimed nearly four million lives, 90 per cent
of which have been civilian casualties. Over 18 million people have
been driven from their homes by conflict. The UN, the EU, OSCE,
NATO and other regional organisations are at the same time taking
a greater responsibility for international crisis management and
the number of multilateral efforts is increasing.
Globalisation and internationalisation continue to foster increased interdependence among the different peoples and countries of our world. Interdependence, despite being basically positive for peace and stability, also makes society more vulnerable and
sensitive to disruption. The nature of threats to peoples and countries has changed as have their implications. It is no longer possible

**6** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

for countries to safeguard their security in isolation from the
development of the rest of the world. The technical infrastructure
and increased mobility that characterise and underpin our open Swedish security
society are becoming increasingly transboundary and therefore
constitute part of our common vulnerability. and national
The nature of threats and conflicts also has an impact on the EU independence,
and Sweden. Both Sweden and Europe face new threats that are on
the one hand more multifaceted but on the other less predictable. ty in our immeThese threats and challenges come from regional conflicts, the diate vicinity,
break-up of states and unions, organised crime, the proliferation of -  strengthen
weapons of mass destruction and terrorism. Terror attacks in the
USA, Spain, Indonesia, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and Russia have had security.
a considerable impact on the development of global security policy
and forms of international cooperation. Through conflict prevention

Swedish security
policy aims to:

- preserve peace
and national
independence,

- promote stability and security in our immediate vicinity,

- strengthen
international
peace and
security.

efforts and conflict management in the relevant areas, the world can
help stabilise the situation and hence restrict the effects of conflict.
Looking to the future, it is more apparent than ever that security is more than just the absence of military conflict. Threats to
peace and our security can best be averted collectively and in
cooperation with other countries. The primary expression of this
conviction at global level is our support for the United Nations. As
a member of the European Union, we are part of a community created in and characterised by solidarity, whose primary purpose is
to prevent war on the European continent. An adequate defence
capability is a central component of Swedish security policy.
Sweden is making active endeavours to promote disarmament and
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

THE UN

The UN has the ultimate responsibility for maintaining international peace and security. Currently (2004) the UN is leading
dozens of peace-promoting operations involving a total of about
50,000 people. Sweden has shown its commitment in concrete
terms by participating with troops in UN operations in the
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and Liberia. In DRC, about
90 military personnel were deployed as an airfield unit as part of
the UN MONUC mission and another 90 as part of the EU’s Artemis
rapid reaction force.
About 240 military personnel are deployed as a mechanised rifle
company as part of the UN’s UNMIL force.

OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

THE EU

Development of a common European security and defence policy is
changing the prerequisites of Sweden’s own defence policy. The
European Union is central to Sweden’s security. EU enlargement
has strengthened security throughout Europe. To meet the different threats and challenges of today, the EU must be more active,
however, and develop early and rapid reaction capabilities. As a
result, it is in the interest of both Sweden and the other EU member states to increase the EU’s crisis management capabilities. The
focus should now be on Sweden making a tangible contribution to
the EU’s capability and making rapid reaction resources available
for international crisis management operations.
There is widespread solidarity among EU member states. It is
important for Sweden that the new European Treaty promotes this
solidarity still further. If another member state were to be the victim of a terror attack or natural disaster, Sweden must be able to
help by sending humanitarian assistance, making civilian rescue
efforts and if necessary deploying military resources. We can also
expect help from other member states should Sweden suffer a similar fate. The solidarity clause which is part of the new European
constitution reflects the solidarity ingrained in the political
alliance constituted by the union. It is up to each member state to
put this political solidarity into practice and to make decisions on
the national level regarding its own contributions in the event of a
terror attack or other disaster occurring. This is true both for
Sweden as well as for the other member states. The clause also
implies a new dimension to EU security efforts. The content of the
clause is also reflected in the declaration of solidarity among the
member states adopted at the European summit in March 2004.

NATO/PFP

NATO represents the most important forum for security policy
cooperation between the United States and the allied European
states. By agreeing to NATO taking over the responsibility for the
mission in Afghanistan, EU member states have shown that they
are prepared to give the organisation greater responsibility in international crisis management operations outside Europe as well. The
Swedish Government feels there is a need for a strong bond and
close dialogue between Europe and the United States because of
the key significance of American involvement in Europe. The


MONUC
The UN mission
in the Democratic Republic of
Congo (DRC)

UNMIL
The UN mission
in Liberia


OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

Government is of the opinion that Sweden should continue to
develop cooperation with NATO within the framework of the
Partnership for Peace (PFP) initiative. Sweden should also take
existing opportunities to participate in international crisis management exercises with NATO outside the PFP initiative but within
the framework of Swedish security policy.

PEACE-PROMOTING EFFORTS

The need for conflict-prevention measures and crisis management
will in all likelihood increase. The Government feels that Sweden’s
capability to participate in all kinds of peace-promoting operations, from preventive measures to peace-enforcement, should
increase both qualitatively and quantitatively.
Sweden shall contribute to the EU’s capability to make rapid
reaction resources available for crisis management operations.
Particular attention should be paid to the option of participating in
other conflict-prevention and crisis management operations around
the globe, especially in Africa, the Middle East and Asia. The
Government stresses the central importance of effective multilateral cooperation for Swedish security policy.

**PEACE-PROMOTING AND HUMANITARIAN OPERATIONS**

The term ‘peace-promoting and humanitarian operations’ refers to international cooperation in
the event of peace and the safety of human beings coming under threat. Peace-promoting and
humanitarian operations cover:

-  Conflict prevention measures, including the deployment of military resources, to mediate and
prevent the escalation of violence into armed conflicts.

-  Peacekeeping operations using both civilian and military resources to maintain an agreed
ceasefire or to prevent conflicts.

-  Peace-enforcing operations where conflicting parties can be kept apart and the population
can be protected through the legitimate use of violence.

-  Humanitarian efforts are made using mostly civilian resources although military measures
may be taken to help people adversely affected by conflicts, natural disasters or other
extraordinary situations.

OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

### THE FOCUS OF SWEDISH DEFENCE POLICY

The objective for Sweden’s total defence is to preserve the country’s peace and independence by:

-  helping to manage and prevent crises in the world around us,

-  asserting our territorial integrity,

-  defending Sweden against armed attack,

-  protecting the civilian population and safeguarding the most
important societal functions in the event of war.

It shall also be possible to utilise the resources of the total defence
to help the society at large to deal with serious incidents and severe
emergencies in peacetime.
The Swedish Armed Forces shall be able to fulfil the tasks
demanded of them by the prevailing situation in the surrounding
world. It shall also assert our territorial integrity and help to
uphold the country’s sovereignty. In partnership with other authorities, the Armed Forces shall also ward off attempts to take control
of important functions and efforts to influence our actions.
We shall increase our participation in international peace-promoting operations. The Armed Forces’ national and international
tasks constitute two sides of the same coin. The aim is for Swedish
operational units to be designed so that they are able to deal with
the most complex situations and most difficult tasks.
In the event of a negative trend in security policy, the Swedish
Armed Forces shall also be able to strengthen their capability to
act both nationally and internationally.
To be able to develop and meet the threats and challenges of the
future, the Swedish Armed Forces shall also sustain basic skills in
order to be able to develop a more comprehensive capability in the
long term.

**10** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

The prevailing situation in the world at large demands only limited measures within Sweden’s civil defence sector. The basic
requirements are more or less covered by the capability built up by
society to manage major peacetime crises.
The favourable development in the world around us means that
we can reduce the size of our total defence, which in turn means
we can decrease the number of units, schools and centres. Despite
the resulting reduction in defence expenditure, we will increase
our investment in international operations.

OUR FUTURE DEFENCE **11**


-----

### DEVELOPMENTS IN SWEDEN’S MILITARY DEFENCE

The contribution made by the Swedish Armed Forces in fulfilling
the country’s security policy objectives is based on their main task,
namely the capacity to engage in armed combat. The Swedish
Armed Forces shall develop a modern, flexible and highly accessible operational defence. The emphasis should be on rapid operational capability. We shall increase our capability as regards international operations both quantitatively and qualitatively.

**FUTURE DEVELOPMENT OF THE OPERATIONAL FORCES**

The aim is for the following units to be includ- 2 Maintenance battalions
ed in Sweden’s operational defence force: 2 Ammunition Clearance companies
1 Headquarters with Operational command 1 NBC Defence company
1 Operational Command battalion 60 Home Guard battalions
1 Electronic Warfare battalion

4 Submarines

2 Signal and Telecommunications battalions

7 Surface Combat vessels

2 Special Forces units

7 MCM vessels

1 Ranger battalion

1 Amphibious battalion

3 Security battalions

1 Naval Base battalion

8 Mechanised battalions
1 Air-portable battalion 4 JAS 39 squadrons
3 Artillery battalions 1 Helicopter battalion
2 Air Defence battalions 1 Air Transport squadron
2 Engineer battalions 2 Airbase battalions
1 Communications battalion


The Government feels that the organisation proposed by the Armed
Forces within an economic framework of SEK 3 billion (EUR 330 million) can constitute a basis for operations during 2005. Those units
not included in the plan should be decommissioned immediately. It
is the Government’s assessment that the condition of the units to be
included in the operational defence force for 2005 in principle fulfils the requirements for operative capability. Deficiencies were

**12** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

however apparent in the units that are now to be decommissioned.
Military equipment and personnel from decommissioned units will
be used to improve remaining ones. The Government will give more
detailed information in its 2006 budget bill as to how the operational defence force is to be developed in the future.

NEW PLANNING INSTRUCTIONS TO THE SWEDISH
ARMED FORCES

The Defence Committee’s report “Sweden’s new-age defence” (Communication 2004:30) contains draft requirements for the Armed
Forces’ operative capability. More background information in a
number of areas is needed from the Armed Forces with respect to
these requirements.

The term ‘operative capability’ refers to the Armed Forces’ ability to
successfully carry out their tasks:

-  to assert our territorial integrity and to take part in international
peace-promoting operations,

-  to strengthen their capability as far as both international and national
operations are concerned in the short term,

-  to be able to build up the capability to meet new and larger-scale
threats in the event of a prolonged negative security policy trend.

The Swedish Armed Forces has therefore been given the task of
producing more detailed background information on e.g. the size
of a future operational defence force, its design and development,
the preparedness system and principles for how to preserve skill
levels. The Government does not feel it is possible to propose how
the units should be developed nor what capacity or preparedness
each of them should have, etc., before being presented with this
background information.
When compiling this information, the Armed Forces shall pay
particular attention to the following:

-  that Sweden’s contributions to international operations should
increase,

-  that Sweden should contribute to a multinational rapid reaction force within the EU,

-  that the demands on units with low preparedness have changed,

-  that the demands on the supply of military equipment and personnel have changed.

OUR FUTURE DEFENCE **13**


-----

INTERNATIONAL CAPABILITY

The Government proposes that the Swedish Armed Forces shall

A battalion nor- also be able to lead and participate in two large-scale internation
al missions, each requiring the deployment of an entire battalion,

and 1,000 per- and three smaller operations. It shall be possible to undertake some
sonnel. operations with little prior warning and to sustain other operations

over a longer period of time.

A battalion normally comprises
of between 750
and 1,000 personnel.

The Swedish Armed Forces shall be able to successfully tackle
any crisis management task given to them, from confidence-building, conflict prevention, humanitarian and peace-keeping tasks to
peace-enforcement measures.
A Swedish contribution to a multinational rapid reaction force to
be led by Sweden, in partnership with other countries such as
Finland, shall be developed as part of the EU rapid reaction capability. This unit shall be operative no later than the 1 January 2008.
This will strengthen Sweden’s international capability and raise
the level of ambition when it comes to the number of Swedish units
on international forces registers. The contributions made by
Sweden should also help the Armed Forces in their long-term
development and operative capability. The question of which units
Sweden should contribute to international forces and what level of
preparedness they are to have should be continuously assessed. A
greater international capability shall be an integrated and high-priority component of the restructured Swedish Armed Forces. The
Government feels that development of the Swedish rapid reaction
force and the capability of the Armed Forces when it comes to
reinforcement units should also be strengthened in the long run
and the level of ambition regarding international operations shall
continue to be raised. As from 2005, the Government plans to
gradually increase the appropriations for military peace-promoting
operations.

A NETWORK-BASED DEFENCE

The development of the Armed Forces towards a network-based
defence (NBD) is an important component of its reformation from
an armed force against invasion to a flexible operational defence. A
network-based defence shall have a greater operative effect by
assembling units based on the specific requirements of each situation. This leads to a high level of precision and allows for the right
action to be taken in different crisis situations. Modern informa
**14** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

tion and communication technology (ICT) is to be used to facilitate
the military defence’s capability to:

-  gather information and understand the world around us,

-  lead and support decision-making

-  conduct operations and achieve results.

The network shall allow all those potentially involved in an operation to exchange information with each other, both nationally and
internationally. It is therefore important to coordinate Swedish
development with that which is occurring internationally.
The Swedish Armed Forces shall also be able to exchange information and collaborate with the other authorities involved in
Sweden’s total defence and crisis preparedness in order to improve
our total capability for being able to tackle difficult crises in our
society in a well-coordinated fashion.

**THE ISSUE OF PERSONNEL SUPPLY IS CENTRAL TO**
**SWEDEN’S DEFENCE REFORM**

A well-functioning personnel supply system is one of the most
important preconditions for a capable operational defence. The
supply of personnel also affects our freedom to act as regards security policy, e.g. when it comes to deciding what kind of military
resources Sweden shall contribute to the EU’s rapid reaction capability. It is therefore important for the development of the Armed
Forces’ personnel supply system that began in 2001 to continue.
The system must also be modified in order to be able to man international operations. This demands among other things a new training system for all Sweden’s total defence conscripts. Officer training must also be modified to improve efficiency. The Government
feels that both professional officers and some other personnel categories should be obliged to serve in Swedish forces abroad.

A NEW NATIONAL SERVICE TRAINING SYSTEM

In order to produce qualified operational units for both national
and international preparedness, we need a new national service
training system. On the other hand, we should not train more conscripts than we need for the operational defence force. The
Government’s assessment is that between 8,000 and 10,000 conscripts will be needed per year between 2005 and 2007.

OUR FUTURE DEFENCE **15**


-----

The Government supports the Armed Forces’ proposal for a new
training system with the following main components:

-  national service to remain as the main basis,

-  increased volunteerism,

-  better recruitment and selection processes,

-  basic training for 11 months for all conscripts, divided into two
terms,

-  an optional term of 3–5 months, preparing for international duty.

Conscript training shall more or less follow the terms of the civilian school system, so that it does not detract from people’s opportunity to gain a civilian education nor cause unnecessary unemployment prior to and after military service. It is estimated that
the new training system could be brought in as from 2006.
Participation in the EU rapid reaction force requires us to have
military personnel available at very short notice. The Swedish
Armed Forces should therefore be allowed to employ personnel for
a number of years after their basic training in order to train them
for rapid reaction deployment and have them ready for action.
Furthermore, the training organisation will also need to employ a
number of personnel in order to make use of the investments
made. Using such time-limited appointments, the Armed Forces
can retain skills in certain specialist positions, such as ship commanders, sonar operators and combat vehicle commanders.

OFFICER TRAINING

One step in managing the forthcoming supply requirement for
well-trained officers is to make officer training more akin to mainstream higher education. Furthermore, the Armed Forces should
employ more civilians in posts where it is not necessary to have the
kind of unique skills possessed only by officers.

PERSONNEL COSTS AND DOWNSIZING

Since the Armed Forces’ personnel costs represent a large proportion of their total expenditure for unit operations (in 2003, they
amounted to approximately SEK 12.4 billion (approx EUR 1.3 billion) or 57 per cent), the organisation needs to be better at predicting how expenditure will develop.

**16** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

The number of employees needs to decrease by about 25 per
cent or about 5,000 full-time employees (approximately half of
which will be professional officers) between 2005 and 2007. The
costs for downsizing personnel should fall compared to 2001–
2004. The Government feels that the measures taken to reduce the
number of employees should aim to make use of the skills possessed by those being made redundant in other public sector activities, such as the police, the prison and probation service and education. The establishment of a special personnel downsizing organisation should be looked into.
This restructuring may well break the positive, though slow,
trend towards a greater number of women officers. The Armed
Forces must be better across the board at retaining women officers.
Furthermore, it should plan to implement special measures with
the aim of recruiting more women when officer recruitment is
resumed later on.
The future operational defence will need a large proportion of
commanding officers between 20 and 40 years of age. The Armed
Forces should continue to analyse the need for special measures in
order to attain a suitable age structure in its officer corps. This
should be performed in partnership with the Swedish Agency for
Government Employers and private employer organisations.

RESERVE OFFICERS

Reserve officers can also contribute civilian knowledge and experience and should be used more in the operational defence force, the
basic defence structure, international duties, central management
and the home guard.

GENDER EQUALITY IN THE ARMED FORCES

Gender equality efforts in the Swedish Armed Forces have improved in recent years and this trend should continue. The aim is
to have an armed forces with respect for human rights, that
respects and welcomes all individuals regardless of gender, ethnic
origin or sexual orientation.

OUR FUTURE DEFENCE **17**


-----

VOLUNTARY DEFENCE ORGANISATIONS

The role of voluntary defence organisations will be reduced in the
future operational defence force, although it is important to continue to utilise the commitment and knowledge they possess. The
Swedish Armed Forces and the Swedish Agency for Emergency
Preparedness are to conduct a review of the support needed by the
authorities and from which organisations this support should be
forthcoming.

**MILITARY EQUIPMENT ISSUES**

The Swedish Armed Forces shall have modern military equipment
that supports the development towards a network-based defence
and that satisfies both the national and international needs of the
future operational defence force. The modified needs of the operational defence force must have a greater impact on military
equipment planning. Traceability must improve, i.e. it must also be
easier to see how the demands for operative capability affect
equipment supply.
To create more flexibility and greater freedom of action when it
comes to supply and to fulfil both today’s and tomorrow’s constantly changing requirements on equipment, the Armed Forces should
strive to reduce the number of long-term purchasing orders they
commit themselves to. Their room for manoeuvre can also be
increased by making use of research and technological development,
e.g. using test versions of new systems, known as ‘demonstrators’.
The military equipment of the future needs to have an in-built
adaptability to new requirements, which can emerge both during
the development process and during the system’s useful life.
The Government feels that the equipment supply strategy must
continue to be developed so that it can be constantly modified to
fulfil newly emerging requirements, not least when it comes to
international and industrial development.

RESEARCH AND TECHNICAL DEVELOPMENT (RTD)

Research and technological development (RTD) must be focused
more on specific areas or ‘niches’. At the same time, the modified
requirements of the operational force must also have a greater
impact on RTD planning. Swedish authorities and the country’s
defence industry must develop skills based on the equipment

**18** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

needs of the Armed Forces, where Sweden can gain an internationally competitive edge, in turn creating scope for greater international cooperation. Sweden should prioritise a limited number of
areas and within them build up qualified, cutting-edge expertise
and devise RTD projects. We need to identify areas in which the
defence authorities (in this case the Armed Forces, the Defence
Materiel Administration (FMV), the Swedish Defence Research
Agency (FOI) and the National Defence College (FHS)), civil authorities, universities, Swedish industry and research institutes, all
have the opportunity to cooperate to create more synergy effects
and make better use of research findings.
There has to be more cooperation on RTD between different
countries to ensure our equipment is in line with international
development and can function together with the materiel of other
countries in international operations. It is also necessary to make
better use of civil RTD in military equipment systems.

NATIONAL NICHES

The Government feels that concentrating on the following niches
represents the first step towards strengthening Sweden’s position
in the military equipment field:

-  network-based command and control systems,

-  aircraft,

-  combat vehicle systems,

-  short-range combat systems and

-  unjammable telecommunication systems.

These areas also include interfunctional sensor and data fusion as
well as signature, protection and system design.

INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

Cooperation with other countries to share the costs of developing
new equipment systems is a necessary precondition if Sweden is to
continue to develop military equipment and occupy a strong position in this field. Cooperation here should concentrate on the most
important countries as regards the international skills we need for
our equipment supply. This mainly concerns the ‘six nation coop
OUR FUTURE DEFENCE **19**


-----

eration’, involving Sweden, Germany, France, Great Britain, Italy
and Spain and cooperation with the Nordic countries and the
United States.
In July 2004, European defence ministers decided to establish
the European Defence Agency (EDA) to develop military capability
in a number of different respects and improve research and equipment cooperation within the EU. The EDA may also help to render
the international research and equipment cooperation of Swedish
authorities more efficient. Through the agency, EU member states
may also continue to look into pooling resources and jointly owning some materiel to be used in crisis management operations.
Every time the Swedish Armed Forces need new equipment, they
should determine whether it is best to develop what is needed in
partnership with other countries or whether ready-made equipment should be procured. If the alternatives are similar in terms of
cost-efficiency, the Armed Forces should choose what best suits
the future skills and development within the Swedish defence
industry.

SUPPORT TO THE SWEDISH EXPORT TRADE

Support should be developed and focus on the specified niches.
It should also be easier to give away or hire out equipment which
the Armed Forces no longer needs, or can do without for a limited
time, to partner nations in order to support the Swedish export
trade or improve the country’s security.

DECOMMISSIONING

Equipment and establishments for which there is no long-term
need are to be decommissioned as cost-effectively as possible.

**THE BASIC STRUCTURE OF**
**THE SWEDISH ARMED FORCES**

The Government’s assessment of the future basic structure of the
Armed Forces and where it should be located is a holistic proposal, which in the eyes of the Government, will provide the best conditions, even in the longer term, for a modified defence force.
Fewer establishments will be needed in the future to educate
and train operational forces and to develop the necessary skills.

**20** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

Some units should therefore be discontinued and others should be
merged together.
Concentrating certain operations to just one establishment will
provide the best prerequisites for retaining and developing skills.
Gathering operations at a smaller number of locations increases the
scope for units and functions to perform joint military exercises.
These are some of the factors which the Government has considered in its assessment.

REDUCED EXPENDITURE

One prerequisite of the changes is that they should lead to reduced
running costs and minimise the cost of new investments and relocations. In all, the proposals contained in the Government’s proposal will lead to rent savings of about SEK 460 million (EUR 51
million) per year.
The Government feels that some adjustments are needed in
those places where operations will either be extended or changed.
These investments will cost an estimated SEK 905 million (EUR 100
million).
Rent paid by the Armed Forces will total about SEK 2,700 million (EUR 298 million) per year as from 2008, if we include the
changes which the Government feels are necessary and the investments that will be made to effect them. If, instead, the Armed
Forces retains the basic structure decided on in 2000, rent costs
will be about SEK 3,100 million (EUR 342 million) per year as from
2007.

THE MOST IMPORTANT CHANGES

The most important changes in the basic structure of the Armed
Forces, as proposed by the Government, include the decommissioning of a number of units, the transfer of some to other locations
and the establishment of some new ones.
The Government proposes the decommissioning of the following
units:
– The Jämtland Rifle Regiment – Östersund
– The Norrland Dragoon Regiment – Arvidsjaur
– The Södermanland Regiment – Strängnäs
– The Gotland Regiment – Gotland/ Visby
– The Second Surface Combat Flotilla – Haninga/ Berga

OUR FUTURE DEFENCE **21**


-----

– The Älvsborg Amphibious Regiment – Göteborg
– The Southern Coast Naval Base – Karlskrona
– The Eastern Coast Naval Base – Haninge/ Berga
– The Jämtland Air Force Wing – Östersund
– The Gotland Military District Command – Gotland/ Visby
– The Military Academy – Östersund
– The Army Technical School – Östersund
– The Naval Schools – Karlskrona
– The Air Force Uppsala Schools – Uppsala
– The Armed Forces’ Halmstad Schools – Halmstad

The Government is of the opinion that the following units should
be relocated:
– The Artillery Regiment from Kristinehamn to Boden
– The First Submarine Flotilla from Haninge/ Berga to Karlskrona
– The Vaxholm Amphibious Regiment from Vaxholm to Haninge/
Berga
– The Armed Forces’ Logistics Organisation from Karlstad to
Stockholm
– The Armed Forces’ Medical Centre – from Hammarö to Göteborg

The Government proposes the establishment of the following new
units:
– The Naval Base in Karlskrona. The base should run operations in
Karlskrona, Haninge/ Muskö and Göteborg.
– The Armed Forces’ Technical School in Halmstad. The school in
corporates other schools such as: the Armed Forces’ Halmstad
Schools and the Army Technical School.
– The Marine Combat School in Karlskrona. The school incorporates parts of the Naval Schools and the Amphibious Combat
School.
– The Air Combat School in Uppsala. The school incorporates
other schools such as: the Air Force Uppsala Schools and the
military flight academy.

The following military district groups should be decommissioned:
– Kalix
– Sollefteå
– Västerås
– Kristinehamn

**22** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

– Borås
– Kalmar
– Hässleholm

The Government feels that the following units should be included
in the new basic structure of the Armed Forces:
– The Armed Forces’ Headquarters (HKV) in Stockholm
– The Southern Military District Command (MD S) Göteborg
– The Central Military District Command (MD M) in Strängnäs
– The Northern Military District Command (MD N) in Boden
– The Life Guards (LG) – Upplands-Bro/ Kungsängen
_(Security and urban rifle unit, state ceremonial duties and Swedint)_
– The Norrbotten Regiment (I19) in Boden
_(Training of mechanised troops, some engineers’ training, the winter_
_warfare development unit)_
– The Life Regiment’s Hussars (K3) in Karlsborg
_(Intelligence training, training of airborne battalions, paratrooper_
_training, special units, etc.)_
– The Skaraborg Regiment (P4) in Skövde
_(Training of mechanised troops)_
– The Southern Skåne Regiment (P7) in Lund/ Revinge
_(Training of mechanised troops)_
– The Artillery Regiment (A9) in Boden
_(Artillery training, skills centre)_
– The Anti-aircraft Regiment (Lv6) in Halmstad
_(Anti-aircraft training, skills centre)_
– The Göta Engineers (Ing2) in Eksjö
_(Engineers’ training, skills centre)_
– The Uppland Regiment (S1) in Enköping
_(Command and control training, skills centre, Command and Con-_
_trol School, Total Defence Signals Protection School)_
– The Göta Logistic Regiment (T2) in Skövde
_(Maintenance training, skills centre, transport and movement con-_
_trol training)_
– The First Submarine Flotilla (1 ubåtflj) in Karlskrona
_(Flotilla command, parts of the naval vessel units)_
– The Third Surface Combat Flotilla (3 ysflj) in Karlskrona
_(Flotilla command, parts of the naval vessel units)_
– The Fourth Mine Warfare Flotilla (4 minkriflj) in Haninge/ Muskö
_(Flotilla command, parts of the naval vessel units)_

OUR FUTURE DEFENCE **23**


-----

– The Vaxholm Amphibious Regiment (Amf1) in Haninge/ Berga
_(Amphibious troop training)_
– The Karlskrona Naval Base in Karlskrona
_(Naval operations to be run in Karlskrona, Haninge/ Muskö and_
_Göteborg)_
– The Skaraborg Air Force Wing (F 7) in Lidköping/Såtenäs
– The Blekinge Air Force Wing (F 17) in Ronneby
– The Norrbotten Air Force Wing (F 21) in Luleå
– The Armed Forces’ Helicopter Wing (Hkpflj) in Linköping/Malmen
_(Ground-based operations are run in Linköping/Malmen and_
_marine operations at F17 in Ronneby. It should be possible to base_
_helicopter land operations at_ _F 21 in Luleå. Helicopters are to be_
_available for military air rescue at the following Air Force wings:_
_F 7, F 17 and F 21)_
– The Armed Forces’ Logistics organisation (FMLOG) in Stockholm
_(Command is in Stockholm, Technical Division in Arboga, Supply_
_Division in Boden and Service Division in Karlskrona)_
– The Karlberg Military Academy (MHS K) in Solna
– The Halmstad Military Academy (MHS H) in Halmstad
– The Ground Combat School (MSS) in Skövde
– The Marine Combat School (SSS) in Karlskrona
– The Air Combat School (LSS) in Uppsala
_(This also includes the Flight Academy in Linköping / Malmen)_
– The Home Guard Combat School (HvSS) in Salem/ Vellinge
– Total Defence EOD and Demining Centre (SWEDEC) in Eksjö
– Total Defence NBC Protection Centre (Skydd C) in Umeå
– The Armed Forces’ Intelligence and Security Centre (FMUndSäkC)
in Uppsala
_(including the Interpreters’ School)_
– The Armed Forces’ Recruitment Centre (RekryC) in Stockholm
– The Armed Forces’ Technical School (FMTS) in Halmstad
– TheArmed Forces’ Healthcare Centre (FSC) in Göteborg
– The Air Forces Medical Centre (FMC) in Stockholm
– The Armed Forces’ Music Centre (FöMusC) in Upplands Bro/
Kungsängen
– The Armed Forces’ Telecommunications network and Terrestrial
telecommunications unit (FMTM) in Örebro

The Government feels that the Armed Forces should leave the following places:
– Arvidsjaur
– Gotland/ Visby (partly)

**24** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

– Göteborg/ Säve
– Hammarö
– Karlstad (partly)
– Kristinehamn
– Strängnäs (partly)
– Vaxholm
– Östersund

Estimated time for changes to be effected:
Units to be decommissioned: 31 December 2004.
Units or operations to be moved: 1 January 2005–30 June 2006.
Units to be reorganised: 1 January 2005–31 December 2005.
New units to be established: 1 January 2005.


OUR FUTURE DEFENCE **25**


-----

FUTURE BASIC STRUCTURE
OF THE ARMED FORCES

#### • [Arboga][ FMLOG: Tdiv.]
 • [Boden][ MDN, I 19 (ing, jäg), A 9, FMLOG: Fdiv]
 • [Eksjö][ Ing 2, SWEDEC]
 • [Enköping][ S 1]
 • [Halmstad][ Lv 6, FMTS, MHS H]
 • [Göteborg][ MDS, FSC, Naval operations ]
 • [Karlsborg][ K 3]
 • [Karlskrona][ Naval base, 1 submarine ]
flotilla, 3 surface combat flotillas, SSS,
FMLOG: Sdiv.

#### • [Lidköping][ F 7]
 • [Linköping (Malmen)][ Helicopter wing]
 • [Luleå][ F 21]
 • [Lund][ P 7]
 • [Ronneby][ F 17, Hkp-vht]
 • [Skövde][ P 4, T 2, MSS]
 • [Stockholm/AB county][ HKV, LG, FöMusC, ]
FMC, HvSS, RekryC, MHS K, FMLOG
_Berga/Muskö Amph 1, 4 mine_
warfare flotilla, Naval operations

#### • [Strängnäs][ MD M]
 • [Umeå][ Skydd C]
 • [Uppsala][ OPIL, LSS, FMUndSäkC]
 • [Örebro][ FMTM]

**26** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

LOCATIONS WHERE OPERATIONS ARE
TO BE DECOMMISSIONED OR MOVED
y **[Arvidsjaur][ K 4]**
y **[Hammarö][ FSC]**
y **[Karlstad][ FMLOG Command]**
y **[Kristinehamn][ A 9]**
y **[Strängnäs][ P 10, FöMusC. MD M ][to remain]**
y **[Vaxholm][ Amf 1, AmfSS]**
y **[Visby][ P 18. MDgr ][to remain]**
y **[Östersund][ I 5, F 4, ATS, MHS Ö]**



_[to remain]_


OUR FUTURE DEFENCE **27**


-----

**JOINT TOTAL DEFENCE AUTHORITIES**

The operations of the joint total defence authorities include military equipment supply, higher education within the total defence,
skills development, research and development, signal reconnaissance and enlistment of conscripts, etc. The cutbacks in the
Swedish defence will also have a considerable impact on the operations of these authorities. The Government will appoint a committee, whose task will be to propose cost reductions in the
defence authorities and to review the need for legislative amendments in order to achieve the forthcoming cutbacks.

The joint total defence authorities are:

-  The Swedish Defence Materiel Administration (FMV)

-  The National Defence Radio Institute (FRA)

-  The National Defence College (FHS)

-  The Swedish Defence Research Agency (FOI)

-  The National Service Administration (TPV)

**28** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

### FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF OVERALL CRISIS PREPAREDNESS

Civilian operations within the total defence (civil defence) are one
component of Sweden’s overall crisis management capability.
Requirements change when threats and risks associated with
armed military attack decrease in relation to other threats and
risks to society. The Government is planning to present a government bill in the autumn of 2005. The bill discusses the peacetime
measures needed to meet a changed threat scenario. The aim is to
take a holistic approach towards perceived threats and risks, obtain
knowledge as to the available resources, and to create the conditions to allow the effective use of these resources to safeguard the
security of Swedish society.
Measures are needed to strengthen the capability of society to
deal with threats against:

-  the life or health of the population,

-  major ecological or economic values

-  basic values in society.

When military threats shift to other threats and risks in society,
the focus of preparatory measures needs to change from civil
defence to peacetime measures. Long-term efforts by central agencies, municipalities, county councils, organisations and the business sector are needed to create an adequate crisis management
capability, where priority can be allocated to the most effective
measures in the event of a severe peacetime emergency occurring
in society. This desired capability covers a large number of social
sectors, where it will be necessary to consider and prioritise
between measures.

OUR FUTURE DEFENCE **29**


-----

CONSCRIPTS COMPLETING CIVILIAN NATIONAL
SERVICE

The manning of the civilian total defence is based on the regular
peacetime defence organisation. If the organisation needs to be
strengthened in the face of heightened preparedness, defence conscripts should be utilised only if other options, including the redistribution of working tasks, agreements on voluntary engagement or
recruitment via employment exchanges, are deemed impossible.
The Government makes the assessment that the personnel resources created as a result of the enlistment and enrolment of conscripts should be on the lowest possible level and be based on the
requirements placed on the civil defence by a basic defence capability.
The Government also makes the assessment that as far as energy
supply is concerned, the option of being able to strengthen the
electricity distribution system using national conscripts with basic
training should still be safeguarded. Electricity supply is crucial to
most important societal functions and can also be considered a
likely target in the event of conflicts which don’t necessarily take
on the guise of large-scale attacks from other countries. A breakdown in the electricity supply can have devastating consequences
for society. The preparedness measures taken in the area of electricity supply prior to an armed attack also strengthen the reliability of the national grid in peacetime.
In light of the prevailing security policy situation, the option of
calling in and training national conscripts for municipal requirements no longer needs to be utilised. The needs of the rescue services in addition to those in a heightened state of preparedness are
to be satisfied in some way other than by using national conscripts.
Voluntary activities should be encouraged and supported.
The prerequisites for employing and using personnel for societal
activities are regulated by rules and agreements. Voluntary personnel can constitute a valuable additional resource if society
needs extra help in addition to what the defence organisation and
the labour market can manage in the event of a severe emergency.
The requirements and prerequisites for this will be examined by
the Swedish Agency for Crisis Preparedness prior to the government bill in 2005.

**30** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

A NEW SET OF FUNDING PRINCIPLES FOR CRISIS
PREPAREDNESS IN SOCIETY

According to the Government, it is necessary to strive for a general capability to be able to prevent and tackle incidents that may
lead to severe emergencies in peacetime society. The Government
therefore feels that special funds need to be set aside to achieve a
strengthened peacetime capability.
The Government wishes to emphasise that there is a clear connection between measures aimed at safeguarding a strengthened
peacetime capability and measures taken in times of heightened
preparedness. Investing in preventive and preparatory measures to
reduce vulnerability and increase flexibility in vital social systems
and functions will result in fewer resources being needed for the
civil defence. Creating a strengthened capability means that the
demands on the civil defence can basically be accommodated within the framework of society’s peacetime preparedness.

INTERNATIONAL CIVILIAN PEACE-PROMOTING,
CONFIDENCE-BUILDING AND HUMANITARIAN
OPERATIONS – CIVILIAN ASPECTS OF CRISIS
MANAGEMENT

International civilian crisis management should have three clear
main aims:

-  to strengthen Sweden’s capability to deal with national crises,

-  to help increase security in the world around us,

-  to be able to help people in distress.

Greater involvement in international civilian crisis management
provides added value to Sweden’s national crisis management capability. In partnership with other countries, the foundation is being
laid for common security in order to meet different types of threats
and risks. National activities should therefore be more clearly linked
to international operations.

OUR FUTURE DEFENCE **31**


-----

### FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT IN EXPENDUTURE AREA 6: DEFENCE AND PREPAREDNESS AGAINST VULNERABILITY

The Government plans to further improve financial management in
expenditure area 6 in order to create a clearer link between objectives, results and costs of central agency operations.
The Government has adopted a directive for a committee that is
to analyse and evaluate how the budget and evaluation of objectives and results can be improved. The committee shall focus on
how the Swedish Riksdag’s and the Government’s insight, control
and monitoring can be improved.
A financial management model for the Armed Forces’ operational
units should be introduced and come into operation no later than
at the beginning of 2008. This involves the control and monitoring
of the units included in the future operational defence force. The
objectives set by the Government and the Riksdag for the operational defence force shall form the basis of the goals and demands
placed on the activities of the Armed Forces. Budget and monitoring shall be integrated into operational objectives.

**32** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

### FRAMEWORKS FOR EXPENDITURE AREA 6: DEFENCE AND PREPAREDNESS AGAINST VULNERABILITY

THE FINANCIAL FRAMEWORK

The Government has ascertained that the changed threat picture
has reduced the need for investments in external security whilst
the need for internal security has increased. In the light of this, the
Government feels that the financial framework for expenditure
area 6 can be reduced by SEK 3 billion (EUR 330 million). This
reduction will occur gradually and should be carried out by the
end of 2007. The Government intends to return to this issue later.

REDUCTION IN APPROPRIATIONS

Decreasing the framework for expenditure area 6 should be achieved mainly by a reduction in Armed Forces’ appropriations. The
areas that will be especially affected include the Armed Forces’
Central Command, parts of the Armed Forces’ basic structure,
home guard training and joint total defence authority procurements. In addition to this, further savings will be made within the
Armed Forces in order to fund greater investment in international
operations.
Restructuring and the downsizing of activities will also be implemented at the joint total defence authorities.

OUR FUTURE DEFENCE **33**


-----

### REGIONAL CONSEQUENCES

The Government has a responsibility for supporting the people and
the regions affected by the changes made to the basic structure of
the Armed Forces. The worry felt by many defence employees and
others affected by decisions must be taken seriously.
The Government’s overall assessment is that affected regions,
with the Government’s active support, will in the long term be able
to successfully tackle the special problems arising from the restructuring. The extensive work already being done within the
framework of regional development policy will form the basis of
the Government’s forthcoming efforts.
There is special preparedness for those affected in the short
term by unemployment within the framework of labour market
policy to facilitate their transition to further education or to other
sections of the labour market.
In addition, the Government intends to take a specific responsibility in the form of targeted measures in those regions worst
affected by defence restructuring measures. This applies to the
local labour market regions (LA regions) of Östersund, Arvidsjaur,
Karlstad/ Kristinehamn and Gotland. Many defence employees
will be negatively affected in these regions whilst the options available on the local labour market are also relatively limited.

**34** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

**SOME EXAMPLES OF MEASURES FOR ÖSTERSUND,**
**ARVIDSJAUR, KARLSTAD / KRISTINEHAMN AND**
**GOTLAND**

ASSIGNMENTS GIVEN TO CERTAIN COUNTY
ADMINISTRATIVE BOARDS / COUNTY GOVERNORS

The county governors at the county boards of Norrbotten,
Jämtland, Värmland and Gotland will be assigned the task of working closely together with other key actors and proposing suitable
measures to increase competitiveness, sustainable growth and
employment in each of their regions respectively.

SPECIAL CONTACT PERSONS

Special contact persons will be given the task of monitoring and
actively participating in the work done by the county administrative boards on behalf of the Government. These contact persons
will focus on the dynamics, cooperation and revitalisation of the
local business sector.

THE REGIONAL LOCATION COMMITTEE

A government investigator will be appointed with the task of proposing suitable relocations of government jobs to the LA regions of
Östersund, Arvidsjaur, Karlstad/ Kristinehamn and Gotland.

FUNDING FOR RESEARCH AND INNOVATION

In the research bill which the Government intends to present to
the Riksdag in the autumn of 2004, SEK 50 million (EUR 5.5 million) will be allocated to the regions worst affected by the defence
restructuring as from 2005.

STATE-OWNED COMPANIES

Within the framework of their objectives and focus of activities,
state-owned companies should contribute to successful restructuring efforts. The Government will invite these companies to a
dialogue to discuss the matter.

OUR FUTURE DEFENCEOUR FUTURE DEFENCE **3535**


-----

FUNDING TO MUNICIPALITIES

Of the funding set aside for specific investments in certain municipalities and county councils over the next few years, SEK 200 million (EUR 22 million) in 2005 and SEK 300 million (EUR 33 million)
in 2006 has been earmarked for those regions most affected by the
restructuring.

PROPERTY AND ESTABLISHMENT ISSUES

The state-owned company Vasallen AB will play a key role in
restructuring work because of the resources and skills it possesses
in the field of development. In partnership with municipalities and
local business, Vasallen has made a positive contribution to the
development of property vacated by the Armed Forces in conjunction with previous defence decisions.

**SOME EXAMPLES OF MEASURES TARGETED**
**SPECIFICALLY AT:**

ÖSTERSUND

-  A prison establishment to be set up in Östersund.

-  Government jobs focusing on growth analysis and regional
growth to be relocated to Östersund from the central agencies
ITPS (Swedish Institute for Growth Policy Studies), NUTEK
(Swedish Business Development Agency) and from the stateowned company ALMI Företagspartner AB.

-  Jobs from the National Institute for Working Life to be located
to Östersund.

ARVIDSJAUR

-  A prison establishment to be located to Arvidsjaur.

-  The new board of the National Insurance Office to be given the
task of locating some activities to Arvidsjaur.

**36** OUR FUTURE DEFENCE


-----

KARLSTAD / KRISTINEHAMN

-  The Swedish Standards Institute (SiS) to establish a new department in Kristinehamn.

-  Extended international activities within the Swedish Rescue
Services Agency (SRV) to be located to Kristinehamn.

GOTLAND

-  Jobs from the National Institute for Working Life to be located
to Gotland.

-  As part of its development work with the defence restructuring,
Vasallen AB will be able to assist by converting military property into student housing.

OUR FUTURE DEFENCE **37**


-----

-----

-----

The Swedish defence is in the middle of its most extensive reform in the modern age. Using its enormous size,
the old defence system would be able to protect Sweden
against a military invasion.
The future armed forces will be a high-tech, modern
and flexible operational defence. The objective is still the
same – to protect Sweden and Swedish interests – but the
world around us has undergone radical change and the
threat scenario and tasks facing us now look totally different and place new demands on the Swedish defence.
The defence reform began in 1999 and many wholesale
changes have been decided upon and implemented since
then.
This publication is a summary of the government bill:
“Our Future Defence« (Govt Bill 2004 / 05:5), which constitutes the next step in the reform.

**The Ministry of Defence**


-----

