# National Security Strategy


-----

## Foreword

There has been a strong focus on
security issues ever since I became
Prime Minister. This has been due to
dramatic events around the world, as
well as what has taken place in
Sweden. Technological developments
have created strong interdependencies.
Susceptibility to the disruption of
essential services has increased.
Information technology has improved life for most people, but the way
in which it can also be used for
hostile purposes by both states and
individuals is also becoming increasingly apparent.

Security issues now need to be
viewed from a much broader
perspective than in the past. Security
for people in Sweden does not just
mean equipping ourselves to deal
with military threats and armed
attacks, although this remains one of
central government’s core duties.
Wider security measures must also
now encompass protection against
epidemics and infectious diseases,
combating terrorism and organised
crime, ensuring safe transport and
reliable food supplies, protecting
against energy supply interruptions,
countering devastating climate
change, initiatives for peace and
global development, and much more.

This broad concept of security has
formed the basis for the work of the
Government’s security policy
council, which I established shortly
after taking office. It also provides
the basis for the national security
strategy established today by the
Government.

This strategy sets out for the first
time our overall approach to security


**Foreword................................................................................................................................3**
**Introduction..........................................................................................................................5**
**Our approach to security................................................................................................6**
**Security in Sweden ............................................................................................................8**
**Sweden and the world...................................................................................................** **10**
**Our national interests ................................................................................................... 14**
Ensuring the safety, security and health of the Swedish people...................... 14
Ensuring supplies and the protection of essential services .............................. 14
Maintaining the fundamental values of democracy, the rule of
law, human freedoms and human rights ................................................................ 14
Defending, under all circumstances, Sweden’s freedom, security
and right to self-determination.................................................................................. 14
Promoting stability and security in our region........................................................15
Maintaining and strengthening cooperation, solidarity
and integration within the EU..................................................................................... 16
Promoting a rules-based multilateral world order............................................... 16
**Threats to our security and actions to deal with them................................... 17**
Military threats ................................................................................................................17
Information and cyber security, digital risks .......................................................... 18
Terrorism and violent extremism ..............................................................................20
Organised crime ............................................................................................................21
Threats to energy supplies .........................................................................................22
Threats to transport and infrastructure .................................................................23
Health threats .................................................................................................................24
Climate change and its effects ...................................................................................25
**Conclusion..........................................................................................................................** **26**

Omslagsbild: Shutterstock
Foto: Jonatan Holst, Regeringskansliet (sid 3)
Mikael Svensson, Scandinav (sid 4)
Robert Ekegren, TT (sid 7)
Carolina Romare, Imagebank (sid 9)
Tomas Oneborg, SvD, TT (sid 11)
Anna Norén, Förvarsmakten (sid 13)
Jessica Gow, TT (sid 15)
Louise Levin, Försvarsmakten (sid 19)
Kentaroo Tryman, TT (sid 20)
Trons, TT (sid 23)
Magnus Ström, Scandinav (sid 27)

Produktion: Gullers Grupp
Januari 2017


in a broad sense. It establishes
the focus and also provides the
framework for the measures required
to collectively safeguard Sweden’s
security. These broader threats, and a
new security policy landscape,
impose new demands for a strategic
approach over extended periods. We
need a better understanding of
security developments, both internationally and in Sweden. This requires
us to pose new questions about our
security, and our national interests,
so we can deploy collective
resources where they will have
the greatest benefit.

A separate section of the strategy
defines those national interests that
should guide our approach to security
and our broader security efforts. The
strategy also sets out a number of
primary threats in key areas that
challenge our ability to protect our
people and our country. These descriptions are then followed by measures to
strengthen our preparedness.


This security strategy encompasses
many different policy areas, with
relevant actors in both the public and
private sectors. The Government has
overall responsibility, and following
the establishment of this strategy all
ministries are to adopt this approach
as the next steps are taken and work
on various initiatives is carried out.
But security efforts are a task for the
whole of society. Active involvement
is required by central, regional and
local authorities, as well as by individuals, businesses and civil society.

There is broad agreement in the
Riksdag (Swedish Parliament) on
most issues concerning Swedish
security. I hope and believe it will also
be possible to achieve such broad
consensus on the work in realising
the content of this strategy.

Stockholm, 4 January 2017
Stefan Löfven, Prime Minister


-----

## Introduction

#### The efforts to protect the people of Sweden  are based on strong foundations. 


There is broad political consensus
about most strategic decisions
relating to our country’s peace and
security. The innovation, openness
and cohesion that characterise our
society provide good conditions for
safeguarding our security.

Sweden is more dependent on the
outside world than ever before. Over
the long term, increasing globalisation has clearly positive effects, both
on our standard of living and our
security. The diversity reflected in
today’s Swedish society is linked to
both economic growth and our
openness. It provides us with opportunities to develop our prosperity,
safety, peace and security together.

The conditions for safeguarding
Sweden’s security are changing
rapidly. The people of Sweden are
increasingly affected by what happens
both within and beyond our borders.
Many of the factors that have made
our society successful also create
vulnerabilities. Developments in
Sweden and the world are increasing
requirements on our ability to
safeguard our security. This is so
closely correlated with global security
that it is necessary for Sweden to
build peace and security together
with others. More than ever, we need
to create shared security in a broad
sense, including through trade,


contact between people and cooperation in international organisations in
order to create trust.

The internal and external threats
faced by society today are more
complex than in the past. They are
occurring and evolving faster than
before. This is due to a changing
world in which there are new types
of threat from new combinations
of actors. We also face a situation in
which our fundamental values and
our way of life are being increasingly
challenged. This is happening both in
our immediate region and further
away, inspired by currents of ideas
that risk also gaining a foothold
in Sweden.

In a world that many view as increasingly turbulent, Sweden is still
widely regarded as a relatively secure
country. Overall, its people trust in
the State’s ability to safeguard their
freedom and security. But this is not
something that can be taken for
granted permanently in the future.
Developments in our country, both
social and technological, are resulting
in increasing requirements for
coherent security efforts.

This national security strategy sets
out the focus and establishes a
framework for the work required
to collectively safeguard Sweden’s


security, within and between different policy areas. This strategy aims
to strengthen our ability to effectively
and concertedly prevent and tackle
immediate and long-term threats
and challenges.

The strategy is based on a number of
broadly defined objectives for our
security and the values on which
these objectives are based. It provides
an overview of recent security
developments, both in Sweden and
internationally. The strategy identifies
a number of areas in which Sweden
has specific interests to defend and
in which security efforts need to
be strengthened. Together, this
forms the core of Sweden’s national
security strategy.

Of course, it is not possible to predict
precisely what new threats are most
likely to arise or what strategic
decisions Sweden may need to make
to avert these. But by focussing our
combined security efforts on the
areas of priority and national interests
set out by the strategy, Sweden will be
better equipped to prevent, counter
and address the security challenges
we face both now and in the future.


-----

## Our approach to security

#### Sweden’s freedom, peace and security must be  safeguarded. No duty of the State is more important.


The objectives for our security are
to safeguard the life and health of the
population, as well as the functionality
of society, along with the ability to
maintain fundamental values such as
democracy, the rule of law and
human rights and fundamental
freedoms. In order to achieve these
objectives our country’s political
independence and autonomy must be
secured and our territorial integrity
must be able to be maintained. This
is the basis on which this strategy
is founded.

Our security is linked to our fundamental values. We will defend and
support our democracy and our rule
of law and uphold respect for each
inhabitant’s freedoms and rights
against all domestic and external
actors that may seek to undermine
them. These values are of inalienable
intrinsic value. They constitute the
foundation of our society’s prosperity
and resilience.

This national security strategy is
based on a broad approach and uses
a broad concept of security. The
challenges to our security are
complex and can change rapidly. In
addition, the conditions for protecting the population and maintaining
the most essential services have
changed fundamentally. There are


now not only more actors that are of
significance to society’s security, but
they are also more diverse. Influence
over key areas and essential services,
which previously was to a greater
extent exerted by the State, may now
be shared by numerous parties. As
a result of globalisation, the link
between domestic and external
security is more direct than in
the past.

Every day extensive work is carried
out in Sweden to ensure the protection and security of the population
and provide for adequate civil
contingency planning. This constitutes a solid basis for a secure and
well-functioning society. However,
our security imposes ever increasing
requirements for an all-hazards
approach and cooperation between
different actors and policy areas. The
vast range of pressures that we may
face must be addressed with all the
tools we have at our disposal. The
combined ability of our country to
prevent, counter and tackle crises and
war must be strengthened. This
applies to both short-term challenges
and more long-term threats.

The international dimension of our
security is becoming increasingly
important. Sweden endeavours to
achieve collective security and wants


to develop security in solidarity
and cooperation with others.
Fundamental to this collective
security is cooperation, exchange
and close contacts. Threats to peace
and security are best countered
together in cooperation with other
countries and organisations. Our
interests are particularly closely
connected to those of our Nordic and
Baltic neighbours, the EU and the
rest of Europe. A strong transatlantic
link is vital for Europe’s security.
Sweden aims to be a credible and
sought-after partner in international
cooperation. Diplomacy and development cooperation play a key role in
preventing conflict, building trust
and safeguarding peace and freedom.

Our approach to security also reflects
the strong links between peace,
security, sustainable development and
international law, including human
rights. There is a connection between
internal oppression and external
aggression. Peace and security are
necessary preconditions for development. Democracy, human rights and
economic and social development
provide the best foundation for both
human security and international
security. Sweden aims to be a leading
force for gender equality and the full
participation of women in all endeavours to promote peace and security.


-----

## Security in Sweden

#### Sweden aims to be an open and secure society for all. 


Our country is well equipped for the
changes that are currently taking
place. A high standard of living, a
strong rule of law, an advanced
welfare system, advanced education,
research and innovation, in addition
to strong international partnerships
are key success factors in Sweden’s
prosperity. Our open and dynamic
society, with a high level of trust
between people, shall continue to
form the basis for security in Sweden.
The vulnerabilities that can be seen
in our society should not result in us
compromising our fundamental
values, but rather in us better
ensuring their protection.

All actors in society collectively, and
within their respective areas, have a
significant responsibility for contingency and security. Public-sector
actors have a designated responsibility for Sweden’s security. The business
sector is also a key actor as a large
proportion of the resources that are
essential to the functionality of
society are privately owned or
operated. Every day, civil society
makes important contributions to the
security of society. Sweden’s security
is ultimately dependent on each
inhabitant’s desire and ability to take
responsibility for their own and our
society’s safety and contingency.


Society’s dependence on functioning
supply flows has increased, whether
this be for food, medicines, information technology or energy. Meanwhile,
a large percentage of the main
operators in these sectors are now
private-sector businesses. A high-tech
society results in greater vulnerability
to cyber threats and greater opportunities to spread disinformation. But
this modern technology is also
necessary for the continued development of our prosperity and our management of increasingly complex
systems that form the basis of the way
society operates today.

Sweden’s population is increasingly
diverse. This is an asset for a small,
open country like Sweden. It also
leads to a greater need to build a
society that is cohesive and to combat
segregation to prevent social tensions
and economic inequalities. A lack of
opportunity for people to become
established and integrate can lead to
fertile conditions for social unrest
and various forms of extremism.

Today we see that transnational
organised crime that threatens
systems is challenging society and its
institutions. This could lead in some
parts of the population to declining
confidence in society’s ability to
maintain law and order.


Access to information and different
means of communication is increasing, although it is unequally distributed. Digitalisation is leading to
growth, innovation and development
and is creating new channels of
contact between people. This
increases individuals’ opportunities
to gain knowledge and actively
participate, and strengthens opportunities to freely form opinions,
participate and think critically.

However, digitalisation also provides
hostile actors with the opportunity to
spread their message that challenges
our fundamental values and the
security of society. Managing these
issues, while also safeguarding shared
values and norms that form the basis
of our society, is vital to promoting
safety and security in the long term.
Confidence in authorities and the
media must be safeguarded, along
with trust among citizens.

We must have a strong ability to
prevent, withstand and manage crises
and situations under heightened
contingency. Day-to-day responsibility for different types of essential
services is now spread among lots of
different actors. This means all of
these actors need to take active
responsibility for maintaining a good
level of contingency. Thorough


protective security efforts are a
requirement for this. Crises and
threats can arise quickly, but they can
also involve a slow sequence of
events. Whatever the time frame,
society needs to have a fundamental
ability to take action to address such
crises and threats. Effective cooperation is particularly important in
efforts to strengthen this ability.

The increasingly complex nature of
security threats increases demands
for robust management functions.
Serious crises whose links and causes
are unclear challenge society and
different interpretations can quickly


spread. Security-related events in
which the factual and legal status is
unclear places significant demands
on decision-making abilities amid uncertainty. Well-coordinated management processes and advanced societal
communications are fundamental to
quickly providing society’s view of a
sequence of events and supporting
national decision-making processes.

The deterioration in the security
situation in our neighbourhood
imposes greater requirements on
Sweden’s total defence capability.
A credible total defence capability
promotes continued peaceful


development and political freedom of
action. Modern and comprehensive
national defence planning is being
developed. Strong intelligence
capabilities in both the police and
defence and well-equipped psychological defence are essential components in Sweden’s security. The
continued development of civil
contingency planning and the
rebuilding of civil defence reinforce
each other. Civil defence is fundamentally synonymous with society’s
inherent robustness, resilience and
ability to manage heightened
contingency, threat of war and
war itself.


-----

## Sweden and the world

#### Global developments have never had such significance for Sweden as they do today. 


Our country is closely interlinked
with the rest of the world – economically, politically and culturally.
Cross-border trade is a foundation of
our strong economy. Sweden is an
open, competitive and high-tech
country that is fully integrated into
the global economy, and as such is
well equipped to continue fully
taking advantage of the opportunities
offered by globalisation.

However, globalisation also results in
increased vulnerability to direct and
indirect effects of global changes.
This may involve threats related to
climate, the environment and
resource shortages, or armed conflict,
violent extremism, terrorism, threats
to health, uncontrolled migration,
climate change, cyber threats,
economic crises and organised crime.
Our society’s prosperity and functionality require secure and free flows of
goods, services and communication.

As a result, an effective rules-based
international order is now even more
important for Sweden’s security
and prosperity. This has always
been particularly important for
smaller states.

The basis for the current international
order consists of the political and
economic institutions that were
established after the Second World
War, with the UN Charter at their
core. Parts of this order are currently
subject to strong demands for
change. One example of such a
demand for change is to strengthen
the way these international institutions operate. Recently, these
institutions have been able to make
important decisions about develop

ment funding, the 2030 Agenda and
the Sustainable Development Goals,
and a global climate agreement.
Success was also achieved when the
Ebola epidemic was stopped before
becoming more catastrophically
widespread. However, it has become
increasingly difficult to reach
international consensus on other
challenges. This primarily concerns
security policy issues such as the war
in Syria, Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine and tensions in the South
China Sea. Rivalry between major
powers has increased.

There is now a global redistribution
of power – both between states and
regions and from states to non-state
actors and individuals. A key trend is
the shift in political, economic and
military power towards Asia – particularly China, but also India. Several
African and Latin American countries are gaining more prominent roles.

The development towards a more
multi-polar world order is continuing. The United States will remain
the most important international
actor for the foreseeable future, but it
will expect Europe to do more for its
own security. Europe’s percentage of
the global population is declining, as
is Europe’s percentage of total global
GDP. The EU must work strategically and concertedly to remain one of
the world’s leading economic actors
and a sought-after global partner.
Technological advances are increasing the influence of non-state actors,
which are often transnational. In
general, the international system is
becoming increasingly complex,
resulting in a risk of fragmentation.


Another factor is that globalisation is
affecting people’s social living
conditions, which also has implications for global security. The percentage of people living in extreme
poverty has more than halved in 25
years, representing outstanding
progress in a relatively short space of
time. Global health is improving.
More children are being educated.
Access to information and technology is increasing for private individuals.

Other trends, however, are not as
unequivocally positive. Today we are
seeing global declines in human
rights, democracy and the rule of law.
This can also be seen in international
fora, where international undertakings on human rights are increasingly being called into question. The
undermining of an international
order based on human rights,
democracy and the rule of law is a
foreign and security policy objective
in itself for certain states.

Urbanisation is accelerating. Almost
half of the world’s population is
under the age of 25 and most of these
young people live in developing
countries, with increasing numbers in
cities, putting resources and sustainable
solutions under severe pressure. For
better or worse, the pace of social
change is faster than ever before.

The global economic integration of
recent decades is now being challenged by protectionism, renationalisation and isolationism. A number of
European countries are experiencing
political fragmentation with subsequent social polarisation and lack of
confidence in the rule of law and
democracy as the basis for the


-----

political order. This is a serious
challenge, particularly for democratic
societies and their cohesion.

European integration is of indispensable value, particularly as a means of
maintaining peace on our continent
following two devastating world
wars. Sweden’s membership of the
European Union has strengthened
both our prosperity and our security.
However, the EU is facing fundamental challenges: insufficient
economic recovery following the
financial crisis, continued high
unemployment, instability in the
EU’s neighbouring regions resulting
in large flows of refugees, the UK’s
decision to leave the EU, and the
strengthening of nationalistic
tendencies in other Member States.
EU cooperation in its current form is
being called into question in a
number of countries. At the same
time, the need for European cooperation is increasing in order to
manage shared security challenges.
The EU Global Strategy offers a
sound basis for progress. No Member
State has the resources to address
these challenges on their own. The
EU’s internal cohesion therefore
needs to be strengthened.

Large areas near the EU’s southern
borders are experiencing instability,
armed conflict, a lack of democracy,
terrorist elements and a lack of
human security and respect for
human rights, with huge humanitarian needs and large flows of refugees
as a consequence. The conflicts in
Syria, Iraq, Yemen and Libya show
how weak states and a lack of
inclusive political structures can have
devastating consequences for people,


societies and entire regions. Developments in Syria show the far-reaching
consequences that a regional conflict
can have for international peace and
security, particularly as the UN
Security Council has been unable to
take responsibility for the situation as
required under the UN Charter.
The situation may also affect Europe
and Sweden’s security for a long
time to come.

In the East, Russia has breached key
parts of the European security order,
in which the Helsinki Final Act
(1975) and Paris Charter (1990) are
key pillars. At the heart of this order
is the right of all participating states
to territorial integrity, the right to
their sovereignty and the right to be
free to make their own security
policy choices.

Another fundamental principle is
that security between states is closely
linked to security within states, which
includes states’ respect for human
rights, democracy and the rule of law.
Russia is now openly questioning this
order and can seem to be seeking a
return to those times when the great
powers were left to create privileged
spheres of interest. Russia’s illegal
annexation of Crimea and aggression
against Ukraine are in breach of the
UN’s principle of non-aggression and
fundamentally challenge the European security order and the principle of
non-intervention. In Syria, the
Russian leadership has also shown
that it is prepared to use military
force and the threat of military
measures to achieve its political
objectives. Russia seems to still
prioritise extensive military rearmament, despite the weak economic


development in the country. Influence operations are being directed
against Western countries, including
Sweden, to sow discord, create
uncertainty and influence political
decision-making processes and
choices, while domestically Russia is
moving in an increasingly authoritarian
and repressive direction.

As a result of Russia’s actions, the
security situation in our neighbourhood has deteriorated over time.
Opportunities for a reduction in
tensions and cooperation in the near
future have decreased. In the West,
both NATO and the US have
increased their military presence in
the Baltic region, particularly in
Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and
Poland. Territorial defence is being
mentioned once again as one of
NATO’s key tasks. Unlike the Cold
War period, the Baltic region is now
one of the primary points of friction
between Russia and NATO. The
development of military technology
has contributed to the Baltic region
now, more than in the past, being a
strategic whole.

Sweden is participating actively in
efforts to influence developments in
our region. Swedish-Finnish cooperation on security and defence policy
issues has been intensified. Both of
our countries have developed our
partnership with NATO, and this
now includes a strategic dialogue on
the Baltic Sea Security with the 28
NATO members. Cooperation with
other Nordic countries and the Baltic
states has been strengthened and is
increasingly focussed on regional
security. More intensive bilateral
cooperation with Denmark, Finland,


Norway, Poland, the UK, Germany
and the US is also aimed at strengthening security in our part of Europe.
A strong transatlantic link is vital for
Europe’s security. Within the scope
of the OSCE, Sweden supports a
number of initiatives to help reduce
tensions and create trust in the
region. Civilian cooperation within
organisations such as the Arctic
Council, the Barents Euro-Arctic
Council and the Council of the Baltic
Sea States also plays an important
role in building security.


Sweden’s disarmament and non-proliferation policy is an integral part of
our security policy and is of clear
relevance to both regional and global
security. A particularly concerning
aspect of the deterioration in the
security situation is the more prominent role that nuclear weapons are in
the process of regaining, including in
Northern Europe. This is reflected in
both political statements and in plans
for the extensive modernisation of
nuclear arsenals. The devastating
effects that the use of nuclear


weapons would have on people and
the environment give Sweden reason
to continue to engage with this issue.
We have a distinct security interest in
breaking the deadlock that has long
characterised multilateral cooperation on nuclear disarmament.


-----

## Our national interests

#### Our national interests guide both our approach to security and our broader security efforts. Sweden must actively  safeguard these interests and defend them whenever they are at risk of being undermined.


**Ensuring the safety, security and**
**health of the Swedish people**
A fundamental objective of Sweden’s
security efforts is to safeguard the
lives and health of the country’s
inhabitants. Ensuring the safety and
security of Sweden’s inhabitants is
closely correlated with protecting
essential services and fundamental
values. The lives and health of people
can be threatened by a raft of different factors today. Efforts concerning
Sweden’s security therefore need to
be based on a broad perspective of
threats, risks and capabilities.
Women, men, girls and boys can be
affected differently by the threats to
safety, security and health. The
essential services that are most
important to maintain are those that
meet fundamental human needs and
ensure the perpetuation of society.

**Ensuring supplies and the**
**protection of essential services**
The robust provision and protection
of essential services is vital to the
survival of the population and for our
society to function. Access to
drinking water and food is of national
interest. Functioning health care and
supply of pharmaceuticals is essential
for safeguarding people’s lives and
health, both day to day and during a
crisis. All parts of society are dependent on secure energy supplies.
Transportation and means of communication are vital services. Maintaining functioning infrastructure
and flows for supplies, trade and the
economy is also a national interest.


**Maintaining the fundamental**
**values of democracy, the rule of law,**
**human freedoms and human rights**
The equal value of all people and equal opportunities for all inhabitants to
have a say and actively participate in
society are a national interest.
Freedom of expression, freedom of
information, the right to education,
freedom of assembly, the right to
protest, freedom of association and
freedom of religion and belief are
some of the human rights that need
to be protected through efforts
concerning Sweden’s security.
Democracy, human rights and
freedoms, and Sweden’s security
are strengthened by a free,
independent media.

Robust social communications,
particularly between authorities, are
vital. How authorities, the general
public and the media communicate
can also be vital in how a crisis or
event develops. The ability of
inhabitants to obtain knowledge and
evaluate information is important to
Sweden’s ability to cope with both
large and small strains. These
capabilities can be developed through
school, training and non-formal adult
education, which consequently play
an important role in our security.

Democracy and the rule of law are
strengthened by people’s active
participation and the experience of
participating in society. Social trust
and cohesion are therefore also
important to security efforts. Inhabitants’ trust in each other and in public
institutions strengthens the collective
ability to prevent and manage major


crises and disasters. The administration of justice and other exercise of
authority should be predictable,
cohesive and according to the rule of
law. Individuals should be protected
against arbitrary intervention. The
rule of law and legal rights are
fundamental to inhabitants having
confidence in laws, authorities and
courts of law. Judicial authorities,
military and civil defence, emergency
services, the alerting service and the
coastguard are vital resources for
Sweden’s security.

**Defending, under all circumstances,**
**Sweden’s freedom, security and**
**right to self-determination**
The assertion of our country’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity is
a necessary precondition for Sweden’s
ability to achieve its security objectives. Significant importance must be
placed on our ability to deter any
party who wishes to attack or exert
pressure on Sweden, individually or
together with others. Citizens’ will to
defend the country and society’s civil
contingency planning are a national
interest and a fundamental part of
Sweden’s total defence and the
combined resilience required to
tackle threats to Sweden.

Society’s civil contingency planning
is important for everyone and needs
to be designed to manage accidents,
disruptions, crises and war. The basis
is for all actors in society to take
responsibility for and develop civil
contingency planning within their
area of responsibility and to
cooperate with the relevant actors.


The total defence prepares Sweden
for heightened contingency and
comprises civil and military defence.
Civil defence is based on society’s
contingency planning and society’s
combined resilience. Civil defence
aims to safeguard the civilian
population, secure the most essential
services and contribute to the
Swedish Armed Forces’ capabilities
in the event of an armed attack or war
in our region. Our armed forces will,
on their own and together with
others, defend Sweden and promote
our security, and have a special
responsibility for protecting the
country’s sovereignty.

Ensuring that Sweden can be
governed and led, even under
significant strains that may arise in
the event of crisis or war, is a national
interest. Strong protection is required
to ensure the State’s ability to take


decisions and communicate, even in
difficult circumstances. Cooperation
between authorities, the business
sector and civil society is of vital
importance. The security of society,
total defence and civil contingency
planning are everyone’s concern.

**Promoting stability and security**
**in our region**
Sweden has a strong interest in our
neighbouring countries also being
free, democratic, safe and prosperous. Norms-based cooperation
and deeper integration – political,
economic, cultural and interpersonal
– strengthens stability and security in
the region. Sweden will actively
participate in the shaping of such
cooperation. The fact that many of
our neighbouring countries are EU
members, or as in the case of Norway
have a close relationship with the EU,
both facilitates and promotes


integration. With Russia we seek
practical cooperation if and when our
interests coincide, such as in the
Arctic Council, the Barents Euro-Arctic Council and the Council of the
Baltic Sea States.

Our part of Europe should be firmly
embedded in the European and
Euro-Atlantic security cooperation
structures. The Baltic Sea should be
an open sea. A strong transatlantic
link is fundamental to the security of
our region. The OSCE offers a
framework for dialogue and the
creation of trust that can contribute
to stability and a reduction in
tensions. Sweden’s military
non-alignment serves us well and
contributes to the stability and
security of Northern Europe. In
addition, our cooperation on defence
and security policy is increasing. Our
partnership with NATO is important


-----

## Threats to our security and actions to deal with them


to our security and our military
capability. Our bilateral cooperation
with Finland and several other
countries is developing.

**Maintaining and strengthening**
**cooperation, solidarity and**
**integration within the EU**
Sweden has a strong security interest
in the European Union continuing to
make vital contributions to peace,
democracy and reconciliation in
Europe. The outbreak of war
between any of the EU Member
States is unthinkable. The appeal of
the EU has contributed to positive
change in countries that have sought
or are seeking EU membership.

EU cohesion is of clear intrinsic value
to Sweden. It contributes to us being
able to achieve our security objectives,
including in relation to the world
outside the EU. A united and strong
EU that pursues a principled and
active foreign policy is also important
to Sweden’s security. No European
State can meet today’s security policy
challenges on its own. Sweden
therefore wants to further strengthen
the EU as a foreign and security
policy actor. This includes a greater
ability for civilian and military crisis
management.

Our country regards the EU as a
community of solidarity across a
range of areas and works to make
it stronger

**Promoting a rules-based**
**multilateral world order**
The United Nations is the hub of the
multilateral world order that must be
developed to manage growing global
challenges concerning security and
development at a time of change.


Sweden aims to contribute actively to
defending, adapting and strengthening this world order. This is also of
significance to our national security.
There are six priority areas.

**_Norms and international law:_**
Maintaining and promoting respect
for human rights, democracy and the
principles of the rule of law are of
vital importance to Sweden. We stand
up for the European security order
and international law, with the UN
Charter as the basis. Undermining of
these norms, rules and undertakings
has a negative impact on our security.
It is in our interests for serious
breaches to result in clear consequences, such as through peace enforcement under Chapter VII of the UN
Charter or through prosecution at the
International Criminal Court.

**_Trade: Long-term security requires_**
healthy economic development. This is
largely dependent on trade with the
rest of the world, particularly for a
country like Sweden whose exports
account for around 50 percent of its
GDP. Economic interdependence also
encourages long-term security. History
shows the risks to which a vicious
circle of protectionist and isolationist
measures can lead, including for
international peace and security.
Sweden has a strong interest in the EU
pursuing a free trade policy agenda.
The World Trade Organisation
(WTO) provides the basis for international cooperation on trade.

**_Climate: Climate change is one of the_**
greatest long-term challenges for
humanity. It has direct and rapidly
growing security consequences.
The 2015 Paris Agreement was an
important step in starting to curb


global warming. Sweden should
continue being a leading country
with regard to reducing fossil fuel
emissions and conducting strong
climate diplomacy that builds
effective alliances.

**_Development cooperation: Sweden_**
is among those countries that provide
the most development assistance in
relation to GDP. We are a world
leader in humanitarian aid that
alleviates the effects of war, conflict
and crises. Sweden also conducts
important initiatives to eliminate
the underlying causes of conflicts.
Sweden aims to increase the percentage of development assistance that
goes to failing states and to protect
human rights and democratic
institutions.

**_Civilian and military peace_**
**_promotion: It is in Sweden’s interest_**
to be a credible and supportive
partner in international missions and
to collectively contribute to the
promotion of peace internationally
and initiatives to encourage stability,
principally through the UN and the
EU. Sweden wishes to be one of the
world’s leading contributors to
civilian crisis management
operations.

**_The 2030 Agenda: The global_**
Sustainable Development Goals are
to enhance security and prevention
by creating the conditions for
developing peaceful and democratic
societies. Our country should set a
good example in terms of the
implementation of the goals and
should also play a leading role in
international implementation.


Sweden’s security, and consequently
our national interests, are currently impacted by a large number of factors.
These involve both new and more
traditional threats, and immediate and
long-term risks. The careful examination of these factors and strengthening
our abilities to prevent, warn of,
withstand and tackle the challenges
that they generate form an important
part of our security efforts. Without
claiming to be comprehensive, the
following section analyses a number of
primary threats which in both the
short and long term challenge our
ability to protect our population and
our country. The description of each
threat is followed by a number of
measures to strengthen our contingency planning.

**Military threats**
The security situation in Europe and
our own region has deteriorated. It is
inconceivable that military conflicts in
our region would affect only one
country. A separate armed military
attack directly targeting Sweden
remains unlikely. However, crises or
incidents – including those involving
military force – may occur, and the
threat of military attack can never be
ruled out. Russia’s aggression towards
Ukraine demonstrates that the risk of
this has increased, including in our
neighbourhood.

Military means, or the threat of their
use, are tools that a State or other actor
may use in combination with influence
operations and information warfare,
cyber-related threats to the total defence and certain forms of sabotage and
terrorism. A number of threats may be
combined in what is sometimes called
hybrid warfare or non-linear warfare.


**_Measures_**
The objective for Sweden’s military
defence is to individually and together
with others, within and outside our
national borders, defend Sweden and
promote our security. This is achieved
by upholding Sweden’s sovereignty,
and by safeguarding sovereign rights
and national interests. In addition,
military defence aims to prevent and
tackle conflicts and war. Sweden’s
freedom of action shall be protected in
the event of political, military or other
pressure and, if required, Sweden shall
be defended against incidents and
armed attack. Sweden’s military
defence shall also protect society and
its functionality by providing support
to civil authorities.

Threats to peace and security can best
be averted collectively and in cooperation with other countries. Sweden is
not a member of any military alliance
but will continue to intensify its
bilateral and multilateral defence and
security policy cooperation. The
Swedish unilateral declaration of
solidarity encompasses EU Member
States, Norway and Iceland. Sweden
will not remain passive if another EU
Member State or Nordic country
suffers a disaster or an attack. We
expect these countries to take similar
action if Sweden is affected. Sweden
therefore needs to be in a position to
both provide and receive civil and
military support.

The deteriorating security situation
places increased demands on Sweden’s
defence capability. This principally
involves increasing the warfighting
capability of the military units and the
overall operational capability of
Sweden’s total defence. A credible
military defence capability promotes


continued peaceful development and
political freedom of action.

Ultimately, the aim of military defence
is to have the ability to repel an armed
attack. Together with political,
diplomatic and economic means, the
Armed Forces create a threshold for
any party who would wish to attack
Sweden or apply pressure through
military force.

Civil defence aims to safeguard the
civilian population, ensure essential
services and contribute to the Swedish
Armed Forces’ capabilities in the event
of an armed attack or war in our
region.

Modern and comprehensive total
defence planning needs to be in place.
Based on the Government’s planning
directives and guidelines, the relevant
authorities will resume their planning
for heightened preparedness and
ultimately also for war. The continued
development of civil contingency
planning and the rebuilding of civil
defence are mutually reinforcing. The
same applies to the development of
government authorities’ ability to
coordinate, prioritise and distribute
resources at central and regional level.

A good foreign intelligence capability
is essential both for Sweden’s defence
capability and for its ability to conduct
independent and active security,
foreign and defence policy. The same
applies to the identification of external
threats to the country, such as terrorism and cyber-related threats. The
foreign intelligence capability should
enable sufficiently high contingency
in order to provide the necessary
warning.


-----

The deterioration in the security
situation internationally is highlighting the need for psychological
defence adapted to current circumstances. Influence operations have
become increasingly sophisticated,
can be used in both peacetime and
wartime and relate to a number of
Swedish authorities’ responsibility and
roles. Swedish authorities need to be
able to identify and address influence
operations and neutralise propaganda
campaigns.

It is an essential security interest to our
country to have our own military
capabilities in terms of combat aircraft
and submarine capabilities. It is
important for Sweden’s defence
capability that these essential security
interests, and the associated industrial
and technical skills, are retained and
developed rationally in relation to the
requirements for war capability and
what may be deemed appropriate use
of State resources.

Sweden will continue its active
involvement and participation in international missions, both civilian and
military. This may take place within
the scope of the UN, the EU, NATO
and the OSCE. In these organisations
we contribute to increased security,
conflict prevention and create
conditions for sustainable poverty
reduction and development. Participation in missions is a way of showing
solidarity and increasing cooperation
with countries and organisations that
are important to security in our region.

**Information and cyber security,**
**digital risks**
Digitalisation impacts all aspects of
our society. It accounts for more than


one-third of the increase in production in recent years.

While the benefits of digitalisation are
welcome, it is clear that the risks and
threats with which it is associated are
some of the most complex security
challenges that we face. Such challenges include hostile threats such as
information operations and electronic
attacks on sensitive information and
communication systems, such as in
the form of computer hacking,
sabotage or espionage, including
against Sweden’s total defence. They
also include IT attacks to evaluate,
affect or disrupt essential services as a
precursor to armed conflict. IT attacks
could also improperly influence the
outcome of democratic elections.

Data management in electronic
communication networks and IT
systems, including in industrial and
other control systems, is constantly
growing. Social media, ‘big data’,
cloud services, artificial intelligence
and what is starting to be termed ‘the
internet of things’ are other areas in
which large amounts of data are
handled. The scope is increasing
across all sectors of society. Where
deficiencies arise in the handling of
data, and particularly regarding its
security, this could have extensive
consequences both for society at large
and for the privacy of individual
inhabitants. Confidence in digitalisation could be jeopardised.

Virtually all of our society is now
dependent on functioning IT systems.
This applies to everything from food
supplies, transport and energy supplies
to health care, emergency services and
police and military activities.


IT services in modern organisations
are often complex and dispersed –
physically and organisationally,
nationally and globally. Information
about ourselves and about our
technological solutions is becoming
increasingly publicly available. This
results in threats being more difficult
to detect, in the risks becoming harder
to assess and in dependence becoming
harder to determine.

**_Measures_**
The objective of our IT policy is for
Sweden to be the best in the world at
using the opportunities provided by
digitalisation. A strategy for the
combined digitalisation policy is
currently being drawn up. This
includes addressing the vulnerability
that inevitably arises from digitalisation. IT systems with high reliability
and strong protection against external
attack are extremely important for the
security of society and for the ability
to manage various crisis situations.
Good information and cyber security
are characterised by all actors having
confidence in information and its
management at all levels of society.
The best possible conditions should
be created for everyone to use, have
responsibility for and have confidence
in the digital society.

To address these challenges in the
field of cyber security, it is important
to work continually to reduce vulnerabilities. This is the task of all actors in
society. The ability to prevent, identify
and manage IT incidents and hostile
attacks therefore needs to be improved in all essential services. The
activities that are most worthy of
protection for the nation should also
meet the requirements stipulated in


-----

**Terrorism and violent extremism**
Terrorism and violent extremism
threaten international peace and
security, our national security and our
fundamental values, freedoms and
rights. Violent extremism and terrorism
also create unrest in society, which
contributes to polarisation, alienation
and a harsher climate of debate.

Every year a large number of terrorist
attacks are carried out around the
world. In recent years, violent Islamist
extremist movements have threatened
security and development in an
increasing number of countries, often
those that are affected by conflict and
weak government. Most terrorist
attacks are carried out outside Europe’s borders, but in recent years both
Sweden and several countries in our
region have been affected. Future
attacks against Sweden and neighbouring countries cannot be ruled out.


protective security legislation. Efforts
to reduce vulnerabilities are based on a
risk and vulnerability analysis and/or
security analysis of the relevant
operations. It is essential that these
efforts include effective coordination
and cooperation between authorities
and other parties to identify what needs
to be protected and what further
security measures need to be put in
place. In this regard, the implementation of the EU Directive concerning
measures for a high common level of
security of network and information
systems across the Union (the NIS
Directive) will play an important role.
Moreover, a robust cyber defence
capability is an important part of our
overall approach to resist targeted
attacks and attempts to influence.

A national cyber security strategy based
in part on the NIS Directive is currently being drafted. Its purpose is to create


the necessary conditions for capacity
building, effective cooperation and
efforts to establish a collective strategic
objective to protect our open society
from the vulnerabilities arising as a
result of digitalisation. The proposed
new protective security act reflects the
changed requirements concerning
protective security, including developments in the area of information
technology, increased international
cooperation and increased
vulnerability of vital public services.

The challenges that Sweden faces are
shared with most other countries.
International cooperation in the field
of cyber security, particularly in
EU-related bodies, is an important
part of Sweden’s ability to promote
security. In addition to this, work
regarding the global dimensions of
information and cyber security issues
should be intensified.


Violent extremism in Sweden mainly
consists of three identified groups:
far-right extremism, Islamist extremism and far-left extremism. These
different extremist groups’ activities
undermine, challenge and threaten
democracy in different ways. Our
society aims to be characterised by
openness and respect for human
rights and for democracy’s fundamental values. People should be able to
move freely, participate in gatherings,
express their views and wear religious
symbols without fear of being exposed
to threats or violence. Terrorists will
not be allowed to restrict this openness, respect and freedom.

**_Measures_**
Terrorism is an extreme form of
violent extremism. In order to prevent
and combat terrorism, efforts to
safeguard democracy against violent
extremism must go hand in hand with
security-enhancing measures and
stricter legislation. This applies both
internationally and in Sweden.
Sweden’s counter-terrorism strategy
forms the basis for the country’s
long-term efforts in this area, both
nationally and internationally.

The objective for all counter-terrorism
activities is to prevent terrorist attacks
being carried out. Efforts to combat
terrorism break down into three areas:
prevent, preempt and protect. Preventive efforts involve all of society
having to work against the underlying
causes of terrorism, combating their
driving forces and appeal and identifying vulnerable individuals in order to
reduce terrorism’s recruitment base.
Society also needs to be more resilient
against radicalisation to violent
extremism. These preventive measures involve authorities, municipalities


and civil society organisations,
including faith communities, contributing and working effectively and in
coordination to safeguard democracy
against violent extremism. Promoting
democracy, gender equality, tolerance
and participation enables us to
strengthen our ability to resist those
who wish to utilise and fuel intolerance, discrimination and exclusion. A
fundamental requirement for all
counter-terrorism work is that human
freedoms and human rights and the
principles of the rule of law must be
respected. This also applies to the
protection of personal privacy.

Preventive measures to reduce violent
radicalisation and recruitment by
terrorist groups are essential but are
often more long-term. Also, more
restrictive and repressive measures are
necessary to counter urgent terrorist
threats. Effective counter-terrorism
work therefore requires both preventive and repressive measures that
complement each other.

As well as working at different levels
to develop the ability to prevent,
counter and disrupt terrorist attacks,
there also need to be contingency
plans in place to handle the situation if
such attacks occur. This includes both
the ability to quickly and effectively
intervene against and stop an ongoing
terrorist attack and to limit the
consequences to society of such an
attack. The focus for this ability is on
effective procedures for cooperation
between authorities on crisis management and crisis communication.
Health care functionality also needs to
be ensured. Cooperation with
countries in our region is also important in order to secure access to
critical equipment.


Efforts to combat terrorism and
violent extremism require stronger
and greater cross-border cooperation.
Sweden should work both within the
EU and the UN to encourage an
overall global approach for more
effective measures against terrorism
and extremism.

Initiatives to resolve and prevent
conflicts and create the conditions for
sustainable development with democracy and a working rule of law are
particularly important in international
cooperation. In this respect, the UN’s
initiatives would need to be strengthened and developed with regard to the
prevention of armed conflicts, conflict
resolution and peace building.

**Organised crime**
Organised crime is a threat to democratic society. In Sweden, organised
crime has developed to encompass
more serious and more organised
elements, sometimes with links to
international criminality of significant
scope. It may involve trafficking
people, arms or drugs. In certain
networks there is both an intent and
an ability to harm and disrupt
fundamental democratic processes.
This may involve preventing the
implementation of political decisions
or seeking to shut down open debate.
Criminal networks’ capacity for
violence and improper influence, as
well as the large sums of money that
criminal individuals accumulate, can
in the long term lead to power shifts
that affect society and its democratic
structures.

The increased use of weapons in
public places and in criminal conflicts
leads to greater fear and insecurity
among people who are present or live


-----

in places where such violent crime
takes place. Repeated violent crime
involving the use of firearms or
explosives could reduce confidence in
the legal system and trust in society as
a whole.

**_Measures_**
Sweden should be a secure country to
live in for everyone and this should
apply to all areas. To ensure this,
targeted measures are required, not
only against ongoing criminality in
prioritised residential areas, but also
against the causes of such criminality.
The preventive work requires municipalities, municipal managements,
County Administrative Boards,
schools, the business sector, voluntary
organisations and non-profit organisations to cooperate with each other and
with government authorities.

The challenges in those particularly
vulnerable areas that experience
shootings and criminal networks
more than others are such that they
require particularly sustained initiatives from various actors in society. Key
aspects in this respect are preventive
measures at an early age, an increased
police presence and intensified work
on combating the occurrence of illegal
weapons and explosives.

Cooperation between many different
actors is necessary in order to tackle
the problem of criminal groups in
Sweden and the crime that these
perpetrate. A combined initiative to
combat this crime and its networks is
currently being undertaken. This
includes increased opportunities for
the exchange of information between
authorities and an instruction for 12


authorities to work together against
organised crime in vulnerable areas.
In addition to this, there will be
improved penal measures against
organised crime and action to improve
order and security in courts of law.

In addition, the Swedish Police
Authority will strengthen its efforts
against illegal arms and explosives in
the country. Effective working
methods should be disseminated and
statistics produced about the extent
to which violent crime is carried out
using firearms or explosives. Efforts
to combat organised crime require
stronger and more intensive crossborder cooperation.

**Threats to energy supplies**
Modern society is strongly dependent
on well-functioning energy supplies.
Disruptions and outages in the supply
of electricity, fuel, gas and heating
could lead to serious consequences,
both for the lives and health of people
and for the functioning of society.
Energy supplies can be affected by a
range of factors, in the short and long
term – weather conditions, accidents,
technical faults, changes in market
conditions, political decisions, climate
change or direct attacks.

Our society is based on integrated
systems of vital infrastructure, which
poses complex challenges in a number
of areas. The supply of electricity is a
key component in society and disruptions can lead to rapid consequences
for other activities such as information
and communication technology, as
well as the transport system.


Robust supply systems for energy with
a good ability to handle any disruptions that might arise contribute to
activities in areas such as food supply,
information technology, telecoms,
radio and television being able to
function. In most cases, dependence is
mutual as disruptions in these
operations can affect energy supplies.

**_Measures_**
The basis for high security of supply is
a robust energy system based on a
diversified energy mix, secure and
diversified transportation and
well-functioning energy markets.
Reduced dependence on fossil fuels is
improving security of supply. As well
as measures that strengthen security
of supply, contingency measures are
also required to cope with disruptions
that are anticipated or that have
already occurred.

There is functioning cooperation
within energy supply at Nordic,
European and global level. Electrical
links to neighbouring countries result,
for example, in good opportunities to
balance temporary national electricity
deficits and surpluses. This leads to
greater robustness and security.

The ability to rapidly restore electricity
supply is of great importance. A robust
energy system is needed to prevent,
withstand and cope with such
disruptions in electricity supply that
can place substantial strain on society,
as well as satisfy electricity supply in
the event of heightened contingency.
The electricity sector has functional
requirements meaning that unplanned
interruptions in the transmission of
electricity may not exceed 24 hours if


the event is within the inspection
responsibility of electricity grid
operators. Electricity consumers that
provide essential services require
knowledge and need to prepare how
they handle outages in order to
mitigate the effects.

Sweden’s security is also affected by
the energy situation in other countries.
A well-functioning and wellintegrated energy market is essential
in the EU. It is also important for
Sweden that Member States as well as
countries on the EU’s borders reduce
their unilateral dependence on a third
country, such as through energy
efficiency measures and a switch to
renewable energy sources.

**Threats to transport and**
**infrastructure**
Threats and risks involving transport
and associated infrastructure could


cause disruptions and outages that
affect travellers, the business sector
and the general public. If critical
infrastructure and related information and communication systems are
damaged, this can have serious
consequences for the whole of
society’s functionality.

Specific threats and risks include
disruptions to and loss of resources
such as fuel, electricity supply, vehicle
supply and IT/telecommunications;
disruptions and the loss of important
support systems such as information
and communication systems and
control centres; major accidents and
accidents involving hazardous goods;
hostile threats in the form of sabotage and attacks against vital
infrastructure, nodes or other
facilities. There are several challenges
within the transport sector that need
to be managed in order to prevent,


and to ensure contingencies and
capabilities to cope with, possible
events. The overall coordination and
control of activities in the transport
sector is complex from a contingency
perspective, as in addition to a number
of authorities there are many private
operators and state-owned companies
that also have key tasks.

Increasing traffic in different areas of
transport means that the risks of more
extensive consequences of known
threats, risks and challenges are
increasing. Major events and extensive
disruptions that affect vital infrastructure and essential transport could
also have consequences for other
types of essential services.

**_Measures_**
The overall objective in the area of
transport is to ensure economically
effective transport provision for


-----

citizens and businesses throughout
Sweden that is sustainable in the long
term. Good, reliable transport systems
and transportation for trade and travel
between countries and within Sweden
are prerequisites for today’s globalised
society to function.

Robustness and replaceability of
critical infrastructure and essential
transport services must be ensured.
This is particularly relevant in terms of
the transport sector’s importance for
our food supplies, the functionality of
which is vitally important to society.

The ability to cope with situations in
which threats and risks are realised
needs to be improved. This may be
achieved, for example, through
measures that provide better perimeter protection of vital parts of the
transport infrastructure. It is also
important to continue initiatives to
bring about greater security in
information and communication
systems. The ability to improve
redundancy and to use replacement
systems should be reviewed.

At regulatory authority level, the work
of analysing, planning and practising
for various incident scenarios needs to
be further developed, from accidents
to possible events outside Sweden that
occasion heightened contingency.
Where relevant, issues regarding
threats, risks and challenges should be
evaluated as part of infrastructure
planning processes. Cooperation
between the private and public sectors
needs to be analysed and appropriate
measures taken, particularly in light of
rebuilding civil defence.


International cooperation on contingency and security issues in the
transport sector is important for the
ability to manage various types of
crisis. Sweden aims to actively
participate in various organisations
and other forums that draw up
international transportation rules
(aviation, shipping, road and rail) and
carry out initiatives to safeguard the
security of global flows.

**Health threats**
Infectious diseases and other types of
biological, chemical and also radionuclear threats come under the
category of health threats. Threats
may be in the form of bacteria, viruses
and other microorganisms, as well as
radioactive, chemical and biological
weapons. These may be used unintentionally through deficient handling or
intentionally through different types
of hostile actions targeting facilities or
the general public directly. Threats
that affect people’s health may also
have an environmental origin, such as
pollution of watercourses in the event
of flooding and similar events.

The cross-border aspect and the
constantly changing microbiological
world are central to health threats. The
nature of the threats is consequently
largely unpredictable. Global travel
and international transport are
resulting in the spread of an increased
number of diseases. These diseases
can adapt to local conditions and new,
previously unknown infections can
emerge. Some 60 per cent of existing
infectious diseases and 75 per cent of
new diseases are ‘zoonoses’, i.e.
diseases that are transmitted from
animals to humans. Humans, animals


and the environment are therefore
closely linked in a cycle without any
clear boundaries.

Increasing antibiotic resistance poses a
threat to modern health care. The
problem has increased as a result of
greater, often uncontrolled, use of
antibiotics internationally. An important aspect is the spread of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, particularly in
health care. Increased mobility of
people, animals and foodstuffs is
leading to the more rapid spread of
antibiotic-resistant bacteria. Moreover,
there has been a reduction in the
development of new antibiotics.

Outbreaks of infectious diseases in
Sweden, including flu epidemics, will
lead to an increased burden on health
care. Demans may be made regarding
capacity to handle illnesses that
require access to special high level
isolation units. If a large number of
people become ill simultaneously,
this could be expected to lead to
disruptions in other essential
services, with subsequent major
economic consequences.

**_Measures_**
Ensuring adequate Swedish contingencies against health threats will
continue to require our own capacity
to prevent, detect and respond to these
threats, along with effective international cooperation within the EU and
globally. Sweden will work to ensure a
robust global capacity to detect and
respond to health threats through the
implementation of the International
Health Regulations, and the Swedish
crisis management system must
continue to meet the requirements of


these regulations. Sweden requires
necessary and tested contingency
plans and resources for managing
different types of health threats, such
as flu pandemics. Coordination and
cooperation structures need to be in
place and be tested. Authorities’ ability
to detect hazardous substances and be
able to operate in such environments
needs to be practised. Medicines need
to be available in sufficient quantities
to cope with a sudden crisis (such as
antiviral medicines, antibiotics and
vaccines). Protection against sabotage
for food production and drinking
water facilities needs to be robust, as
these supply systems are particularly
sensitive to hostile attack.

**Climate change and its effects**
Climate change is a serious and
growing threat to global security. It is
already threatening the existence of
some states and populations. Without
decisive action by the international
community, these changes will
threaten the survival of humanity in
the long term. In no other area is the
need for prevention greater or more
obvious.

Climate change impacts security in
Sweden both directly and indirectly.
The international implications will be
just as significant as those directly
affecting our country.

Climate change can increase the risk
of war, conflict and poverty. It can
exacerbate the lack of water and food
in regions that are already vulnerable.
The combination of a lack of resources and population growth destabilises
societies and breeds or exacerbates
conflict. This often results in people


being forced to flee. Higher sea levels
and severe storms threaten lives,
property and infrastructure in coastal
regions throughout the world.

Today’s Swedish society has been
developed and adapted to a particular
climate. A change in climate has
implications for many key services in
society. These include physical
planning, buildings, communications
and transport infrastructure, technical
supply systems and, of course,
agriculture, hunting and fishing.

Sweden’s climate has already become
warmer, with more precipitation.
Changes are expected to continue,
even if the global average increase in
temperature is limited to less than
2 °C. Deluges and heavy rain are
expected to increase in intensity,
raising the risk of flooding and high
river levels. This will have implications
for areas such as Mälardalen, Vänern,
Göta älvdalen and Gothenburg.
Flooding and saltwater intrusion
could also increase as a result of rising
sea levels, particularly in low-lying
coastal areas in southern Sweden.
Skåne is particularly vulnerable to
erosion and a rise in sea level, but these
factors would also have implications
for Mälardalen and Gothenburg. Over
a horizon of 100 years, saltwater
intrusion would threaten the drinking
water supply from Lake Mälaren.

**_Measures_**
Sweden will strengthen its leading role
in international cooperation to curb
climate change and promote
sustainable development based on
the 2030 Agenda. This role is
strengthened by our own national


policy to reduce emissions and to
achieve the target of Sweden becoming one of the world’s first fossil-free
welfare nations. Our contribution to
international development cooperation aims to reduce global greenhouse
gas emissions and strengthen the
resilience of vulnerable countries.
Sweden will continue its efforts to
ensure that climate and security are
high on the agenda in international
organisations, particularly the UN and
the EU. Strengthening cooperation
between development assistance and
humanitarian aid could enable the
risks and consequences of natural
disasters to be reduced. Following
extreme weather events and natural
disasters, humanitarian aid should be
used as effectively as possible and be
preventive in nature.

Sweden’s focus for the adaptation of
society to a change in climate is to
develop a long-term sustainable and
robust society that actively addresses
climate change by reducing vulnerabilities and leveraging opportunities. A
national strategy needs to be developed to strengthen climate adaptation
efforts and the national coordination
of such work in the long term. This
will make it easier to adapt ongoing
and planned land use and the built
environment to a gradual change
in climate.


-----

## Conclusion

The Government has overall responsibility for Sweden’s security. This
responsibility includes encouraging a
broad approach to the concept of
security and giving security issues
adequate organisational and political
support. There is also significant value
in having a continued broad consensus in the Riksdag that promotes a
long-term approach and continuity in
Sweden’s national security efforts.

A number of changes have been made
over the past ten years to strengthen
society’s contingency planning and
the ability to prevent, withstand and
manage crises. This includes the
establishment of a crisis organisation
in the Government Offices of
Sweden, as well as a stronger crisis and
consular organisation in the Foreign
Service and the establishment of the
Swedish Civil Contingencies Agency.
Since 2014, the Government has
included a Minister for Home Affairs,
with express responsibility for civil
contingency planning, civil defence
and combating terrorism. A specific
counter-terrorism strategy has been
adopted and a cyber security strategy
is being prepared. A specific strategy
on antibiotic resistance has also been
determined.

There is wide support in the Riksdag
for the Government bill ‘Defence
policy orientation – Sweden’s defence
for 2016–2020’. Work on comprehensive total defence planning, both
military and civil, has commenced.
Foreign policy and diplomacy are key
instruments of coordination and to
counter and prevent crises and
conflict. Work on peace, security and
development demands a coordinated
and consensus-based approach. The


Government’s Policy for Global
Development (PGD) plays a key role
in this regard.

Experience of events that have
occurred in Sweden has demonstrated
the importance of the relevant actors
cooperating with each other to ensure
adequate coordination and effective
use of resources. Experience has also
shown that the relevant actors need to
be proactive and prepared to take the
necessary measures, even in uncertain
situations where there is a lack of
information. Exercises and training strengthen the ability to adopt a
combined approach to tackling crises,
make it easier to cooperate in a real
crisis and provide important experience. Continued long-term knowledge
accrual, research and technological
development must be ensured in order
to strengthen society.

The conditions for safeguarding
Sweden’s security are changing rapidly.
Internal and external threats are
changing and are more complex than
before. Consequently, our country is
constantly facing new challenges in
which efforts to improve security
must continually be developed. The
Government will conduct a review of
what constitutional changes may need
to be made to better meet central
government’s needs to safeguard the
interests of the total defence in
different areas of society.

Swedish business now operates
globally and depends on an international market to source its workforce,
develop technology and for growth. In
addition to the work that is already
taking place regarding key security
interests in the field of defence, there is


also reason to consider how the
protective security efforts of the
business sector with regard to essential
technology and operations that are of
strategic interest to Sweden, can best
be implemented.

The national security strategy describes
the objectives for our security and the
interests that are at the heart of
Sweden’s national security efforts. The
security strategy encompasses
different aspects across a number of
policy areas, and the relevant actors
are in both the public and private
sectors. Public-private partnership is
particularly important. For the
Government’s part, all ministries must
base their preparation of relevant
initiatives in their respective areas of
responsibility on the strategy.

Implementation of this strategy, along
with wider efforts to prepare Sweden
for crisis and war, is the collective
responsibility of Swedish society.
Active participation from central,
regional and local authorities, and
from private individuals, the business
sector and civil society, are of vital
importance to the success of its
implementation.

The Government’s security policy
council will have specific responsibility
for following up on this strategy. The
council is not a decision-making body,
but it is an appropriate forum for
ongoing reporting on how the strategy
is being implemented.

The aim is to conduct a review of this
national security strategy every five
years. It is also of value if broad
consensus in the Riksdag can be
reached on such reviews.


-----

### Prime Minister’s Office 103 33 Stockholm www.regeringen.se


-----

