# SWITZERLAND’S SECURITY


## Situation Report 2016


## of the Federal Intelligence Service FIS


-----

### Switzerland’s Security 2016


-----

-----

### Table of contents

**Security and sovereignty in uncertain times** **5**

**The situation report in brief** **7**

**Strategic environment in a state of flux** **13**

**Focus on China** **24**

**Violent extremism and terrorism motivated by religion and ethno-nationalism** **33**

**Right-wing and left-wing extremism** **53**

**Proliferation** **63**

**Illegal intelligence** **71**

**List of abbreviations** **85**


-----

-----

### Security and sovereignty in uncertain times

As the previously favourable security climate becomes more volatile, security policy is required
to provide guidance. Our environment is characterized by rapidly growing complexity, and even the
word ‘chaos’ is creeping into the language of security policy. It is being used as a rather inadequate
description of the trend toward ‘fragmentation’: the sharp rise in the number of relevant players
compared with past eras. Increasingly, many non-state players are able to influence Switzerland's
internal and external security, both for good and for ill. In this environment, threats and dangers can
often develop rapidly and surprisingly. They are becoming more unpredictable and the response
times for decision-makers are shrinking. This is generating an atmosphere of uncertainty. The probability of strategic surprises is growing.
Providing security guidance under such conditions is a major challenge, and a reliable situation
assessment is an indispensible requirement. It provides the basis for governing bodies to make decisions which will help to prevent strategic surprises and to guarantee security even in an increasingly
uncertain environment. The intelligence service’s assessment of the threat situation, as presented in
an unclassified version by the FIS in its annual report, using its situation radar tool, makes a substantial contribution to these security policy objectives.
Every ship in turbulent waters relies on its own radar. This alone shows precisely those threats and
dangers that are relevant to its position. However, this does not preclude the exchange of information with other ships in similar positions about risks lying in wait along the route. The situation is
similar in the case of states. In a volatile security environment, it is natural to exchange information
with other states about developments, risks and consequences. However, our country decides independently on our external security-policy stance and the specific
design of our internal security-policy instruments. This independence requires
us to be willing and able to do our own information gathering, analysis and
assessment. For this reason, the intelligence service is a particularly important
tool for sovereign decision-making on security policy in Switzerland. The new
Intelligence Service Act will increase its importance still further. It will improve the intelligence service’s information gathering, primarily where there are
indications of an immediate threat to our own interests. It will optimise our own
radar. The new Intelligence Service Act will in this way contribute to our
security and our sovereignty.

Federal Department of Defence,
Civil Protection and Sport DDPS

Guy Parmelin
Federal Councillor


-----

-----

### The situation report in brief

The complexity of the challenges facing the security authorities is increasing as the security environment becomes fragmented due to the growing number of relevant players. The FIS uses its 'situation
radar' tool to provide a certain amount of security policy guidance. It gives an overview of the security situation, removing any unnecessary complexity, and identifies what the intelligence service
sees as being the major issues facing Switzerland's inhabitants.



- Switzerland's strategic environment is
marked by unusually high levels of stress
in Europe due to various crisis situations.
These crises are long-term in nature, but they
have all come to a head at around the same
time: the political and economic crisis over
European integration, a new conflict situation with Russia and the crisis situations in
the Middle East, the impacts of which have
been directly felt in Europe in the form of escalating migration movements and a heightened terror threat.

- For a number of years, Russia has opposed
the expanded EU and NATO in Eastern Europe and has sought to consolidate its own
sphere of influence on its borders. Ukraine is
strategic territory and lies at the heart of this
ambition. Since the annexation of Crimea,
force of arms has been used to prosecute the
conflict; the armed conflict has left its mark
on the Ukrainian economy and population.
However, the country is also being weakened by internal power struggles. Russia's
influence can also be seen in Moldova, Belarus and Georgia. The conflict with Russia
will in all probability be a change in Switzer

land's strategic environment that will have
lasting effects. Realistically possible security scenarios in Europe fall into two broad
categories: in one of these, an understanding
between East and West limits the conflicts
along the edges of the emerging zones of interest at an early stage, and in the alternative
evolution, escalation gradually continues to
spiral upward over the next few years.

- Syria is in many respects the epicentre of one
of the crisis situations. The problems underlying the Arab Spring have not been brought
any closer to a solution anywhere in the region (with the possible exception of Tunisia),
and new crises have escalated (such as in
Yemen). The tensions between Saudi Arabia and Iran have the potential to cause particularly far-reaching destabilisation of the
region. But it is in Syria that the expansion
of ‘Islamic State’ and signs of attrition of the
regime have internationalised the conflict to
a whole new level. Russia took the strategically significant decision to intervene on the
side of the regime with its own armed forces.
This step and the attacks by ‘Islamic State’ in
Paris have given fresh impetus to efforts by


-----

the Western powers to exert influence. However, despite intensified military operations,
there is as yet no sign of a resolution of the
Syrian civil war, let alone a sustainable political solution.

- The terrorist organisation ‘Islamic State’
occupies the leadership role in the jihadist
movement. It took over this role from al-Qaeda, but the potential threat from the latter
has not diminished as a result. The threat
posed by jihadist terrorism has increased
further in recent months, mainly due to the
fact that ‘Islamic State’ is sending individuals to Europe on missions to plan or carry out
attacks. Switzerland is part of the European
threat area, and the threat level has also risen
in this country.

- Migration movements toward Europe have
escalated over the course of the last year.
Despite rising numbers, Switzerland has until now been less affected by this than other
countries in Europe. Migration is not a security issue in itself, but individual aspects
of migration certainly are. Notable among
these are attempts by groups or individuals
to reach Europe concealed within the mass
flow of migrants in order to carry out terrorist
attacks. The violent reactions of right-wing
and left-wing extremists to developments
in the area of migration and asylum also
require close monitoring. The situation in
Switzerland, unlike that in some countries in
Europe, has been largely calm. Nonetheless,
the potential for violence is present in both
right-wing and left-wing extremist circles.



- An agreement has been successfully reached
with Iran in the shape of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, thus overcoming one
of the challenges in the area of nonproliferation. This should prevent a nuclear-armed
Iran for the next ten to fifteen years. However, the nonproliferation issue has not in any
way diminished in importance as a result;
further efforts in this area are required in relation to North Korea as well as Iran.

- Illegal intelligence is carried out in Switzerland, as elsewhere. The damage caused
by the theft of information is just one of the
resulting problems. The access which intelligence services obtain to persons, institutions
or electronic systems can potentially be exploited not only in order to collect intelligence, but also for the purposes of manipulation or even sabotage. Information obtained
by intelligence services can also be used for
information operations, the importance of
which is increasing. In the area of information security, the lessons that emerged from
the Snowden affair remain as valid as ever.


-----

-----

**Situation radar tool**

The FIS uses a situation radar tool to depict the threats
affecting Switzerland. A simplified version of the situation radar, without any confidential data, has also
been incorporated into this report. The public version
lists the threats that fall within the FIS’s remit, together with those classified under the categories of ’migration risks’ and ’organised crime’, which are also relevant
from the point of view of security policy. This report
does not go into detail about these two categories, for
more information on which readers are referred to the
reports of the relevant federal authorities.


-----

**om**


ConventionalConventional
war in Europewar in Europe Cyberwar

**Early warning**

Threats to criticalThreats to critical

OrganizedOrganized infrastructureinfrastructure
crimecrime

Restrictions onRestrictions on

Migration risksMigration risks Switzerland‘sSwitzerland‘s Energy

**Main themes** freedom of actionfreedom of action security

North AfrikaNorth Afrika

RussiaRussia

Syria/IraqSyria/Iraq (East-West confict)(East-West confict)

JihadJihad

al-Qaeda andal-Qaeda andits afliatesits afliates „Islamic„Islamic travellerstravellers **Flash-** Iran North Korea

state“state“ **points**

PKKPKK Lone perpetrators/Lone perpetrators/

Political espionagePolitical espionage

KidnappingsKidnappings small groupssmall groups

against Switzerlandagainst Switzerland

Left-wingLeft-wing
extremismextremism IndustrialIndustrial

espionageespionage

Espionage againstEspionage against

CyberactivismCyberactivism

exile communitiesexile communities

Right-wingRight-wing
extremismextremism


-----

-----

### Strategic environment in a state of flux


**Long-term crises and trends**
Switzerland's strategic environment is
marked by unusually high levels of stress in Europe due to various crisis situations. In the last
few years, these crises have been regularly described by the FIS in its situation reports. They
are long-term in nature, but they have all come
to a head at around the same time: the political
and economic crisis over European integration,
a new conflict situation with Russia and the crisis situations in the Middle East, the impacts of
which have been directly felt in Europe in the
form of escalating migration movements and a
heightened terror threat. The focus of this year's
report is on another long-term trend of importance to Switzerland: the growing strength of
China and its rise to become a global force.


**Huge pressure for change on Europe as we**
**know it**
The migration movements toward Europe,
which had been steadily increasing for years,
have escalated since the first half of 2015. In
the month of October 2015 alone, as many asylum-seeking migrants entered Europe as in the
whole of 2014, itself a record year – the majority
entering via Turkey and Greece and travelling
onward via the so-called Balkan route. In many
places, temporary border controls intended for
emergency situations have been reintroduced at
internal borders. The Schengen/Dublin agreements, pillars of the free movement of persons
and among the most visible achievements of
European integration, have come under severe
pressure.


Figures: State Secretariat for Migration /February 2016


LIBYA


-----

However, the negative impact on Schengen is
only the most visible aspect of the challenges
with which Europe's political order currently
finds itself confronted. The European debt crisis and the associated risks to the stability of
the eurozone and the common currency are still
virulent threats and just as relevant to the survival of European integration as the problems of
migration and terrorism. A series of crisis management steps have been taken to tackle the debt
crisis in recent years, and harsh structural reforms are underway, particularly in the countries
on the periphery of the EU. However, further
– politically difficult – measures still lie ahead,
and these will not be completed until at least the
end of the current decade. Political and economic crises like those which have gripped Greece,
Portugal, Spain, Italy and Cyprus for years tend
to trigger speculation about the stability of the
eurozone and of the common currency, and are
likely to occur again in the years to come.
It remains to be seen whether the escalated migration movements will be the crisis that brings
European integration to a standstill or even jeopardises the entire historical process since the
Second World War. The heightened terror threat
is now also impacting on the integration process,
for the time being with mixed results: integration and cross-border cooperation in the area
of security are widely recognised as being necessary, but there is also a tendency for national
border regimes to be tightened again, to some
extent at the expense of the free movement of
persons. Whatever the outcome of the responses
to these challenges, the years of difficult political and economic crisis management will have


eroded trust among the member states. Even if
the EU, the euro and the common market outlive
the protracted European crisis, severely strained
government budgets and continuing instability
in the European banking system will delay economic recovery and increase social tensions. Far
and wide, the fringes of the political spectrum
are gaining in strength and the political centre
ground is being weakened. Obtaining political
majorities for EU-wide solutions is becoming
more and more difficult. A multi-speed Europe
is on the verge of becoming reality: unilateral
decisions by individual countries are becoming
more frequent, as are requests for national exemptions. In cases of acute crisis, the suspension
of common European rules has also become a
reality. The debate in the UK, where a referendum on whether or not to remain in the EU is
still pending, illustrates that the integration of
Europe is not irreversible.
The crisis in European integration affects
Switzerland directly, not only due to the great
economic importance of the stabilization of the
Eurozone. It challenges policymakers in many
areas, more and more including security policy.
For Switzerland, as an integral part of Europe in
many respects, European integration since the
Second World War has guaranteed a secure and
stable environment. A Europe in crisis, preoccupied with itself and experiencing difficulties in
maintaining the common market and the development of intra-European solidarity, is not well
equipped to tackle the major long-term security
challenges presented by the growing strength
of Russia in the East and the crises on Europe's
southern and south-eastern flanks.


-----

**Russia: Europe in the initial phase of a new**
**conflict situation with Moscow**
The growth in Russia's power on the European continent is a process that has been ongoing
for over 15 years. The core of the Russian power structure, which President Putin has built up
around a small circle of trusted advisors, is very
stable in terms of personnel, the middle-class
opposition movement has been contained, and
the centralisation of the system and the internal controls are continuously being strengthened. Western sanctions and even more so the
sharp fall in oil prices are currently putting a
strain on the Russian economy. However, the
corporatist system of power was built to cope
with adversities. It would probably come under
enough pressure to affect its stability only if the
oil price were to remain at a low level for a prolonged period.
Russia, from its position of regained strength,
has for a number of years opposed the expanded EU and NATO in eastern Europe and has
sought to consolidate its own sphere of influ

ence on its borders. This policy of exerting
power in Europe is accepted by the Russian
population at large.
The expansion of Russian influence is clear to
see. Russia has begun to challenge the post-Soviet status quo in Europe – including militarily. To Russian ambitions, Ukraine represents
strategic territory and the heart of Russia's own
sphere of influence. Since the annexation of
Crimea, force of arms has been used to prosecute the conflict. Two years on, the armed conflict has left its mark on the Ukrainian economy
and population. However, the country is also
being weakened by internal power struggles.
The political elite in Kiev, the traditional ruling
oligarchy, is involved in intense internal power struggles which are damaging the Ukrainian
state more than at any time since its independence in 1991 and are promoting the trend toward the break-up of the country into its regions.
Russian influence stands ready to succeed the
present leadership. The pro-Western government in neighbouring Moldova was replaced in


-----

2015 after years of internal power struggles and
protests by frustrated citizens, and the country
is once again increasingly opening itself up to
Russian influence. Russian influence is already
dominant in Belarus and is also advancing in
Georgia.
In all probability, the conflict with Russia
is not a temporary phenomenon, but a change
in Switzerland's strategic environment that
will have lasting effects. A 25-year-long era
in which inter-state conflicts on the 'old continent' were on the decline has come to an end.
A return to a situation like the one which has
prevailed over the last two decades, in which
movement toward the goal of a common security area from the Atlantic to the Urals was at
least a long-term prospect, has now become unlikely. The joint fight against jihadist terrorism
will also in all probability be unable to put a
halt to the growing geopolitical polarisation between East and West. Europe probably now faces a sustained period of confrontation between
the West and Russia at the political, economic
and military levels. The conflict in Ukraine, the


West's subsequent economic sanctions against
Russia, Russia's sanctions against the EU, the
recession in the Russian economy and Russia's
military action in Syria are an expression of this
confrontation, which will probably drag on far
into the 2020s. A process has been set in motion
which over time is likely to lead to the formation of competing zones of interest on the European continent.
Realistically possible security scenarios in
Europe fall into two broad categories: in one
of these, an understanding between East and
West limits the conflicts along the edges of the
emerging zones of interest at an early stage, and
in the alternative evolution, escalation gradually continues to spiral upward over the next few
years. The more favourable case will see the
development of a constant struggle for influence over a wide geographic area right across
the continent, in which phases of tension and
détente alternate and in which the limits of one
side's influence and of the opposing side's resistance are continually tested. It is uncertain
how these developments will play out in de

-----

tail, whether it will prove possible to regulate
these tensions and to limit the deployment of
resources, to freeze conflicts and to limit each
side's claims or at least to postpone their fulfilment. This ongoing conflict may over the next
few years lead to serious crises in various areas
of Switzerland's strategic environment. Besides
Ukraine, Belarus and Moldova, the fault line
across Europe between East and West passes in
the north through the Baltic region and in the
south through the Balkans, where East-West rivalry could be superimposed on conflicts in a
region which has not yet come to terms with the
disintegration of Yugoslavia.
In the meantime, the NATO states are once
again stepping up their focus on collective
defence. Since 2014, the establishment of rapid-deployment forces has been strengthened,
exercise activity has been intensified and greater importance is again being attached to the
maintenance of hardware and infrastructure.
The USA, for its part, has begun to restrengthen the deterrent effect of US armed forces in
Europe and to restore the basic capacity for
rapid reinforcement in the event of a conflict.
NATO is anticipating not only purely military
threats, but also challenges below the threshold
of war, such as cyber attacks and acts of sabotage against critical infrastructure by special
operations forces or other players prepared to
use violence, information warfare or coercive
economic measures. Along with changes in the
strategic environment, the situation for Switzerland is also changing. An armed attack on
Switzerland remains unlikely. However, developments in Europe lead to challenges on many


fronts. Switzerland’s environment is once again
becoming more sharply polarized along EastWest lines and military factors are regaining importance. The conflict with Russia represents a
new phase in the geopolitical struggle. Threats
have become a reality on both sides of the eastern border of the EU/NATO and are currently
growing. A crisis in this area between East and
West – whether above or below the threshold
for war – could, without much advance warning, become a challenge to Europe's political
order, an order whose stability since the Second
World War has also been one of the foundations
of Swiss security and defence policy.

**The consequences of the Arab Spring reach**
**Europe**
2015 was the year in which the crisis in the
Middle East resulting from the Arab Spring of
2011 finally reached Europe. Firstly, migration
escalated in 2015 to such an extent as to cause
the reception infrastructures in Europe to collapse in places, giving rise to a real refugee
crisis with complex political and social repercussions. Secondly, the attack on a Russian passenger plane over Sinai and the attacks in Paris
by jihadist terrorists from the ‘Islamic State’ in
Iraq and Syria demonstrated – not for the first
time, but on a new level – the organization’s
potential to act globally.
Syria is in many respects the epicentre of the
crisis situation. The problems underlying the
Arab Spring have not been brought any closer to a solution anywhere in the region (with
the possible exception of Tunisia), and new
crises have escalated (such as in Yemen). The


-----

tensions between Saudi Arabia and Iran have
the potential to cause particularly far-reaching
destabilisation of the region. But it is in Syria
that the expansion of ‘Islamic State’ and signs
of attrition of President Bashar al-Assad's regime have internationalised the conflict to a
whole new level. Russia took the strategically
significant decision to intervene on the side of
the regime with its own armed forces. This step
and the attacks by ‘Islamic State’ in Paris have
given fresh impetus to efforts by the Western
powers to exert influence: they have triggered
renewed attempts at a political solution, as well
as new military operations in the fight against
terrorism. At this point in the crisis in Syria,
which will soon enter its sixth year, the price
of political compromise has already increased
significantly. Despite intensified military operations, there is as yet no sign of a resolution of
the Syrian civil war, let alone of any sustainable
political solution to the conflict.
The impact of ‘Islamic State’ is far-reaching. For at least the next twelve months, it will
probably continue to control its own territory,
although it is currently shrinking due to suc

cessful operations of the opposing forces. A
sustainable military defeat of ‘Islamic State’ in
Iraq and Syria is not likely in 2016, whilst the
group continues to exploit the weaknesses of its
opponents. Its demonstrations of power, from
Iraq and Syria via Lebanon and Egypt to Libya,
are calling into question the precarious legitimacy of state borders and with it the almost
century-long post-Ottoman order in the Middle
East. Finally, they are also provoking new and
possibly long-drawn-out rounds of military interventions in the region, led by the USA and
Russia.
The outcome of this upheaval on Europe's
southern and south-eastern flanks remains uncertain. Any consolidation of ‘Islamic State’
in Syria and Iraq would be a strategically important change in the Middle East order and
would have security consequences for Europe,
Switzerland included. In Syria, the regime is
fighting on and will possibly survive, albeit
with Syrian society in ruins and without stable
control over many provinces. The loss of state
control across large areas of Syria and Iraq will
make it necessary for the West and Russia to


-----

maintain lengthy military engagements, which
will possibly also introduce new geopolitical
rivalries into the region. Egypt and Tunisia are
struggling to stabilise the balance of power in
their own countries, using a variety of methods.
Libya has lost this struggle and is now showing
all the symptoms of a failed state.
Switzerland is supporting the difficult and
lengthy process of transformation in the region, where such a process still exists. However, it cannot remain unaffected by the risks
in the southern and eastern Mediterranean regions. Migration to Europe from the crisis area
has become one of the two greatest and most
pressing challenges. Europe can try to mitigate
and manage the consequences. But unless the
region stabilises – and at the moment it doesn't
look like doing so – the migration pressure on
Europe will remain at a high level over the next
twelve months.
The other major challenge for Europe is to
tackle the increased terrorist threat from the region. This problem was the central theme of the
FIS's 2015 Annual Report. The phenomenon of
jihad tourism has become the serious security
problem for Western states that many feared it
would. At a media conference on 2 November
2015 –11 days before the attacks in Paris – the
FIS drew attention to the heightened threat because there were indications that ‘Islamic State’
had sent individuals to Europe on missions to
plan or carry out attacks. However, the authorities will also need to continue to pay close attention to numerous other problem areas: the
threat to the security of citizens and diplomatic missions in the region, terrorist threats and


kidnappings in the region and the disruption of
trade and of energy supplies, as well as coping
with sanctions regimes and managing the funds
of politically exposed persons.

**Energy security**
The crisis in the global economy and the
political challenges in regions critical to the
global economy are being accompanied by upheavals on the commodity markets. These continue to call the public’s attention to the issue
of dependence on imported raw materials and
energy. As far as Switzerland's energy security is concerned, however, the risks have not
changed fundamentally. A well-functioning oil
market secures Switzerland's supply, even in
times of heightened uncertainty in the oil-producing regions. This also applies with regard to
the dramatic collapse in the oil price, which in
the short term offers price advantages for importing countries, but in the medium term prevents continuous investment in prospecting for
and developing new oil fields, which may well
result in supply bottlenecks and rising prices in
future. There is as yet no comparably robust international market for natural gas. Switzerland's
dependence on fixed pipeline systems which
are largely centred on Russia will not change
substantially in the near future. The EU's largescale Nabucco project and Russia's South
Stream project have both been aborted in recent
years. This has further accentuated the significance of the crisis region of Ukraine to the transit of natural gas from Russia to Europe in the
short term. In the longer term, the technological
revolution linked to the extraction of shale gas


-----

has the potential to speed up the development
of an international natural gas market and also
to have a positive impact on Switzerland’s energy security.

**Focus on China**
The focus section of this report is dedicated
to China. Where the intelligence service directs
its attention should be determined not only by
current events but also by long-term trends,
where these impact on Switzerland. The growing strength of China and its rise to become a
global power undoubtedly fulfil this criterion.
As a result of China's expanding international
engagement, contacts between Switzerland and
China – initiated as much by one side as the
other – are also on the increase.
China sees itself as Asia's strongest power
and is seeking recognition as a player which is
politically and economically on a par with the
USA. Since head of state and party leader Xi
Jinping took office, the country has taken ‘the
Chinese dream of the rejuvenation and resurgence of the nation’ as its guiding principle. In
the international context, it is showing itself to
be a dependable player, but is also asserting its
interests in a determined way. It is striving to
attain a regional leadership role in Asia.

**Terrorism**
Jihad-motivated terrorism still poses a major threat to security in jihadist conflict zones,
but also in Western, Islamic and other states.
Radicalised individuals prepared to use violence might also take action in Switzerland or
use Switzerland as a base for preparing attacks


in other countries. Overall, the threat from jihad-motivated terrorism in Europe has once
again increased. This also applies to Switzerland, which falls within the western European
threat area.
Ethno-nationalist-motivated terrorism and
violent extremism should not be forgotten, either.In particular, the Kurdistan Workers Party
(PKK) has the potential for violence in Western
Europe and could exploit it at any time. Depending on the situation in Turkey and in Kurdish-populated areas, further coordinated events
and campaigns across Europe can be expected.
However, these will probably not be of a violent nature, at least not in Switzerland. Isolated
incidents on the fringes of demonstrations can,
however, quickly lead to acts of violence, especially where Turkish and Kurdish groups come
into contact with one another.

**Right-wing and left-wing extremism**
In both right-wing and left-wing extremist circles, the potential for violence persists.
Despite this, the situation at the current time
is largely calm. However, the tense situation
regarding the issue of asylum, in particular, as
well as further jihad-motivated attacks in Europe, could potentially lead to a deterioration
in the situation in both right-wing and left-wing
extremist circles. While there are currently no
specific signs of such a situation developing
in Switzerland, there are in other countries in
Europe.


-----

**Proliferation**
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems continues to
threaten security in many regions of the world.
Thanks to a diplomatic breakthrough in 2015,
the situation regarding the Iranian nuclear programme has eased significantly. Nonetheless,
Iran will remain subject to a special authorisation regime in the area of foreign trade for
years to come. Some sections of the agreement
between Iran and the permanent members of
the Security Council plus Germany, codified
through a UN Security Council resolution, are
also binding on Switzerland, as one of the major
exporters of dual-use goods. North Korea continues unhindered with its weapons of mass destruction programs and on 6 January 2016 once
again tested a nuclear explosive device. The international sanctions regime introduced in 2014
in connection with the military escalation of the
situation in Ukraine also poses a new challenge
for Switzerland. In addition, the repeated use of
chemical substances in the conflict in Syria and
Iraq reminds us of how important combating
proliferation is to related issues such as that of
combating terrorism.


**Illegal intelligence**
Illegal intelligence activities are carried out
by governments or by private players working
for governments; in some instances, there is
also a market for illegally acquired information.
In the area of espionage there are no friendly
states, but collaboration does take place where
interests coincide. As a rule, state interests define the goals of intelligence collection activities – with some requirements constant and
others dictated by the current situation. Illegal
intelligence provides access to persons and
systems which could possibly be exploited, not
only in order to acquire information: they may
sometimes also be used to manipulate or even
sabotage data. The information is used in the interest of the state concerned, generally in secret,
but in certain cases it may also be made public.
Information operations have greatly increased
in importance in recent years.

**Cyberspace**
This report does not deal with cyberspace
separately, firstly because cyberspace is a
cross-cutting issue and secondly because the
Reporting and Analysis Centre for Information

Attack carried out using an improvised
explosive and incendiary device in connection
with the WEF in Zurich in January 2016
(Zurich city police)


-----

Assurance produces half-yearly reports on the
latest developments. However, the so-called
real world is reflected in many areas of the socalled virtual world, although the virtual world
does not present a comprehensive picture. The
major difference is that in the virtual world
every networked point on Earth can be reached
in fractions of a second. For players with malicious intentions, this means that they can attack
these points without having to be present at the
location. Inhibition thresholds are generally
lower, and attacks are more likely to be carried
out, whether because the degree of anonymity
in the virtual world is greater and the personal
consequences of a person's own actions are less
serious, or because the victim is identifiable,
accessible or inadequately protected. Examples
include the campaigns conducted by the hacker
group ‘Anonymous’ against targets which are
linked to a greater or lesser extent with ‘Islamic State’ – the attackers in this case remain unknown. As a consequence, ‘Islamic State’ and
its protagonists are taking protective measures,
which range from taking personal precautions
to retreating into the dark web – the part of the
Internet which cannot be tracked via conventional search engines.


Attacks can take different forms, one of
which is website defacement. After the attack
on the ‘Charlie Hebdo’ magazine in France,
1,300 cyber attacks were detected in which
25,000 websites were hacked and defaced with
Islamist propaganda and messages of sympathy. This wave of attacks also spilled over into
French-speaking Switzerland.
Alongside these private or loosely organised
players, state players also make an appearance
in conflicts. Their resources are usually greater;
as is the damage which they (can) inflict – their
importance in terms of security is correspondingly higher. For example, various locations in
Switzerland and in Austria at which the nuclear negotiations with Iran took place have been
attacked. The infiltration of computer networks
for espionage purposes may be a direct part of
a conflict. However, it also makes it possible
to inflict damage on an opponent at a later date,
for example by means of manipulation or even
sabotage. Cases of sabotage continue to be rare,
although media reports in January 2016 indicate that hackers were responsible for a power
failure in Ukraine. This would be the third such
case, following the attacks on an Iranian centrifuge plant and on a steelworks in Germany.

One of the numerous website
defacements following the
attack on ‘Charlie Hebdo’
in January 2015


-----

-----

### Focus on China

China has undergone a period of enormous
growth over the last thirty years. The impetus
for this was the policy of reform and liberalisation vigorously promoted by Deng Xiaoping.
Due to the resultant economic upturn, China
has risen to become the world's second-largest
economy. Thanks to the economic power which
it has now accumulated, Beijing is acting with
greater confidence on the international stage
and is increasingly making its influence felt
worldwide. China sees itself as Asia's strongest
power and is seeking recognition as a player
which is politically and economically on a par
with the USA. As a result of China's expanding international engagement, contacts between
Switzerland and China – initiated by both sides
– are also on the increase.

**China growing in strength under Xi Jinping**
After taking office in 2012, China's head of
state and party leader Xi Jinping swiftly consolidated his position at the head of the state,
the party and the army. At the start of his term
in office, he proclaimed the guiding principle


of ‘the Chinese dream of the rejuvenation and
resurgence of the nation’. In doing so, he articulated China's historical aspiration to recover
its national greatness, coupled with the desire
of the people for prosperity and welfare. The
party uses such slogans to propagate its legitimacy and credibility. Due to serious corruption scandals and internal power struggles, the
party's image has taken a beating. The party
therefore presents itself in the state media as
being close to the people and as the representative of the masses. The new hands-on style of
the government is illustrated most clearly by
Xi's unprecedented anti-corruption campaign,
which has been used to dismiss tens of thousands of political opponents and critics from
the party, the military and the government. In
parallel with the anti-corruption campaign, Xi
has promoted the establishment of a socialist
rule of law with Chinese characteristics. The
country is to be ruled strictly in accordance
with legal and statutory rules and regulations.
The objective here is not so much a separation of powers, but rather the reestablishment

|Ministries|Col2|
|---|---|
|||


-----

of the citizens' trust in the organs of justice,
which will, however, continue to be subject to
full party control. Xi is using these developments to extend his power and control to the
entire apparatus of government.
The current leadership is not only using
harsh methods to tackle corruption and disagreements inside the party but is also simultaneously fighting the emergence of a civil society that is critical of the party. This manifested
itself in 2015 in a wave of arrests of more than
300 Chinese human rights lawyers and the detention of publicists in Hong Kong who were
critical of China. The party is pushing ahead
with an intense programme of ideologisation
and of isolation of the population from foreign
influences. To this end, it has massively tightened control and censorship of the media and
of the Internet. The Minister of Education has
demanded that Western values should vanish
from the curriculum in schools and universities and that Chinese values should be reinforced. Marxist ideas are exempted from this.
The party is afraid of groups which have the
capacity to organise themselves outside its
sphere of influence and to mobilise people.
Beijing therefore has difficulties with ethnic
minorities, independent spiritual groups, trade
unions and dissidents. Critics of the system of
government are not tolerated, as the primary
goal of the regime is the retention of power by
the Communist Party. Additional party priorities include preserving territorial integrity and
maintaining internal order.


**China in need of far-reaching economic**
**reforms**
After around thirty years of record growth,
the Chinese economic model is in need of
far-reaching reforms. China has risen to become the world's second-largest economy and
during the economic upturn has managed to
lift around 500 million people out of poverty, but the economic upturn has also been accompanied by problematic side effects such as
industrial over-capacity, over-investment and
the over-indebtedness of local administrations.
These difficulties have been exacerbated by
China's expansionary monetary policy in the
wake of the financial crisis of 2008. In general terms, its economic growth is insufficiently driven by domestic consumption and is too
heavily dependent on the export economy and
on infrastructure investment. In addition, demand for Chinese goods is falling due to the
ailing world economy. China is therefore battling a decline in economic growth.
In November 2013, the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China approved
an ambitious programme for restructuring the
Chinese economy. The aim of the realignment
is a transformation toward an innovative service economy which will be driven to a greater extent by domestic consumption, thanks to
increased wage levels. Under the reform plans,
the economic influence exercised by the central government will be diminished and market forces will be strengthened. To date, the
reforms have been implemented tentatively, as
bureaucratic hurdles and the resistance of stateowned enterprises are hampering implementa

-----

tion. The government interventions to stabilise
the stock market in the summer of 2015 and the
unannounced devaluation of the Chinese currency in the autumn of 2015 illustrate that the
government still feels compelled to intervene
in the market. Beijing has been criticised for
its market interventions, particularly because
of their inadequate communication.
China's strong economic growth has, however, also had negative consequences, such as
rampant environmental pollution and sharply increasing income differentials. Although
the party is aware of the problem, both issues
are potentially socially explosive. They are
particularly highly charged because they are
linked to some of the concerns of the growing
middle class. The latter is better informed and
networked than the farmers and the workers
and also has greater financial resources at its
disposal. It is therefore better able to coordinate and mobilise itself and to challenge the
party.
In the long term, China faces a demographic problem: a falling working population will
have to provide for a rising non-working population. This is a consequence of the one-child
policy, relaxation of which will counteract
China's demographic change only to a marginal extent. A further problem lies in the prosperity gap between coastal and inland provinces
and between urban and rural areas. Linked to
this are challenges such as the high levels of
domestic migration, involving over 250 million migrant workers, and the discrimination
against migrant workers due to their lack of
residence permits. Despite recurring protests


against environmental damage, poor working
conditions, expropriation of land or discrimination by the authorities, there are no signs of any
major cross-regional social unrest movements.
In frontier provinces such as Tibet, Xinjiang or
Inner Mongolia, the effects of these socio-economic problems are particularly pronounced,
as the ethnic minorities are economically disadvantaged and politically oppressed.

**China's outward projection of power**
Since Xi Jinping took office, China has projected itself to the outside world more actively
and self-confidently. By dropping the foreign
policy reticence of his predecessors early on in
his term of office, Xi Jinping came to embody
this invigorated China, The Chinese leadership
is pursuing an intensive policy of state visits
and is adept at raising its own profile at multilateral summits. It is trying to shoulder more
responsibility internationally in order to gain
influence and is increasingly exerting a formative impact on individual global problems.
On paper, Beijing's foreign policy subscribes
to the ‘principle of peaceful development’.
Where China's core interests are concerned,
however, the government is unwilling to make
any concessions and is not afraid to adopt a
confrontational stance. This applies above all
to the overlapping territorial ownership claims
in the East and South China Seas, as well as
to the Taiwan issue and international support
for the Tibetan government in exile. This is
increasing the potential for conflict, particularly with neighbouring states and the USA, and
jeopardising the economic relations that are


-----

important to China. China is therefore attempting at the same time to stabilise its foreign-policy environment, particularly on its periphery.
The main tools China is using to achieve this
are its economic dominance and the plentiful
financial resources at its disposal. During visits
abroad, agreements on multibillion foreign investments are signed. China has now become
the largest trading partner for several states
in the ASEAN region and on the African continent, as well as for South Korea, Mongolia
and Taiwan. In this way, China is attempting,
through its expansionary economic policy and
the creation of economic dependency relations,
to weaken the USA's influence in the region.
In addition, China is carrying out an extensive modernisation of its armed forces. For
years, China's defence expenditure has been
increasing sharply, more or less mirroring its
general economic growth. Xi Jinping's goal
is a powerful army that is combat-ready at all
times and is able to guarantee China's internal
and external security. The Chinese army is


developing from a purely territorially-based
and inflexible defensive army into a dynamic
armed force with a capability to achieve military effects even over considerable distances.
This process will extend over the next thirty
years. Despite the large-scale military modernisation and the demonstrated increase in capabilities, the operational readiness of the Chinese armed forces remains currently limited.
Although the Chinese army still has large
gaps in its capability and is in the midst of a
process of transformation, it is viewed as an
increasingly effective instrument of power politics. China has already started deploying military resources to signal its regional interests.
Although Chinese foreign policy is dominated
by the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other states, an increase in the
deployment of military forces far from China's
own shores has also been observed in the last
few years. In this context, the navy and the air
force have been growing in importance relative to the previously dominant army. This has


-----

given China the opportunity to showcase its
newly commissioned military systems around
the world.
China is aware that its rise to great power
status will lead to conflicts of interest with established powers. However, it sees its claim
to assume a leadership role in Asia as being a
legitimate one. Its long-term goal is the establishment of a security zone around China and
the expansion of its own sphere of influence
to neighbouring states. This is seen as the best
way to assert its core interests. As a rising great
power, China will confidently and resolutely
involve itself in foreign-policy areas which affect its own interests. On the other hand, it will
avoid conflicts which touch on the country's
interests only marginally.

**China's renewed leadership role in Asia**
For several centuries, the Middle Kingdom
stood at the centre of a regional tributary sys

tem. States and peoples from both near and far
regularly paid tribute to the Chinese emperor in
the form of gifts and reverences. In exchange,
they received commercial goods and in some
cases also protection guarantees.This led to a
stable system of regional order. The tributary
system and the Sinocentric world view associated with it came to an abrupt end with the
invasion of the Western powers and Japan in
the second half of the 19th century. Chinese
historiography looks on this period, which lasted until the end of the Second World War, as a
century of national humiliation.
The century of national humiliation has left a
deep mark in the Chinese social consciousness
and national identity. Against the background
of this historical consciousness, the Chinese
view it as a matter of course that China will
one day again stand at the heart of Asia. This
is also reflected in the central theme of the
Chinese Dream propagated by Xi Jinping. The


-----

Communist Party is skilfully using this to rally
the population behind it and is presenting itself
as the only player which can guide the Chinese
nation back to past greatness.
The rise of China will in principle be accepted by the international community as long as
it remains within existing international standards and rules. However, China's increasing
global involvement is revealing that in numerous areas its standards and values differ from
those of the West. As a result, China's rise is
also perceived as a threat. In a secret party
document which was published in 2013 by a
Chinese-language international news magazine, the party warned of the ‘dangers’ which
have to be quashed in China. These included
press freedom, universal human rights, party
democracy, the rule of law and constitutionalism. This document shows how far apart the
West and China are from one another ideologically. These differences will deepen in future,
as China shows itself increasingly willing to
use its freshly acquired power to create new
international standards which will change the
existing political and economic world order.
To this end, China is founding new institutions
and funds and initiating large-scale economic
projects.
Through its so-called New Silk Road initiative, China is planning to become the central
hub of a regional value chain which is to be
extended over land and sea to East, South-East
and Central Asia and as far as Europe and Africa. This initiative is the centrepiece of current
Chinese foreign policy and, according to the
official interpretation, is intended to strengthen


exchange and cooperation in the region. In fact,
large-scale investments are creating a new regional economic architecture which will make
surrounding states increasingly dependent on
China. Although the project is intended to cover fifty states, it is based on bilateral rather than
multilateral treaties. Like the tributary system,
the initiative is hierarchically structured: China stands at the centre and controls the flow of
commercial goods to the connected countries.
China aims to use this network to reestablish
itself as a strong power in Asia ensuring stability in the region by means of economic dependencies.
The founding of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) as a supplement to the
existing Bretton-Woods system is another sign
of a resurgent China. The multilateral AIIB is
focussing primarily on the as yet unmet demand for investment in infrastructure in Asia.
As the initiator, China is providing the AIIB
with by far the largest share of its financial
resources and according to the rules currently
has a blocking minority with respect to important decisions. China will in future also use the
bank as an instrument of economic diplomacy
to counter any regional tensions that emerge
due to the rise of China.
The Chinese government is also anxious to
legitimise its own principle of national internet sovereignty and to introduce it as a global
standard. It takes the view that national authorities are entitled to regulate, control and censor
any online content which is consumed within
their own state borders. This approach is in
stark contrast to the Western understanding.


-----

The ability of China to assert its international interests, whether in the context of the New
Silk Road initiative or of the AIIB, is seen in
China as symbolic of redressing the century
of national humiliation. Its regained national
strength is also clear to see in China's more assertive behaviour in the territorial disputes in
the South and East China Seas. Based on its
historical role in the region, China sees control
over these areas as its by right.

**The People's Republic of China and**
**Switzerland**
Switzerland maintains active and multifaceted relations with China. After the introduction
of the reform and open-door policy by Deng
Xiaoping at the end of the 1970s, bilateral relations grew strongly at all levels.
The increased influence being exerted by China presents Switzerland with both opportunities
and risks. It offers a variety of opportunities
for bilateral and multilateral political and economic cooperation. There are institutionalised
bilateral dialogues between the states in a large


number of areas. Switzerland is a founding
member of the AIIB. In economic terms, China is Switzerland's main trading partner in Asia
and its third-largest trading partner worldwide
after the EU and the US. Switzerland benefits
from the import of cheaply produced Chinese
goods. Chinese trading partners in turn are interested in products manufactured by the Swiss
engineering, electrical, metal and pharmaceutical industries. Swiss watch and jewellery manufacturers have profited from the rising prosperity in the Middle Kingdom and the marked
affinity of many newly rich Chinese for luxury
goods. The bilateral free trade agreement which
entered into force in 2014 has led to favourable
terms for Swiss companies, as many customs
duties are gradually being reduced. The rapid
rise of the new middle class in China has paid
particular dividends for the Swiss tourism industry: since 2014, over a million overnight
stays by Chinese visitors to Switzerland have
been recorded annually.
The main risks are posed by a growing
dependence on China's economic growth.


-----

A marked economic downturn or sharp currency
fluctuations in China would impact negatively
on Switzerland. Economic or political pressure
exerted by China on EU states could indirectly
have consequences for Switzerland. Furthermore, branches of Swiss industry are exposed
to a risk of being crowded out by competition
from China. Chinese companies and investors
have a particular interest in this country's industrial and financial sectors and in innovative
companies, for Switzerland is a world leader in
areas in which China still has some catching up
to do. Through takeovers of Swiss companies
and increasingly also Swiss hotels, China is attempting to secure the know-how that it desires
and to acquire Swiss brands together with their
good reputations.
However, cooperation with China is not based
on the principle of reciprocity. Beijing does not
grant its foreign trading partners the same access to the Chinese sales and investment market as is granted to Chinese companies abroad.
A number of branches of the economy and of
the financial market are closed off by the state's
protectionist industrial policy. Shortcomings in
the rule of law, the lack of law enforcement in
China and direct intervention in the market by
the government mean that there are risks for
foreign companies operating in China that are
difficult to predict.
China's influence in Switzerland is not just
economic, but also ideological. The Chinese
government aims to establish a thousand Confucius Institutes worldwide by 2020. Two Institutes have already been opened in Geneva and
Basel. In addition, China is also expanding its

At left:
simplified diagram of China’s New Silk Road Initiative


own media reporting capabilities: since 2011,
China Central Television (CCTV) has opened
around 70 offices worldwide, including one in
Geneva. For Switzerland, it is primarily in relation to the Tibetan exile community in Switzerland that China's assertive and demanding
behaviour makes itself felt. Official receptions
of the Dalai Lama are no longer tolerated by
China in any way, and a variety of measures
are used to impose retroactive sanctions. These
measures range from the temporary cooling of
diplomatic relations and cancellations of state
visits to the temporary decrease in exports to
China from the country concerned. This shows
that fundamental differences of opinion persist
between the West and China in relation to human rights, personal freedoms and the rule of
law. Because of China's economic power politics, however, the resolve of the international
community to demand that China join in respecting basic universal values is waning.


-----

-----

### Violent extremism and terrorism motivated by religion and ethno-nationalism

Jihad-motivated terrorism still poses a major threat to security in jihadist conflict zones, but
also in Western, Islamic and other states. Radicalised individuals prepared to use violence
might also take action in Switzerland or use Switzerland as a base for preparing attacks in
other countries. Overall, the threat from jihad-motivated terrorism in Europe has once again
increased. This also applies to Switzerland, which falls within the western European threat
area. Ethno-nationalist-motivated terrorism and violent extremism should not be forgotten, either. In particular, the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) has the potential for violence in Western
Europe and could exploit it at any time. Depending on the situation in Turkey and in Kurdish-populated areas, further coordinated events and campaigns across Europe can be expected.
However, these will probably not be of a violent nature, at least not in Switzerland. Isolated
incidents on the fringes of demonstrations can, however, quickly lead to acts of violence, especially where Turkish and Kurdish groups come into contact with one another.


JihadJihad

al-Qaeda andal-Qaeda and travellerstravellers

„Islamic„Islamic

its afliatesits afliates

state“state“

PKKPKK Lone perpetrators/Lone perpetrators/

KidnappingsKidnappings small groupssmall groups


-----

###### SITUATION

**Core al-Qaeda loses leadership role**
The threat, to Western states in particular, from
jihad-motivated terrorists operating internationally has increased. The power struggle between
‘Islamic State’ and core al-Qaeda over the claim
to leadership of the jihadist movement has
reached a new stage. Above all, Core al-Qaeda
contests the very legitimacy of the caliphate proclaimed by ‘Islamic State’.
In mid-August 2015, after a year of silence,
core al-Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri issued
an audio message that put his organisation back
in the spotlight. In the audio recording, he declared an oath of allegiance to Mullah Akhtar
Mansour, the new leader of the Afghan Taliban.
In a further audio message in September 2015,
Zawahiri unequivocally dismissed the legitimacy of the caliphate proclaimed by ‘Islamic State’
in June 2014. All the recognised affiliates of
core al-Qaeda – al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula
(AQAP), al-Shabaab in Somalia, Jabhat al-Nusra in Syria and al-Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent – have confirmed their pledges of allegiance.


Since 2013, ‘Islamic State’ has repeatedly
professed its claim to leadership of the jihadist
movement. Since the proclamation of the caliphate in 2014, various jihadist groups worldwide have pledged their support for ‘Islamic
State’ or sworn an oath of allegiance. In return,
‘Islamic State’ has accepted several of these
pledges and declared the groups to be provinces. Meanwhile, the organisation has taken over
the leadership role in the international jihadist
movement from core al-Qaeda.

**Differences and common features**
Core al-Qaeda and ‘Islamic State’ share
the ideology of international jihadism which
al-Qaeda and Osama bin Laden were instrumental in shaping. At the same time, however,
there are numerous differences between the
two organisations. For example, core al-Qaeda has been left with just a small circle of
leaders, and from the West only isolated individuals are now willing to fight for the organisation. The al-Qaeda label has lost much of
its potential to mobilise support in the West.


-----

The organisation's financial resources are
very limited. Core al-Qaeda is able to engage
in military activities only in collaboration
with local players. Core al-Qaeda maintains
a low profile on social media and it produces
very little propaganda any more, most of it
unstructured.
‘Islamic State’, by contrast, has a high-profile leadership that remains intact. Several thousand individuals from the West are
prepared to play an active combat role. The
utopia of making a caliphate reality, as well
as reports of heroic deeds, make the organisation attractive to potential fighters. Also,
thanks to its relatively substantial financial
resources, which stem in part from exploitation of the territory it occupies, but also from
the looting of banks and trading in oil from
wells in occupied areas, ‘Islamic State’ is
well-equipped and has considerable military
fighting power.

**Willingness, capability and means to carry**
**out attacks**
The fact that ‘Islamic State’ and other jihadist groups and individuals connected with it, as
well as perpetrators linked to al-Qaeda, are not
only willing to carry out attacks worldwide but
also have the capabilities and the means needed
to do so, has recently been illustrated on numerous occasions.

- On 22 March 2016, jihadists carried out
attacks at the airport and a metro station in
Brussels (Belgium). They killed more than
30 people and injured more than 300. On the
same day, ‘Islamic State’ claimed responsibilty for the attacks.

At left:
comparison of core al-Qaeda and ‘Islamic State’



- On 15 January 2016, jihadists in Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso) attacked the ‘Cappuccino’ restaurant and the ‘Splendid’ Hotel. They
killed 30 people, including two Swiss nationals. AQIM claimed responsibility for the
attack, but it was carried out by the al-Murabitun group.

- On 12 January 2016, 11 people were killed
and 14 injured in an attack in Istanbul (Turkey). Ten of the victims who died were German tourists. The modus operandi suggests a
link to ‘Islamic State’, but responsibility for
the attack has not been claimed.

- On 13 November 2015, 137 people died
and more than 350 were injured in multiple
coordinated attacks in Paris. Three suicide
bombers detonated explosive devices outside the ‘Stade de France’ football stadium in
the north of the city. Dozens of people were
shot dead at the ‘Bataclan’ theatre by three
men wearing suicide vests; they were killed
during the storming of the building. In addition, several perpetrators carried out almost
simultaneous shootings in three locations,
targeting customers in bars and restaurants,
and another suicide bomber detonated an explosive device in a restaurant. ‘Islamic State’
claimed responsibility for the attacks.

- In two suicide bombings in a suburb of the
Lebanese capital Beirut on 12 November
2015, 44 people were killed and over 200
injured by the explosive devices. ‘Islamic
State’ announced via social media that it had
been behind the attack.


-----

**‘Islamic State’: a complex phenomenon**

‘Islamic State’ is more than just a jihad-motivated terrorist organisation operating internationally. The FIS views
‘Islamic State’ as a multifaceted phenomenon with a variety of different guises.
The strategic leadership of ‘Islamic State’ is composed
of experienced jihadi fighters from Iraq and Syria, but
also includes persons who have traveled there from
elsewhere. ‘Islamic State’ is a highly diverse organisation
which effectively and efficiently integrates the different
capabilities of battle-hardened jihadists, former soldiers
and supporters from Europe and the Islamic world.
‘Islamic State’ uses multimedia-based propaganda selectively and professionally; it maintains a high profile on
social networks. Despite countermeasures, its inspirational effect remains high.
Although it has suffered a number of military setbacks
in the last few months, the organisation still controls a
territory covering approximately the eastern half of Syria
and the western third of Iraq. ‘Islamic State’ continues
to control several major cities, including Mosul, Iraq's
second-largest city. This highlights the way the group
sees itself as a state in the true sense of the word. The
ultimate goal is the establishment of a caliphate as the

**Information age**

**Resentment**

**Jihadist ideology**


only state in the world for all Muslims in which a strict
interpretation of Islamic law is applied as the only law
and temporal and spiritual leadership are vested in one
person, the Caliph.
Besides individuals across the globe capable of carrying out attacks in its name, there are numerous jihadist
groups professing allegiance to ‘Islamic State’. Many of
these have been officially recognised by ‘Islamic State’ as
affiliates. ‘Islamic State’ has what it calls provinces (wilaya,
pl. wilayat) in Libya, Algeria, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Afghanistan/Pakistan, Egypt, Nigeria and the North Caucasus. This conveys the impression that the ‘Islamic State’ is
expanding globally, which in turn increases the appeal of
the organisation to potential sympathisers and fighters.
Even if ‘Islamic State’ does not control the provinces in the
sense of tightly governing them, its influence has made it
an important regional player in the Islamic world.
The use of violence is deemed by ‘Islamic State’ to be a
legitimate means of establishing the caliphate. The enemy is seen as being the USA, Israel and the West as a
whole, as well as Russia and all those who are infidels in
the eyes of ‘Islamic State’ – i.e. all those who do not share
its understanding of Islam.


**Information age**

**Resentment**

**Jihadist ideology**


-----

- It is probable that the detonation of an explosive device that was smuggled on board
a Russian passenger plane which took off
from Sharm el-Sheikh in Egypt on 31 October 2015 led to the plane crashing over the
Sinai. All 224 passengers and crew lost their
lives in the crash. ‘Islamic State’ claimed responsibility immediately after the crash and
reiterated this claim repeatedly. For example, in its magazine ‘Dabiq’, ‘Islamic State’
published a picture of the explosive device
which was allegedly used.

- Two suicide bombings were carried out
on 10 October 2015 during a peace rally
in the Turkish capital, Ankara. 102 people
lost their lives in the attack, and over 500
were injured. One of the two perpetrators
was the brother of the man who had carried
out the attack in Suruc in July 2015. The
modus operandi suggests a link to ‘Islamic
State’, but responsibility for the attack has
not been claimed.

- A suspected jihad-motivated lone perpetrator
attempted to carry out an attack in a highspeed train travelling from Amsterdam to
Paris on 21 August 2015. He boarded the
train in Brussels and opened fire on passen
Photograph of the bomb which
is alleged to have caused the plane
crash over the Sinai in October 2015.
Appeared in ‘Dabiq’, an ‘Islamic State’
magazine, in November 2015.


gers. Passengers managed to overpower him,
but several people were injured.

- On 20 July 2015, 34 people died and over
70 were injured, some of them seriously, in a
suicide bombing in the Turkish city of Suruc.
No-one has yet claimed responsibility for
the attack; it is likely that the perpetrator was
linked to ‘Islamic State’. The organisation
had on a number of occasions threatened to
extend its struggle to Turkey.

- On 26 June 2015, in Port el-Kanaoui close to
Sousse in Tunisia, a man shot at tourists on a
beach and threw several hand-grenades into
a hotel complex. A total of 38 people lost
their lives, including a large number of UK
citizens. On the same day, a suicide bomber
detonated an explosive device during Friday
prayers at a Shiite mosque in Kuwait City.
26 people were killed, and over 200 were injured. On the following day, ‘Islamic State’
put out a claim of responsibility via the short
message service Twitter.

- On 18 March 2015, an armed attack on tourists planning to visit the Bardo Museum took
place in Tunis. Several people were taken
hostage in the building. 19 foreign tourists


-----

and two Tunisians lost their lives in the attack. Approximately 40 other people were
injured, some seriously. The two Tunisian
perpetrators were killed when the museum
was stormed by the Tunisian security forces.
‘Islamic State’ claimed responsibility for the
attack in an audio message the following day.

- On 7 January 2015, two brothers who were
French citizens of Algerian descent carried
out an attack on the editorial offices of the
satirical magazine ‘Charlie Hebdo’ in Paris and killed twelve people. While fleeing,
the perpetrators also shot dead a policeman.
They were killed by the French gendarmerie
on 9 January 2015; one of the brothers had
previously stated that he had links to AQAP.
Though AQAP claimed responsibility for
the attack, the actual extent of its involvement is still unclear. On the previous day,
a Frenchman of Malian descent had shot
and killed a policewoman in Montrouge
(France) and on 9 January 2015 he took
hostages in a Jewish supermarket In Paris.


He killed four of his hostages and was himself shot and killed when the supermarket
was stormed. He had pledged allegiance
to ‘Islamic State’ in a video message. In
2016, on the first anniversary of the attack
on ‘Charlie Hebdo’, security forces in Paris
shot dead a man who approached a police
station carrying a weapon and wearing an
imitation suicide vest.

**Travel to jihadist conflict zones**
People continue to travel from Switzerland
to jihadist conflict zones, for example the area
controlled by ‘Islamic State’. The journeys are
made via transit countries such as Turkey and
are therefore not easy to detect. Propaganda by
terrorist organisations motivates people to travel to conflict zones not just to take part in combat. In the conflict zones, jihad tourists receive
training on carrying out attacks, gain experience in armed combat and credibility as role
models, and network with other people. Women
and minors are also increasingly travelling to

Image disseminated on
Twitter by a Swiss jihad
tourist: explosive belt
and Swiss passport


-----

conflict zones for jihadist motives or to ‘Islamic
State’ territory on religious grounds. The dataset of the ‘Islamic State’ (the so-called ‘IS-list’)
that appeared in the media in March 2016, did
not yield much new information for FIS.
After their return, jihad tourists may pose a
specific threat to the internal security of the
countries where they embarked on their journey or from which they originate. However,
returnees from jihadist conflict zones may also
plan or perpetrate attacks in countries to which
they have no biographical connection. Within
Europe, the free movement of persons in the
Schengen area makes it easy to cross borders
between individual states, and the risk of being detected is low. Jihad tourists present a potential threat to their countries of origin even
during their time in a conflict zone: they may
have a radicalising influence on individuals via
electronic media or other channels, for example by publishing reports of their experiences
or directly inciting violence against e.g. their
country of origin.
Radicalised individuals resident in Western
countries who are unwilling or unable to travel
to conflict zones also pose a threat. Such persons may assist potential perpetrators with the
preparations for or after an attack or may ultimately be persuaded to carry out acts of violence or terror themselves, once they have been
sufficiently indoctrinated by jihadist propaganda. Jihadism may also be used merely as an ideological pretext for justifying crimes committed for other reasons.


**Switzerland as crime scene or preparation**
**area**
Radicalised individuals prepared to use violence might carry out attacks in Switzerland
or use Switzerland as a base for preparing jihad-motivated attacks in other countries. In October 2015, the Office of the Attorney General
of Switzerland brought charges before the Federal Criminal Court against four Iraqi citizens
for participating in and/or supporting a criminal
organisation. The charges against the accused
include the preparation of a terrorist attack in
Europe. Three of the four men were arrested in
north-east Switzerland in the spring of 2014 and
have been in custody since then. Three of the
four men have been convicted at first instance
by the Federal Criminal Court in March 2016.

**Electronic communication**
‘Islamic State’ makes frequent, targeted and
highly professional use of social media and other electronic means of communication. In this
way, it is able to reach a wide audience in a very
short time. Internet users in Switzerland and
elsewhere may be radicalised by propaganda,
particularly that of ‘Islamic State’.
Jihadist groups and individuals continue to
make intensive use of electronic channels in order to communicate, to acquire new members
or find sympathetic supporters, to disseminate
propaganda and to raise funds. In addition, cyberspace is also used to carry out attacks. For
example, websites are modified or defaced
(website defacement) or accounts on social
media are taken over and misused without authorisation (social media hijacking). To date,
however, little evidence has been found of more


-----

sophisticated activities such as cyber espionage
and cyber sabotage. While the attacks in cyberspace focus predominantly on Western targets,
these are mainly a randomly targeted selection
of websites with security weaknesses or poorly
protected user accounts.
In connection with propaganda activities on the
Internet, in October 2015 the Office of the Attorney General of Switzerland issued a penalty order
in conclusion of proceedings against an Iraqi for
supporting a criminal organisation, displaying
violence, providing instruction on the manufacture of explosives and publicly inciting crimes or
violence. Over a period of several years, the man
had taken part in discussions in various Internet
forums which were used for spreading jihadist
propaganda and supporting terrorist groups.

**‘Islamic State’ provinces and al-Qaeda**
**affiliates**
There are jihadist terrorist groups operating
in parts of Africa, some of which are affili

ates of core al-Qaeda or provinces of ‘Islamic
State’. Groups such as, for example, the Sinai
province of ‘Islamic State’ in Egypt, AQIM,
al-Murabitun in Mali, Boko Haram in Nigeria or al-Shabaab in Somalia exploit porous
borders and territories that are in some cases
difficult to control in order to carry out operations, evade pressure from security forces, obtain supplies of weapons and materials, build
up networks of supporters and recruit fighters.
Operating alongside them in these areas are
jihadist groups which have not affiliated themselves either to ‘Islamic State’ or to al-Qaeda,
or whose oath of allegiance has not been officially recognised by these groups. In Libya,
in particular, jihadist groups have been capitalising on the power vacuum that has existed
since August 2011. The situation in Libya has
impacted on the security situation and stability
of the entire Sahel and Maghreb regions. The
jihadist groups or cells in the Maghreb and Sahel regions differ in terms of their goals, oper
Propaganda disseminated on the Internet by a
user in Switzerland: response to the attacks in Paris,
November 2015


-----

ating methods, alliances, motivations and national and ethnic composition. Although they
are pursuing different goals, their local aspirations may also coexist alongside an international jihadist agenda which views the West as
the main enemy.
There are also North Africans among those
joining jihadist groups in Syria, Iraq and Libya.
Their countries of origin find themselves facing
a growing threat from returnees from jihadist
combat zones. In addition, increasing numbers
of radicalised lone perpetrators or small cells,
influenced by international jihadist propaganda,
are independently deciding to take jihadist action in North African countries.
In the western Sahel, the security situation
remains unstable, despite the conclusion of a
peace agreement in Mali. The risk of attacks is
still high, particularly in Mali, where these are
directed at representatives of the Malian Government, the international UN Mission, the French
special forces stationed in the country and other
Western targets. Five people were killed and several were injured in an attack by a gunman on a
restaurant in the Malian capital Bamako in the

Profile picture of a
Swiss social media user


early hours of 7 March 2015. Among those injured were two members of the Swiss army who
were deployed in Mali as munitions specialists.
On 15 January 2016, two Swiss nationals were
killed in an attack by AQIM in Ouagadougou
(Burkina Faso). The attack in Ouagadougou
shows that the terrorist groups previously active in northern Mali are attempting to expand
their area of operations and to attract attention
by means of spectacular attacks. Again in Mali,
in January 2016, a Swiss citizen was kidnapped
for the second time; she was living in this area
despite repeated warnings.
The situation in several central African
states, e.g. Sudan and South Sudan and the
Central African Republic, is also marked by
instability. Although the parties to the conflict
in South Sudan have reached a peace agreement, ceasefires that have been agreed are repeatedly broken.
In the Horn of Africa, too, particularly in Somalia, civil war is still raging. The al-Shabaab organisation has pledged allegiance to core al-Qaeda, but within the group there is also a faction
which advocates closer links with ‘Islamic State’.


-----

A small group broke away for the first time at
the end of October 2015 and, independently of
the parent organisation, pledged allegiance to
‘Islamic State’. Despite this internal strife, the activities of al-Shabaab continue.
On the Arabian peninsula, Yemen, in particular,
is marked by instability. AQAP and the affiliates
of ‘Islamic State’ in Yemen are exploiting the
fact that in large parts of the country, government
authorities have lost much of their influence.

**Conflict between PKK and the Turkish state**
‘Islamic State’ also operates in Kurdish-populated areas. Turkey is becoming increasingly involved in confrontations between the Kurdistan
Workers' Party (PKK) and ‘Islamic State’. Following the attack in Suruc on 20 July 2015, the
PKK accused the Turkish government of having encouraged the suspected jihad-motivated
attack through its support for jihadist opposition groups in Syria. The Turkish government
for its part accused the PKK of having killed
two policemen after the attack. The talks about
a rapprochement between Turkey and the PKK,
which had been ongoing since 2013, were then
broken off.
As a consequence of this, violent clashes and
hostilities between the PKK and Turkish security forces intensified. At demonstrations in
various cities in Europe, there were increasing
numbers of clashes between supporters of the
PKK and sympathisers of the ruling Justice and
Development Party (AKP) in Turkey and/or
Turkish nationalists.
In Switzerland, riots occurred on 12 September 2015 at a demonstration by AKP supporters
and the counter-demonstration against it organ

ised by PKK youth. Otherwise, demonstrations
organised in Switzerland by the PKK have so
far passed off without any violent incidents.

**Tamil community keeping a low public**
**profile**
While Tamils still have the goal of establishing a Tamil state in part of Sri Lanka, Tamil
groups have for some time been maintaining a
low public profile in Switzerland and elsewhere
in Europe. Events and functions held by Tamil
interest groups take place behind closed doors
and do not cause any security problems.


-----

-----

###### ASSESSMENT

**Leadership role of ‘Islamic State’**
‘Islamic State’ has effectively taken over the
leadership role in the jihadist movement. It is
thus continuing to gain in influence and constitutes the most prominent threat to Western
countries and their citizens. Perpetrators sympathising with or supported by ‘Islamic State’
act ruthlessly and with extreme brutality. This
was underlined by the attacks in Paris in November 2015. Many of the victims were killed
not by explosive devices, but by targeted gunfire.
Core al-Qaeda is still intent on carrying out
attacks in Western countries in order to continue playing an important role in the jihadist
movement, but it is increasingly reliant on the
support of one of its affiliates, as it now barely has the resources necessary to carry out an
attack.

**Increased threat to Switzerland**
The March 2016 attacks in Brussels have
confirmed the threat assessment. The threat


posed by jihadist terrorism has increased further in recent months, mainly due to the fact
that ‘Islamic State’ is sending individuals to
Europe on missions to plan or carry out attacks.
Switzerland is part of the European threat area,
and the threat level has also risen in this country. Switzerland, however, is not one of the primary targets of jihadist terrorist organisations,
because it is not participating militarily in the
fight against terrorism and is not seen by the
jihadists as one of their arch enemies. Nonetheless, the jihadists do see Switzerland as part
of the anti-Islamically-minded Western world
and therefore as part of the enemy. For example, in a propaganda video issued by ‘Islamic
State’, the Swiss flag was shown among the 60
flags of countries which are considered targets
for attack. It is therefore perfectly possible that
Switzerland or Swiss interests abroad might be
targeted in an attack. In Switzerland, a more
likely form of attack at present is one by a lone
perpetrator or small group, carried out with basic means, little preparation and minimal logis

-----

tical outlay. The more complex the circle of
perpetrators and the attack plan, the less likely
it is that the attack will be aimed at Switzerland
or Swiss interests abroad. One caveat needs to
be made here: Swiss interests must be understood as also including interests of third parties
in Switzerland, for example embassies of states
engaged militarily in the coalition against ‘Islamic State’. Some of these are exposed to a
higher level of threat. This also applies to Swiss
Jews and to Jewish and Israeli interests in Switzerland.

**Threat posed by jihad tourists and lone**
**perpetrators**
The number of jihad tourists, particularly to
Syria, will probably continue to increase, though
not on the same scale as in previous years. Of
particular significance among the potential lone
perpetrators or small groups who could carry
out an attack in Switzerland or against Swiss interests abroad are returnees who have been radicalised and trained by ‘Islamic State’ and other
groups. There is also a risk that propaganda by
‘Islamic State’ and its supporters could radicalise individuals in Switzerland and seduce them
into allowing themselves to be recruited or into
carrying out attacks independently.
Since lone perpetrators and small groups operate outside organised structures, it is especially difficult for the security authorities to detect
them at an early stage and to put a stop to their
activities. This applies in particular to individual potential jihadists who mingle among the refugees migrating in large numbers to European
countries. On the internet, especially in social

At left:
Switzerland as part of the coalition against
‘Islamic State’ – Swiss user shares an article
about the ‘Islamic State’ terror video


**Combating terrorism in Switzerland**

Switzerland has taken various measures to counter
the terrorist threat.
For example, at the beginning of 2015 the Federal
Council implemented the urgent federal law of 12
December 2014 banning the ‘al-Qaeda’ and ‘Islamic
State’ groups and related organisations, in order to
prevent any assistance being provided to these two
players in Switzerland.
On 18 September 2015, the Federal Council approved
the ‘Counterterrorism Strategy for Switzerland’. The
strategy sets out the established activities and processes at federal and cantonal level, thereby creating
a common basis for combating terrorism. Its aim is to
combat terrorism and its financing effectively in compliance with the Federal Constitution and international law, with particular regard to basic and human
rights. The fight against terrorism will be conducted
in four areas: prevention, repression, protection and
crisis preparedness. In its foreign policy, Switzerland
is committed to combating terrorism and its causes.
The strategy also acts as a set of guiding principles
for the activities of the Tetra (‘terrorist tracking’)
Task Force, which since October 2014 has coordinated the activities of agencies at federal and cantonal
level dealing with cases relating to jihadist terrorism. In November 2015, the Task Force presented its
second report, in which, among other things, it also
proposed a preventive ban on travelling abroad. This
initiative is in line with UN Resolution 2178's objective of preventing travel for terrorist purposes. At the
same time, the Security Core Group broadened the
Task Force's mandate to include issues relating to
non-jihadist terrorism.
On 18 December 2015, the Federal Council decided
to strengthen counterterrorism by creating 86 additional full-time posts in the federal administration.
The posts are temporary, for a period of three years
– until the end of 2018.


-----

networks, the highly effective propaganda of
‘Islamic State’, in particular, frequently leads to
individuals and small groups becoming radicalised. It is possible for perpetrators to be inspired
to undertake violent terrorist acts exclusively
via electronic channels without ever having
been in direct contact with a terrorist group or
having travelled to a jihadist conflict zone.

**High terrorism risk in parts of Africa and the**
**Middle East**
Acts of violence by jihadists are possible
throughout the Sahel and Maghreb regions,
and the risk of terrorist attacks is high. Such
attacks are directed both against Western and
against local targets. Tourists, in particular,
will continue to be targeted, especially in the
tourist destinations of Tunisia, Morocco and
Egypt. The risk of abductions of Western nationals remains high throughout the Sahel and
Maghreb regions.
Civil-war-like conflicts between hostile
armed organisations and the existence of fragile states also increase the threat. For example,
jihadist groups are exploiting fragile states


such as Mali, Niger, Nigeria or Somalia in order to strengthen their presence. The insecure
environment in countries like Kenya, Chad,
Sudan or the Central African Republic could
provide fertile ground for jihadist activities.
On the Arabian Peninsula, a coalition of
Arab states is continuing its offensive against
the Houthi rebels. Jihadist groups, first and
foremost AQAP, but increasingly also the affiliates of ‘Islamic State’, are capitalising on
the unstable security situation. Even though
AQAP is currently focussing on the fight
against the Houthis, it remains committed to
the internationalist jihadist agenda. AQAP is
still willing and able to attack Western interests, both inside and outside Yemen, when the
opportunity presents itself.

**Turkish-Kurdish conflict continues**
The conflict between the Turkish state and the
PKK continues. Riots at rallies in Europe are a
response to the situation in Turkey and, depending on developments, may be repeated, including in Switzerland. The main potential targets
for violent attacks by supporters of the PKK are


-----

Turkish institutions such as clubhouses, mosques,
travel agencies and diplomatic missions.
The fighting between a group close to the
PKK and ‘Islamic State’ in northern Syria (Kobane) and northern Iraq (Sinjar) have also led
to tensions in Europe between PKK supporters
and ‘Islamic State’ sympathisers, which may
result in violent clashes. Since late 2015, civilwar-like conditions have prevailed in parts of
Turkey. Attacks by the PKK or organisations
affiliated to it will probably continue to target
government institutions rather than the civilian
population or tourism, as one of the PKK's aims
is to be removed from the EU's list of designated terrorist organisations. ‘Islamic State’, on
the other hand, could carry out attacks not only
on Kurdish but also on tourist targets in Turkey,
in order to put pressure on Turkey and to influence its policies by spreading fear and terror.

**Tamil activities**
Members and sympathisers of the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) are frequently to
be seen among those attending peaceful events
run by the Tamil community in Switzerland.
The organisation is attempting to realign itself
outside Sri Lanka. However, the reestablishment of a violent Tamil separatist movement
like the LTTE is unlikely at the present time.

At left:
Overview: The most important areas
of operations of djihadist groups


-----

###### OUTLOOK

**Destruction of ‘Islamic State’ not imminent**
‘Islamic State’ has been given a further boost
by its new leadership role in the international jihadist movement. A lasting military destruction
of ‘Islamic State’ by the coalition partners is
not likely in the coming months, despite the renewed increase in intensity of their operations.
‘Islamic State’ carries out targeted operations to
exploit and deepen sectarian and power-political fault lines. It will be able to continue the intensive exploitation for propaganda purposes of
its existing control over areas in Iraq and Syria,
its inclusion of various provinces throughout
the Islamic world and its direct action against
targets in its enemies' home countries. The territory it controls will shift further westward into
Syria. This westward shift is a consequence of
the greater impact that the opponents of ‘Islamic State’ are having in Iraq. This trend will continue for as long as the military pressure in Iraq
is greater than it is in Syria.

Propaganda disseminated on the
Internet by a user in Switzerland:
response to the attacks in Paris,
November 2015


**Threat posed by lone perpetrators and**
**small groups**
Persons who have been radicalised as a result of propaganda or during travel to jihadist
conflict zones will, as in the past, continue to
constitute the greatest threat to the security of
Western states and their nationals. In the medium term, the threat remains that returnees
from jihad areas might join together to form
small groups, which could evolve into new,
highly professional jihadist networks. The Paris attacks point in this direction. In addition,
non-European fighters might also attempt to enter Europe by legal or illegal means. Migration
movements could provide a certain amount of
cover for such individuals.

**Parts of Africa remain unstable**
There is no obvious quick solution to the entrenched regional, ethnic, social, security-related and economic problems facing various coun

-----

tries in northern, western and central Africa and
in the Horn of Africa. Even though Switzerland
is not a direct target of terrorist organisations,
there is a continuing risk of Swiss nationals falling victim to acts of violence either in conflict
zones, where civil-war-like conditions prevail,
or during attacks. In some areas, nationals of
Western states still run the risk of being abducted as opportunistic targets.

**Conflict between Kurds and Turks continues**
The PKK and associated Kurdish groups outside Turkey will continue to shape their activities depending on events in Kurdish-populated
areas in Turkey, Syria and Iraq and the operations of ‘Islamic State’. It is to be expected that
there will be repeated events and campaigns
which are coordinated Europe-wide. However,
it is likely that these will not be violent, at least
not in Switzerland. Isolated incidents on the
fringes of demonstrations can, however, quickly lead to acts of violence, especially where
Turkish and Kurdish groups come into contact
with one another.

**Situation in homeland affecting Tamils**
Developments in Sri Lanka will continue to
exert an influence on Tamil communities outside their home country. The current Sri Lankan
government, however, has held out the prospect
of wanting to settle the continuing dispute. It is
not possible at this stage to gauge whether the
desired realignment of the LTTE will be successful.


**Influence of social networks remains strong**
Propaganda on the Internet will continue. Jihadist propaganda will also be distributed more
widely, particularly on social networks. Such
virally spread messages play a major role in
the radicalisation of individuals. The openness
of electronic communication channels and the
numerous opportunities for anonymisation and
concealment will make it almost impossible to
curb such activities in a strategically effective
way or to monitor them comprehensively.


-----

###### FDFA travel advice

**Independent information**
A number of popular holiday destinations
– Egypt, Tunisia, Istanbul and Paris – have recently become terrorist targets. Together with
the emotional and geographical proximity of
these attacks, insecurity is growing in Switzerland.
This was also the case in 1997, when a large
number of tourists from Switzerland and other
European countries lost their lives in an attack
in Luxor. The insecurity has given rise to the
need for independent information about the security situation abroad. In order to meet this requirement, the Federal Department of Foreign
Affairs (FDFA) posted its first travel advice
notices on the Internet in November 1998. In
line with the FDFA's competencies and remit,
the travel advice focusses on the areas of politics and crime. It has now grown to 176 specific country notices and is consulted around two
million times a year.

**Risk of attacks and abductions**
In addition to the specific country advice, the
FDFA also provides non-country-specific travel
information, for example on terrorism and abductions.
In view of the impossibility of foreseeing attacks, the FDFA does not advise against all travel to cities and countries which could be or already have been affected by such attacks. A risk
exists in virtually every country and especially
in places where large numbers of people gather,


for example at tourist attractions, in shopping
centres, on public transport, at sporting and
cultural events and in nightclubs, well-known
international hotels and popular restaurants.
Furthermore, terrorists frequently attempt to
use abductions as a means of extorting money
or enforcing their demands. In such abduction
cases, Switzerland's ability to exert influence is
very limited. The responsibility for resolving
such cases lies with the local authorities. Switzerland does not pay ransom money, so as not
to put other citizens at risk nor to strengthen the
organisations carrying out the abductions. The
outcome of every abduction is uncertain. The
only certainty is that of the enormous physical
and mental stresses on the abduction victims
and their relatives. Since terrorists often deliberately seek out foreigners as victims, the FDFA
advises against travel to regions where there is
a high risk of abduction.

**Information sources**
The travel advice is based mainly on the assessments of Swiss embassies abroad. These
maintain a large network of contacts – these include the authorities of the country concerned,
Swiss companies and private individuals who
are based in the country, local and indigenous
non-governmental organisations, other embassies and personal contacts. Particularly where
terrorism is concerned, information from the
FIS is also incorporated. In contrast to the oneoff snapshots found in travel blogs, the travel


-----

advice is the result of long-term observation
from many different points of view.
The Swiss embassies and the relevant central
services continuously monitor the situation. If
the assessment changes, the travel advice is
adjusted accordingly, so travellers always have
access to the latest situation assessment on the
Internet. The FDFA also provides information
via Twitter on the most important updates to its
travel advice.

**Personal responsibility**
The travel advice is also available on the
online platform ‘itineris’, on which Swiss
travellers can file their travel plans. Thanks to
‘itineris’, if the situation in a country unexpectedly deteriorates markedly, the FDFA is able to
contact, inform and, if necessary, assist Swiss
nationals present in the country.
The travel advice and ‘itineris’ are two important tools which the FDFA provides to citizens for planning and implementing a trip. The
FDFA recommends that you also obtain information from the media and from travel guides.
Having appraised themselves of the risks, travellers must decide at their own discretion and
on their own responsibility for or against travel
to a particular destination and must take suitable precautions.


-----

-----

### Right-wing and left-wing extremism

In both right-wing and left-wing extremist circles, the potential for violence persists. Despite
this, the situation at the current time is largely calm. However, the tense situation regarding
the issue of asylum, in particular, as well as further jihad-motivated attacks in Europe, could
potentially lead to a deterioration in the situation in both right-wing and left-wing extremist
circles. While there are currently no specific signs of such a situation developing in Switzerland, there are in other countries in Europe.


Left-wingLeft-wing
extremismextremism

CyberactivismCyberactivism

Right-wingRight-wing
extremismextremism


-----

###### SITUATION

**Situation remains calm**
In 2015, there were 28 incidents connected
with violent right-wing extremism and 199 incidents connected with violent left-wing extremism of which the FIS is aware; incidents merely
involving graffiti have not been not included
in the figures. This corresponds to an increase
of 47 per cent for right-wing extremism, and of
nine per cent for left-wing extremism. However, the low figures involved mean that annual
fluctuations are not really significant. Broadly
speaking, the figures confirm the long-term
trend toward an easing of the situation: the
figures for right-wing extremism are low; although those for left-wing extremism are markedly higher, the trend since the beginning of the
decade has been downward.
Violence was involved in around 43 per cent
of the incidents relating to right-wing extremism which have come to the attention of the FIS,
while the corresponding proportion for leftwing extremism was approximately 25 per cent.
What is important here is the nature of the violence that is being perpetrated. This has a decisive influence on how the situation is assessed:

- Right-wing extremists fight with, threaten,
abuse and spit at people, and there are iso

lated instances of graves being desecrated.
Their misanthropic attitudes are expressed in
physical violence (albeit on rare occasions).
Weapons are used only very infrequently,
however, and arson attacks are also rare.

- Left-wing extremists attack people at
demonstrations with stones, bottles and pyrotechnics and damage property, most often
with paint, but on rare occasions with fire
or water. The level of aggressiveness, particularly against the police, is high. The last
attack with an improvised explosive and incendiary device took place in January 2016
at the World Economic Forum (WEF). Infrequently, but more often than in the previous year, vehicles were set on fire, and there
were isolated attacks with chemicals such as
butyric acid.

Right-wing extremists and left-wing extremists see each other as enemies. Left-wing extremists, in particular, seek out conflict, and direct clashes tend to become violent. In the case
of events which are known about in advance,
particularly those organised by right-wing extremists, the authorities will have to continue to
take this into account in their security precau

###### Left-wing extremism Right-wing extremism


Events motivated by
left- or right-wing
extremism reported
to the FIS since 2010
(excluding graffiti)


Total number
of incidents

Number of
violence-related
incidents


2010


2011


2012 2013 2014 2015 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


250

200

150

100

50

0

|254|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|254|244|229|207|218|199|
|||||||
|109|113|103||||
||||87|74|49|
|||||||

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||
|||||||
|55|51|46||||
|13|18|25|35 13|19 10|28 12|


-----

tions. The security measures, which are sometimes extensive, ensure that violent clashes remain rare.

**Right-wing extremism**
The issues currently attracting the most attention are those of migration and Islam. However, there is no sign that right-wing extremists
have a strategy which sets out goals and ways
of achieving them. The unusual and tense situation regarding migration which has prevailed
since autumn 2015 could offer violent rightwing extremist circles an opportunity to exploit
a topical issue for their own ends. In September
2015, unknown perpetrators threw bottles at a
transit centre in Oberembrach ZH and slapped
a resident. However, this was the first such incident relating to the issue of asylum since the
end of May 2014 (improvised explosive and
incendiary device outside the transit centre in
Thun BE). In parallel with the debate about
refugees, an increase in xenophobic and racist
comments was observed on social media. The
Federal Office of Police also noted an increase
in threats against politicians in parallel with the
political debate on asylum.
Right-wing extremists continue to keep a
low profile and behave in a conspiratorial way.
This applies even at public events. For example,
in 2015 the commemorations of the battles of
Sempach and Morgarten again provided an occasion for right-wing extremist demonstrations.
These took place in the evening, with a good
fifty or so people taking part in each one. By
contrast, the belated Swiss National Day celebration on the Rütli meadow, which has been a

Band’s response to the prevention of a concert
in the Canton of Vaud in April 2015


regular event for years, did not even take place
in 2015; however, the historic meadow was
used in February 2016 for a major meeting of
right-wing extremists. Instead, skinhead concerts were to be held around the 1 August in
western and eastern Switzerland. The concert
planned by the Swiss Hammerskins in Waadt
and the concert, masquerading as a birthday
party, which was organised by Blood & Honour
in Schänis SG were banned by the authorities.
The extremists did, however, manage to hold
these events at the backup venues of Le Lieu
VD and Schönenberg ZH. In the canton of Zurich, there was a sequel to this: in August 2015,
leaflets were distributed here by left- and rightwing extremist groups alternately, and at the
beginning of September, left-wing extremists
turned up in Hombrechtikon ZH. Eventually
they came across some right-wing extremists at
the railway station in Bubikon ZH and attacked
them. The right-wing extremists responded to
this with a repeat leafleting campaign in Hombrechtikon.


-----

More importantly, as in previous years, there
were again signs that violent right-wing extremists were attempting to organise themselves. So
far, however, such attempts are still in their early
stages. Besides skinhead events in Switzerland,
right-wing extremists also attend similar events
abroad; they do so Europe-wide, but chiefly in
the countries neighbouring Switzerland.

**Left-wing extremism**
In contrast to violent right-wing extremists,
left-wing extremists seek out publicity. For
them, attempts to exploit topical issues are the
order of the day. ‘Borders’ and ‘repression’ are
currently the two dominant overriding issues.
Under the slogan ‘No Borders’, the left-wing
extremists are fighting for unrestricted entry
into Switzerland and against the asylum regulations currently in force. The protest is targeted
at the institutions charged with implementing
these regulations, ranging from prisons where
individuals to be deported are detained to private firms which carry out functions relating to
asylum. The campaigns are not limited to protests, but may also have the aim of using blockades directly to prevent deportations taking
place. The issue of ‘repression’, for example, is
connected with prisons, and has for years been
one of the main items on the agenda of violent
left-wing extremists. With regard to the issues
of ‘open space’ and ‘urban development’, on
the other hand, things have quietened down. In
summer 2015, the response to the Swiss Army’s
Conex 15 exercise showed that this issue was
far from having the mobilisation potential it had
had in the past. The same is true of the annual


World Economic Forum in Davos GR: there is
no real wave of protest for violent left-wing extremists to surf on and which they could exploit
for their own ends. Rather, left-wing extremists
turned up at events and rallies on a variety of
other issues: women’s rights, the right to abortion, the Trade in Services Agreement, democracy in the Congo – the list goes on.
Looking outside our borders, the above finding still holds true: after violent left-wing extremists had spent years trying to exploit the
crisis in Greece for their own purposes, in 2014
the focus shifted to the Kurds’ struggle against
‘Islamic State’, particularly in Kobane (Syria).
Since that time, violent left-wing extremists
and supporters of Turkish far-left groups and of
the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) have provided each other with mutual support. They do
so mainly at demonstrations by one or other of
the groups.

**International links**
As far as violent right-wing extremists are
concerned, the main organisations are the two
international skinhead groups Blood & Honour
and Hammerskins, both of which have been in
existence for decades. Besides these, there are
no established structures or enduring groupings;
links to right-wing circles abroad are mainly on
a personal level. Attempts by groups in western
Switzerland and in France to organise themselves across the border failed; the groups were
either broken up or simply fell apart. Swiss
right-wing extremists did, however, provide
material assistance, albeit a limited amount, to
a Ukrainian organisation called Misanthropic


-----

Division. Misanthropic Division is part of the
Azov Regiment and is fighting against the separatists in eastern Ukraine. The Azov Regiment
is accused of war crimes; Misanthropic Division's public presentation contains references to
its Nazi forerunners. Among the foreign rightwing extremists supporting Misanthropic Division, Swiss nationals play only a marginal role.
Findings to date suggest that their activities are
largely restricted to cyberspace. However, at
the end of September 2015 it was reported in
the media that at least two right-wing extremists from Switzerland had been or were fighting
in Ukraine.
Finally, it should be pointed out that rightwing extremists from Germany have been settling in Switzerland for years. This relocation
is probably chiefly due to personal and especially economic reasons. Findings to date indicate that it has not involved far-right structures
being shifted to Switzerland, and there are no
indications that criminal acts abroad are being
planned in Switzerland. The right-wing extremists who have come from Germany are, however, active in the Swiss scene.
As far as violent left-wing extremism is concerned, the main international link is with Secours Rouge International (SRI). SRI maintains
general secretariats in Belgium and in Switzerland, where the driving force is Revolutionärer
Aufbau Zürich (RAZ). RAZ not only runs SRI’s
Swiss general secretariat, but also maintains
personal contacts, for example in Italy with violent left-wing extremists who, unlike RAZ and
SRI, belong not to the Marxist-Leninist but to
the anarchist camp. One of these groups is Fed
Item deposited in front of the
Turkish consulate in Zurich. It contained
powder which turned out to be harmless.
Revolutionary Youth of Zurich claimed
responsibility on the Internet
in January 2016 (Zurich City Police)


erazione Anarchica Informale (FAI), which was
responsible for the last major attacks in Switzerland and against Swiss interests abroad. FAI
has become weaker, and the remaining operational groups do not so far seem to have Switzerland and its interests in their sights. Apart
from the PKK, the main point of contact with
Kurdish and left-wing extremist Turkish groups
is currently the Turkish group DHKP-C, which
in the EU and the USA is classified as a terrorist organisation. Swiss left-wing extremists
declared solidarity with them at the beginning
of April 2015, following the bloody conclusion
of a hostage-taking in Istanbul. This type of collaboration, mainly in the context of protest campaigns, remains likely but will also be dependent on the particular situation in each case or on
events. The violent environmental activist and
anarchist Marco Camenisch, who is currently
serving his sentence for murder in an open prison in Switzerland, remains a rallying point for
left-wing extremists in Switzerland and abroad.


-----

###### ASSESSMENT

**Right-wing extremism**
The right-wing extremist scene remains subject to the constraints which the FIS has long
been drawing attention to in these reports: if
right-wing extremists are recognised as such,
they face a number of personal consequences.
They risk losing their job or training position
and also face other disadvantages, for example if they are pursuing a military career. This
situation is reflected in their behaviour, in that
they tend to shy away from public attention,
particularly as Swiss society rejects far-right
ideology. It is thus difficult for right-wing extremists to find a venue e.g. for a concert. Premises are hired for seemingly innocuous purposes
(for example a birthday party). The location is
then kept secret, even internally, until shortly
before the event. In cases where the venue becomes unavailable at short notice, for example
because the lessor withdraws from the contract,
the event is shifted to an alternative venue, usually in another canton, which has been arranged
in advance. The authorities will then generally
not have enough time to prevent the event taking place.
It should, however, also be emphasised here
that some right-wing extremists carry weapons
and may on occasion also use them. Firearms
are collected, traded and possibly also smuggled
over the border. Those found in house searches – generally chance discoveries – suggest that
there are substantial collections of functioning
weapons in the hands of right-wing extremists.


**Left-wing extremism**
In terms of issues, the violent left-wing extremist scene in Switzerland remains flexible,
drawing its motivation from current events.
However, it also remains dependent on current
events, does not set the agenda for a broader
public and tends to adhere to negative stances
or unrealistically high demands. Its attempts
at manipulation are obvious and can, at least
in part, easily be averted. For example, at a
demonstration by the Switzerland-Palestine Association at the end of October 2015, left-wing
extremists were initially requested to roll up
their banners, which were seen by the organisers as inappropriate, and were then thrown out
of the demonstration on account of their disorderly conduct.
The organisation Revolutionärer Aufbau
Schweiz (RAS), notably its Zurich section, remains the leading force within violent left-wing
extremist circles. This factor is particularly important when it comes to relations with far-left
circles abroad. The detention of Marco Camenisch continues to provide a motive for attacks
and campaigns in Switzerland and against Swiss
interests abroad. However, the regional groups
also operate independently of one another and
the fundamental ideological differences remain
important and affect the actions they take. For
example, on 18 and 19 September 2015 two
demonstrations were held against the Conex 15
army exercise: one with a Marxist-Leninist, the
other with more of an anarchist leaning. Finally,


-----

it should be pointed out that RAS, as the dictating force, will probably not be in a position
to influence at will an individual’s readiness to
use violence. In Bern, in particular, there have
been repeated attacks on police stations and on
public transport. The Riding School is used as
a base for retreating to. Here and elsewhere, the
level of aggressiveness, particularly against the
police, is high, and there are some attempts to
injure the persons attacked.

Material, presumed to be
for use at a demonstration
in Zurich, seized in Bern
in February 2015
(Bern cantonal police)


-----

###### OUTLOOK

**Right-wing extremism**
There is no indication that a broader social
movement against immigration or Islam is
emerging. This is clearly shown by the fact
that attempts to hold events under the banner
of Pegida (Patriotic Europeans against the Islamisation of the West) in Switzerland, unlike
those in neighbouring countries, have invariably failed.
It is therefore to be expected that isolated
acts of violence that do not form part of any
overall strategy will remain the norm and that
the movement will continue to lead an isolated
existence away from the limelight. The potential for violence remains, however; it comes to
the surface spontaneously in response to particular situations, and could even increase still
further through self-radicalisation. Should the
particular tense situation regarding migration
deteriorate and the impression arise that the
political system is not taking people’s justified
concerns seriously, right-wing extremists could
nonetheless respond with violence. The same
would apply if increased numbers of serious ji

had-motivated terrorist attacks were to occur in
Europe. It should, however, be noted here that
individuals with racist and xenophobic and/or
Islamophobic views and a high readiness to use
violence also exist outside right-wing extremist
circles. In certain situations, these individuals
might also commit violent acts which are almost impossible to foresee.

**Left-wing extremism**
The easing of the situation that has been noted with regard to left-wing extremism must not
distract attention from the fact that the potential for violence remains. This can be relatively
easily whipped up at demonstrations and also
finds expression in serious attacks on individuals, particularly the security forces. There is
little sign of restraint here; those carrying out
the attacks are at least accepting or even aiming
for damage to life and limb. When it comes to
robust attacks, by contrast, left-wing extremists are less willing to use violence. Offences
involving improvised explosive and incendiary
devices or arson are rare; generally only paint


-----

is used. The reasons for this restraint could lie
at various levels. Firstly, levels of violence in
Switzerland are generally lower than elsewhere
in Europe; links with violent left-wing extremists abroad could, however, undermine this restraint. Secondly, there is no underlying social
movement nor any objective that really provides a positive motivation. This could change
if right-wing extremists were to act with increasing violence, for example against asylum
seekers. Left-wing extremists are already more
active in this area, under the banner of ‘antifascism’, than right-wing extremists; a response
to right-wing extremist attacks would probably
not be long in coming. Thirdly, the heightened
sensitisation caused by jihad-motivated terrorist attacks could lead to the public being quicker
and less hesitant to sanction minor acts of violence, or conversely it might result in a higher
level of violence being necessary in order to attract the attention sought. By contrast, one can
imagine a scenario in which jihadist terrorist
attacks are followed by attacks by violent rightwing extremists on those they deemed responsible, which in turn are followed by left-wing
extremist violence under the banner of antifascism. However, there are currently no specific
indications of such a development.
In terms of issues, violent left-wing extremism will change little, with almost everything
falling under the headings of ‘anticapitalism’ or
‘anarchism’. The issues that are actually taken
up will depend on current events, the agenda
for which is not drawn up by the violent leftwing extremist scene. This also seems to be
true of the issues of ‘open space’ and ‘urban
space’, which have given the impression in


recent years that they might become genuine
issues for the far left. In addition, there is a
generational change taking place in violent leftwing extremist circles which will continue over
the next few years, one of the consequences of
which will be a shift of emphasis away from
Marxism-Leninism and toward anarchy.


At left:
Unauthorized demonstration in Bern in September 2015
(Bern cantonal police)


-----

-----

### Proliferation

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems continues to
threaten security in many regions of the world. Thanks to a diplomatic breakthrough in 2015,
the situation regarding the Iranian nuclear programme has eased significantly. Nonetheless,
Iran will remain subject to a special authorisation regime in the area of foreign trade for years
to come. Some sections of the agreement between Iran and the permanent members of the
Security Council plus Germany, codified through a UN Security Council resolution, are also
binding on Switzerland, as one of the major exporters of dual-use goods. North Korea continues unhindered with its weapons of mass destruction programmes and on 6 January 2016
once again tested a nuclear explosive device. The international sanctions regime introduced
in 2014 in connection with the military escalation of the situation in Ukraine also poses a new
challenge for Switzerland. In addition, the repeated use of chemical substances in the conflict
in Syria and Iraq reminds us of how important combating proliferation is to related issues such
as that of combating terrorism.


North Korea
Iran


-----

###### SITUATION

**2015 – a year of change**
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems continues to
threaten security in many regions of the world.
In a globalised world, the misuse of Swiss
goods and technologies for power-political purposes remains a possibility. 2015 was, however, also a year of change. The Federal Council
charged the federal administration with ensuring that the sanctions imposed by important
trading partners in connection with the situation
in Ukraine were not being circumvented via
Switzerland. The so-called P5+1 (permanent
members of the UN Security Council plus Germany) concluded a framework agreement with
Iran on the long-term resolution of the the nuclear issues. It covers the reintegration of Iran
into the world trade system, which must also
be accompanied by security measures by national authorities, in particular the intelligence
services. Finally, the conflict in Syria and Iraq
and the repeated use of chemical substances in
that conflict were a reminder of how important
combating proliferation is to related issues such
as combating terrorism.

**Iranian nuclear programme: diplomatic**
**breakthrough**
The situation as regards the Iranian nuclear programme has eased significantly. On 14
July 2015, following years of negotiations, a
framework agreement (Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, JCPOA) was reached between


the P5+1 and Iran. Iran implemented the
agreed restrictions on its nuclear programme
by 16 January 2016 (implementation day). The
resolution of the Board of Governors of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
of 15 December led to a pragmatic consensus
on the handling of the past military dimension
of the Iranian nuclear programme. The implementation of the framework agreement and the
agreed accompanying control mechanisms will
for years to come limit Iran’s opportunities to
pull out of the nuclear non-proliferation treaty
within a reasonable period of time. At the same
time, however, its technical capability to make
its nuclear programme more flexible will also
increase during this timeframe.

**Iranian ballistic missiles: steady expansion**
In the negotiations between Iran and the P5+1,
no viable consensus was reached on the issue of
Iran's ballistic missile production and proliferation programmes. Iran maintained its de facto
moratorium on the testing of medium-range
ballistic missiles until October 2015. On 10 October 2015, it put the dissension about its missile programme agreed at the negotiating table
to the test by launching a version of its Shahab
III missile. The testing of this new system does
not reflect any significant technical progress
in terms of the threat situation, rather it was a
political move. In reality, the qualitative development of the Iranian missile programme continues to make halting progress. The most re­

At right:
Expansion of the nuclear enrichment facility
in Yongbyon, North Korea (2014)


-----

cognisable progress was made on shorter-range
systems which, though not directly relevant to
Switzerland’s security, are of direct relevance
to states in the region.

**North Korean nuclear programme:**
**new nuclear test**
The North Korean nuclear programme remains a source of concern for the international
community. On 6 January 2016, North Korea
detonated a nuclear explosive device for the
fourth time. Whilst this explosive device represents an advance on previous technology in
technical terms, it is not equivalent to a fully
developed hydrogen bomb. The information
available on North Korea is still scant, but satellite images indicate that its uranium enrichment
programme is progressing. Meanwhile, the
political process within the framework of the
so-called six-party talks (North Korea, South
Korea, USA, China, Russia and Japan) remains
blocked. North Korea is increasing its capacity
to produce fissile material for nuclear weapons
and is probably in a position to provide its forces with some explosive devices in the event of a
conflict. However, this threat remains a regional one. Despite advances in missile construction,
North Korea does not currently have the capa

bility to deploy a nuclear weapon over intercontinental distances.

**North Korean ballistic missiles: steady**
**progress**
In the seventieth year since the end of the
Second World War, North Korea used its missile programme as its main tool in its attempt
to enter into a strategic dialogue with the USA
on an equal footing. Once again, a weapons
system purported to have an intercontinental
range was shown off at a parade. In addition,
Pyongyang announced its first ever successful
test of a submarine-launched ballistic missile.
However, neither capability has yet been independently verified. In its space programme, by
contrast, demonstrable progress can be seen.
For example, there has been expansion of the
site at Sohae, from where North Korea first sent
a satellite into orbit in 2012.

**Use of chemical substances in Syria and Iraq**
Reliable sources indicate that in the war zone
in Syria and Iraq, chemical weapons and chemical substances have repeatedly been used for
the purposes of waging war. It is generally accepted that the relevant resources are available
to all conflict parties in the region. The inhibi

**_Modifed building_** **_Building without roof_** **_Original building_**

**50 m**

**09.08.2014 / WorldView-1** **16.03.2014 / QuickBird-2** **26.10.2013 / QuickBird-2**


-----

tion threshold with regard to the use of chemical weapons is low, and fighters on the ground
have experience in deploying them. It is also
possible that there are still improvised production facilities in the region. These circumstances are also relevant for the assessment of the
probability of non-conventional attacks outside
the conflict zone.


CANADA
USA

_Alaska (USA)_ San Francisco

Los Angeles

RUSSIA **_HWASONG-13 (KN-08_**

_~9000 km_

**_HWASONG-6 / 500 km_**

**_HWASONG-5 / 300 km_**

_Hawaii (USA)_

**NORTH KOREA**

CHINA Seoul Tokyo JAPAN
SOUTH KOREA

**_NODONG / 1300 km_**
**_MUSUDAN / ~3500 km_**

_Guam (USA)_

PHILIPPINES


-----

###### ASSESSMENT

**Nuclear crisis with Iran: efficient restrictions**
The framework agreement and its binding
codification in Security Council Resolution
2231 effectively restrict Iran’s ability to acquire
nuclear weapons in the short term. In the long
term, they could lead to the normalisation of the
situation regarding the Iranian nuclear dossier.
At present, all the parties are showing a clear
willingness to implement the agreement. However, these statements are not intended to give
the impression that the situation is now conclusively settled. Further implementation of the
agreement does not yet appear assured for the
long term, since it is still encountering resistance, both in Iran and in the USA, from opponents of a deal between the two states.
Iran’s foreign trade will be subject to a special authorisation regime for years to come.
This regime includes, in particular, detailed
obligations for exporting companies making
shipments to Iran and the monitoring of supplied goods by the authorities of the exporting
state. In addition, the intelligence services will
continue to focus on Iran’s missile programme,
particularly in the light of the supply of Iranian
weapons and technology to the theatre of war
in Syria.
Some sections of the resolution are binding
not only on Iran and the P5+1, but also on all
UN member states. For Switzerland, as one
of the major exporters of dual-use goods, the
establishment of an internationally controlled
procurement channel for dual-use goods for

At left:
ranges of North Korean delivery systems


export to Iran is of particular significance. Not
only exports for the Iranian nuclear programme,
but all exports of dual-use goods from Switzerland to Iran are subject to the provisions of
Resolution 2231. Swiss industry is required to
submit exports to Iran to the UN for approval
via the responsible Swiss federal authority and
in any contract with the Iranian end customer
must provide for a right for the federal authorities to carry out inspections.

**North Korea: entire production range**
**available to nuclear weapons programme**
North Korea’s uranium enrichment capabilities are unclear, but in the area of centrifuge
technology it could be ahead of Iran. Based on
the development path taken by the known programme, the existence of another, older, uranium enrichment plant seems plausible.
In the past, the regime in North Korea has had
no qualms about selling its missile technology
to numerous customers like Pakistan, Iran, Libya, Egypt and Syria, with no strings attached. It
is capable of supplying the entire range of products needed for a nuclear weapons programme,
including the production of fissile material
(uranium and plutonium), the construction of a
simple nuclear explosive device and the medium-range delivery systems required.

**Proliferation and terrorism**
The use of chemical substances in the conflict in Syria confirms the important role of


-----

non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the fight against terrorism. As with the
use of explosives, a group of perpetrators must
consider whether it would be easier to transport
chemical substances than to produce them in
the area of operations. The control of essential
source chemicals and the FIS’s close contacts
with industry and trade support counterterrorism measures.


-----

###### OUTLOOK

**Risks to Switzerland are many and varied**
The flow of controlled goods and technologies to proliferation-sensitive countries via third
countries poses a major challenge for Swiss export controls. Switzerland has excellent industrial capabilities and offers an attractive and, by
international standards, open research location.
The presence of students from states outside the
EU, including states that are sensitive from the
proliferation point of view, is increasing. The
FIS is therefore increasingly raising awareness
of the risks of proliferation among foreign students as well as at research and higher educational institutions. Knowledge sharing, collaboration, even of an informal nature, or favours
for education or research institutions in the
country of origin may also be subject to a licence requirement in Switzerland.
Thanks to Switzerland’s cooperation with
other countries and collaboration with industry,
Swiss authorities have repeatedly been able to
thwart or expose illegal procurement attempts.
The majority of Swiss industries fulfil their statutory obligations in an exemplary manner and
in cases of doubt contact the authorities.
However, the challenges are mounting. Procurement channels are constantly being redeveloped and reorganised. Many of these run via
Asia. The increasing outsourcing of production
abroad is also making it more difficult both for
industry and for the authorities to monitor the
flow of sensitive goods. In areas relevant to proliferation, there is also a discernible tendency


among purchasers to focus on the procurement
of subsystems and components. Identifying
critical subsystems and withdrawing them from
illegal trade is infinitely more difficult than is
the case with complete systems, the export of
which is subject to tighter and ever more effective international controls.
The international sanctions regime introduced in 2014 in connection with the military
escalation of the situation in Ukraine also poses
a new challenge in the light of growing geopolitical tension between Russia and the West.
It affects trading partners of Switzerland with
extensive and, in some sectors, well-developed
relationships. Switzerland’s actions will ensure
that no circumvention of sanctions via Switzerland takes place.


-----

-----

### Illegal intelligence

Illegal intelligence activities are carried out by governments or by private players working
for governments; in some instances, there is also a market for illegally acquired information.
In the area of espionage there are no friendly states, but collaboration does take place where
interests coincide. As a rule, state interests define the goals of intelligence collection activities
– with some requirements being constant and others dictated by the current situation. Illegal
intelligence provides access to persons and systems which could possibly be exploited, not
only in order to acquire information: they may sometimes also be used to manipulate or even
sabotage data. The information is used in the interest of the state concerned, generally in secret,
but in certain cases it may also be made public. Information operations have greatly increased
in importance in recent years.


Political espionagePolitical espionage
against Switzerlandagainst Switzerland

Industrial
espionage

Espionage againstEspionage against
exile communitiesexile communities


-----

###### SITUATION

**Aims and purposes of intelligence activities**
The main purpose of intelligence is to acquire
information, whilst that of illegal intelligence
is to procure information which cannot be procured using legal means. In addition, numerous
foreign states also use their intelligence services to promote their own interests directly, for
example by procuring goods which would not
otherwise be obtainable, to exert political or
economic influence or to prepare measures for
extraordinary situations.
Information procured by intelligence services
can be used to achieve various aims. It helps to
avert damage to one’s own country, i.e. among
other things it makes a contribution to protection and security, for example in the field of
counter-terrorism. For legitimate objectives
shared by other states, legal means of information procurement are also available, for example collaboration with the intelligence service
of the country concerned or legal assistance in
the field of justice. For the purpose of collaboration, some intelligence services also maintain missions abroad; the intelligence service
employees working there are accredited by the
respective host state. Where collaboration is not
possible – or where the results are considered
insufficient – illegal intelligence activity is to
be expected, even where the objective is legitimate. However, as intelligence services always
serve national interests first and foremost, it
should be borne in mind that amicable collaboration with another intelligence service in order


to achieve a particular aim may also be used to
spy on one’s partner.
Illegal procedures come into consideration
when a state’s own national interest are to be
protected or asserted against the interests of
others. Espionage can be used to assert or improve a state’s own position in relation to its
international political or economic rivals. The
secured or improved position that is aspired to
may relate to the target country of the operation
or to any other members of the international
community, or indeed to the country conducting the operation. For example, various countries spy on their exile communities in other
states, including Switzerland.
Information and the access gained in order
to obtain it can be used in a variety of ways.
Someone who has access to a system or a person might be able not just to siphon off information, but also to use his access for manipulation
or even sabotage. Information can be used in
a multitude of ways: sometimes it is an individual piece of information which provides the
crucial advantage – for example in economic
competition the price quoted by a competitor
– and sometimes it is the contribution the information makes to obtaining an overall picture.
Information gained by the intelligence services does not necessarily need to be kept secret
when it is used.
The targeted dissemination of information
to attain political and military objectives has
become increasingly important in recent years.

At right:
manipulated image material relating
to the MH17 crash, November 2014


-----

These so-called information operations range
from legitimate information politics to targeted propaganda and manipulation campaigns
conducted using intelligence and other tools.
Clandestine networks are set up for the dissemination of information. These operate covertly
and often in the grey areas of legality. Even the
targeted publication of information procured
using intelligence tools is not taboo. Presumably, one such case was the disclosure in early
February 2014 of unfavourable observations
about the EU, in connection with the conflict
in Ukraine, by the US State Department's assistant secretary for European affairs. The recording of a conversation, published via YouTube
and probably procured using intelligence tools,
led to frictions in the USA-EU relationship at
an inopportune moment. On the eve of the G20
meeting in Brisbane (Australia) in November
2014 a Russian TV station showed a manipulated picture, claimed to be an actual satellite
image taken by a Western source shortly before the crash of MH17. It was supposed to


support the thesis that MH17 was shot down
by a Ukrainian fighter aircraft and to undermine confidence in the Western account of the
incident.

**Methods**
For foreign intelligence services, cyber espionage and other cyber operations for obtaining
information are becoming increasingly important. In a world in which networking is on the
rise and information and communication technologies (ICT) are gaining importance, this
is hardly surprising. Electronic attacks offer
perpetrators some advantages over traditional
methods of espionage. Cyber operations offer
perpetrators a good opportunity to act without
personal risk. They can be carried out from a
safe location, so that even their discovery and
the identification of the perpetrators, should it
be successful, will not lead to arrest or criminal
sanctions.
The sheer increase in the volume and frequency of cyber espionage does not, however, mean


-----

that the traditional methods have become unimportant and that defence against them can be
neglected. The acquisition of information from
human sources is one of the traditional methods
of espionage. It is carried out using members of
the intelligence services disguised as diplomats,
journalists, researchers or business people, for
example. This type of intelligence collection
can also be carried out using, or assisted by,
cyber methods. Similarly, the use of human resources can clear the way for cyber operations.
Other traditional forms of intelligence activities
include what is known as open-source intelligence, the collection of publicly available information, which does not by itself fall under
the heading of illegal intelligence, and various
forms of signals intelligence, including surveillance of communication links and the content
of communications. Aerial images, which can
sometimes be procured commercially, are also
information carriers.

**Internationality as a magnet for illegal**
**intelligence**
International negotiations, UN conferences
or a high concentration of foreign missions inevitably attract the interest of large numbers of
states and trigger intelligence service activity.
This statement is confirmed by the espionage
activities, now public knowledge, targeted at
the negotiations with Iran about its nuclear programme.
Intelligence services make intensive use of
the diplomatic environment for information
gathering. Numerous states deploy members of
the their intelligence services in their embas

sies or consulates, disguised as diplomatic staff.
This provides protection – doubled in the case
of diplomatic immunity – and facilitates access
to targeted individuals in the political, administrative, economic and military spheres.
Switzerland is particularly affected by this:
the presence of numerous international organisations and non-governmental organisations
provides an opportunity and a reason for sending representatives and maintaining diplomatic
exchanges (e.g. conferences and international
negotiations).
The accredited intelligence service employees mentioned above represent only part of the
personnel sent abroad for intelligence operations. Many states also employ for their espionage missions what are known as travelling
intelligence service employees. These may
also be disguised as diplomats, or alternatively as tourists or business people. They are most
frequently deployed in order to meet a human
source abroad.
In recent years, the FIS has uncovered a number of cases of illegal intelligence by accredited
diplomats or travelling intelligence service employees. In some cases, entry bans were issued.

**Surveillance of the opposition**
Exiled regime opponents are a key focus of
the intelligence services of their countries of origin. The countries concerned are authoritarian
states in which freedom of expression, at the
very least, is curtailed. Most of these states also
have the means to track their opponents abroad.
The FIS regularly finds that diaspora communities in Switzerland are the target of illegal intel

-----

ligence activities. Such activities represent an
attack on the sovereignty of Switzerland and an
attack on the rights it guarantees; they undermine the protection that Switzerland extends to
all its inhabitants.
This phenomenon affects not only Switzerland, but all states with diaspora communities
considered a threat in their countries of origin.
The intelligence services of these countries are
sometimes instructed to obtain information
about their exile communities, to carry out surveillance on them or even to exploit them for
political purposes at home. This will obviously
depend on the profile of the exile community
concerned. However, it is not just political refugees who belong to the opposition or are seen
as being members of it; the profile of exile communities is extremely heterogeneous. Swiss nationals, whether with or without any biographical connection to a state, are also becoming
involved alongside activists who have fled to
Switzerland from their homelands. These Swiss
nationals, like the exiled activists, may become
espionage targets.
Activists may be prevailed upon to act as
sources. Positive incentives may be used for
this purpose, but also pressure by threatening
reprisals against which scarcely any protection
is possible, for example against relatives living
in their home country. In addition to straightforward intelligence gathering, intelligence services sometimes also attempt to weaken opposition organisations and movements by means
of infiltration: for example, individuals planted
by intelligence services may endeavour to sow
discord and thus split an opposition movement.


The information obtained is also used in the
country of origin for the purposes of repression,
and exiles may in extreme cases even be killed.

**Cyber espionage**
At least since the beginning of the new millennium, cyber attacks using simple, not particularly technically sophisticated methods, have been
joined by so-called advanced persistent threats.
These are precisely what their name implies: the
attacks are carried out in a targeted fashion, are
highly complex, are intended to remain undetected for as long as possible and are aimed at
obtaining specific data. In the past, these characteristic features were a sign that a government
perpetrator was behind the espionage activities.
Even if the considerable resources required and
the long-term interest still point to such a conclusion, the case of a group which has been active for some years now demonstrates that this is
not necessarily so. The group possesses complex
espionage software and the capability to install
it. It either just sells the malware or handles the
execution of the entire operation on behalf of its
clients. Targets have included private companies
– exclusively so in Switzerland to date – but also
supporters of jihadist objectives on the internet
or other hackers.
The diagram gives an overview of the main
advanced persistent threats, with just two of the
most recent attacks being highlighted here: the
attack on the nuclear talks with Iran and the attack on the German Bundestag.

 - Various properties in which the talks between the permanent members of the Security Council plus Germany and Iran were


-----

taking place were attacked, some of them
in Switzerland. Traces of the software used
were found at three locations. The Russian
company Kaspersky, which was itself attacked, named the malware Duqu2 because
of its similarity with the Duqu software detected in 2011. It also has similarities with
the Stuxnet software which was deployed
against targets including the Iranian nuclear
programme.

- The cyber attack in May 2015 on the German Bundestag was also carried out using
software which was already known about.
The operation had already become public, in
a different context, in October 2014, its main
focus being on targets in the areas of defence
and security policy. The Swiss federal administration was also attacked. In general,
previously unknown security vulnerabilities,
so-called zero-day exploits, were used for
infection.


**Comprehensive monitoring**
From an intelligence viewpoint, at least, the
world now finds itself in a ‘post-Snowden’ era.
The disclosures set in motion in mid-2013 by
Edward Snowden, a former employee of a
service provider for the US National Security
Agency (NSA), relating to the activities of the
NSA as well as to those of the UK's Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ)
and of the Five Eyes states (USA, UK, Canada,
Australia and New Zealand) in general, have
brought to light a new dimension of intelligence
activities. This involves the comprehensive recording of electronic data stored anywhere or
being moved via any channels. The example
of the list of selectors for strategic communications intelligence publicised in the media in
Germany from March 2015, shows once more
what has to be expected. Meanwhile, not only
the victims but also their attackers will probably have drawn their own conclusions from
the revelations. Political reactions to this, for


-----

example in the USA, have shown that a partial
restriction on such activities is an option, but
only within a country and only in relation to
that country's own citizens, and not in relation
to foreign countries. For example, at the end
of January 2016, media reports stated that the
Canadian intelligence service, Communications Security Establishment, had temporarily
suspended the exchange of information only
because a software error had led to metadata on
its own citizens inadvertently being delivered
to its Five Eyes partners.

At left:
Selected espionage operations from 2001 to date. The period in which an espionage operation was active
is shown. The start of an operation has been defined as the first reference to the espionage software,
and the end – where clearly defined – as its public disclosure. The case whose name is printed in bold is
explained further in the report.


-----

###### ASSESSMENT

**Threats persist**
The security dimension of the Snowden revelations is still very relevant: across the board,
intelligence services are procuring confidential
information by monitoring communications
and actively penetrating IT systems. It is possible that they may also be falsifying such information or even manipulating processes or
infrastructures. The penetration of communications is deep, systematic and virtually comprehensive. This is reflected in the resources
that are used: providers are forced by law to
disclose data, covert access has been obtained
to the main lines of communication, encryption
codes have also systematically been broken or
weakened, and even encryption standards have
been affected.
Advanced persistent threats will also continue
to exist. One of the aims of these attacks is to
remain undetected. However, it should be noted that recognised malware – albeit in modified
form – also continues to be deployed. While the
basic components of the malware remain the
same, these are further developed and in particular are repeatedly reconfigured so that they
will not be recognised by the protection mechanisms installed. However, a further feature of
advanced persistent threats is that even after
one has been discovered, it can be assumed that
the attacker will attempt to infiltrate the system
again.
Targeted cyber attacks require knowledge of
the target, for example initially, when it comes


to installing the malware in a system. This can
be done in various ways, for example by a person who is physically present feeding the software in directly, or alternatively via the internet.
The most commonly used methods are targeted
emails, known as spear phishing, or targeted
website infections, known as waterhole attacks.
However, some effort is now needed to persuade the designated victim to click on a link or
to open an email attachment, thereby taking the
step necessary for installation.
Command and control servers are used to
control the malware once it has been installed.
These link the computers infected with the malware to a so-called botnet and can be used not
just for espionage, but also to serve criminal
purposes. Such command and control servers
have also been identified in Switzerland.

**Information operations**
Successful information operations have a
number of basic features in common. They contain simple core messages. These build on one
another and are differently packaged, structured
in simple or more complex ways and regularly repeated on various channels. The messages
are closely synchronised in terms of time and
content and are presented in a coordinated way,
both vertically – from the head of state and
public officials down to seemingly independent individuals, all put forward the same view
– and horizontally – various media, letters to
the editor and comments by so-called trolls or


-----

Internet trolls. This shared emphasis increases
the impact, as does the final feature, a distinct
focus on a specific target group. For example,
a campaign intended to tarnish the relationship
between two states will attempt to influence the
population and a government in different ways.
Intelligence services are not only a tool but also
a target of tailored manipulation campaigns.

**No friendly states**
When it comes to illegal intelligence, there
are no friendly states, just ones that pursue their
own interests. These may be wholly or partially compatible with the interests of other states,
or they may diverge from or even conflict with
them. However, even converging interests are
no guarantee that a state will not deploy illegal intelligence in other states – one has only
to think of the intelligence activities in the area
of counterterrorism that link many different services.

**Regime opponents remain a target**
The intensity of illegal intelligence activities
against regime opponents living in exile depends on several constant factors, but the situation is also a determining factor. The security
situation, in particular, has a major influence
on the intensity of intelligence activity. For example, official visits by foreign politicians or
officials may lead to an intensification of illegal intelligence activity in Switzerland, often
more out of a need for security than purely for
intelligence reasons. In such cases, intelligence
services may become active in Switzerland
in order to obtain information about demon

strations or attempts to disrupt the visit. More
independently of the particular situation, the
aim is to identify persons who sympathise with
movements critical of the regime or who support these and could pose a destabilisation risk
to the regime.
Intelligence surveillance using individuals
who have infiltrated the opposition is hard to
detect. People will have very little interest in
collaborating with counterespionage in the host
state if family and relatives at home may be
subject to intimidation attempts and repressive
measures.


**TRAVEL INTELLIGENCE**

Travel intelligence refers to the collection and recording by the intelligence services of sensitive information
about the travel and itineraries of particular individuals. The intelligence service relies on such information
to detect activities which pose a threat to security. In
concrete terms, this consists primarily of evidence
from border and customs controls (entry, exit and transit) about citizens of particular countries. In addition,
check-in data from selected airports is evaluated and
compared with data in the FIS's information systems.
The FIS is also involved at an early stage in the consultation process on the issue of visas for the Schengen
area. The Federal Council regularly sets out the criteria for such information collection in a classified list,
taking the threat situation as its basis. Together with
findings from other sources, travel intelligence helps
to build up a more comprehensive picture of the travel,
itineraries and contacts of intelligence targets.


-----

###### OUTLOOK

**Continuing espionage, increased**
**significance of information operations**
Continuing espionage, increased significance
of information operations
Illegal intelligence against economic, political and military interests will continue to be
carried out, in Switzerland as elsewhere. The
high technological standard of Swiss industry,
the presence of the UN and other international
bodies, and Switzerland's status as a research
location, a financial centre and a marketplace
for energy and commodities trading are among
the reasons why this will remain the case, even
if the entire range of counterintelligence measures is brought to bear against it. These include
criminal prosecution and measures under the
law governing foreign nationals and, most importantly, prevention.
Information operations will continue to increase in importance in future. Authoritarian
states have a fundamental advantage over the
open societies of the West in this regard.

**Vulnerability of ICT**
ICT remains vulnerable and probably exposed to attack by those states in which the
industry for key ICT technologies is based.
These countries will, provided they also have
large intelligence services, continue to be potential sources of extensive espionage activity.
At most, they may restrict their intelligence activities in their own countries and against their
own citizens, but not abroad. Confidence in the


ICT companies of these countries will therefore
remain dented.
One result of this is that in countries which
do not themselves possess the capability to
manufacture key technologies, greater significance will be attached to security aspects of ICT
projects, with the added consequence that this
will lead to shifts on the international markets.
However, key technologies will not migrate to
other countries, at least not in the medium term.
Conflicts are thus to be expected within ICT
projects, perhaps in the form of legal disputes
about the award of contracts within the framework of the World Trade Organisation. It is not
immediately clear that the courts would give
priority to general security considerations, for
example regarding illegal intelligence: if there
is a requirement for risks to be identified and
documented in detail, then this will no longer
be possible beyond a certain level of precision,
precisely because there is a dependency on the
leading states in this field. However, there is
also a countervailing factor at work here: since
Snowden, companies which supply key technologies have had to combat scepticism and are
therefore interested in winning back trust. It can
therefore be assumed that some companies will
point out security vulnerabilities – for example
backdoors or errors in encryption algorithms –
sooner than would previously have been the
case.


-----

**Criminal prosecution and the alternatives**
When spies are identified, the FIS will transfer the case to the authorities for criminal prosecution, unless they enjoy diplomatic immunity.
However, cases of espionage are beyond the
scope of international mutual legal assistance,
the investigations are lengthy, the cases complex and finally, however lawful the measures,
retaliatory measures can be expected, at least
from certain countries. To safeguard the country’s interests, the criminal prosecution authorities therefore require, in accordance with Article 66 of the Penal Authorities Organisation Act

[Strafbehördenorganisationsgesetz], authorisation from the Federal Council in order to be
allowed to prosecute political offences, such as
for example political intelligence as defined by
Article 272 of the Swiss Criminal Code.
Sometimes, however, explaining the legal
position to the country of origin of officials engaged in intelligence activity may be enough
to achieve the removal of an individual. If not,
provisions under the law on foreign nationals

MELANI’s semi annual report
is available on the internet
(www.melani.admin.ch)


can be used against identified spies: refusal of
diplomatic accreditation or refusal to grant a
visa. In addition, an entry ban may be imposed
or the person concerned may be declared persona non grata. Depending on the circumstances,
these measures are taken either discreetly or, in
order to send a signal, publicly.
Finally, when all the interests are weighed up,
a conscious decision may be taken to allow a
person identified as being a spy to stay in Switzerland, at least temporarily. This may be the
case where activities within the framework of
international organisations or negotiations are
involved. Their success may be of greater political interest. Examples of such events include
the WEF, the Syria talks in Geneva, and visits
by delegations with members in key economic
or political positions.

**Prevention and autonomy**
Overall, prevention is the most important
part of the defence against illegal intelligence.
The FIS has a statutory remit to take preventive


-----

measures to counter the espionage activities of
foreign intelligence services. The FIS, in collaboration with the cantonal intelligence units,
has therefore for years been raising awareness
among companies and research and higher educational institutions of the risks posed by illegal
intelligence and proliferation. The Prophylax
prevention and awareness-raising programme
is used for this purpose with commercial companies, while the Technopole programme is
specifically tailored to research activities in
Switzerland. In addition, the FIS has provided
speakers for events devoted to industrial espionage and has conducted seminars on ‘Prevention of industrial espionage’ in Zurich and in
Lausanne for Swissmem representatives. In the
area of information assurance, the Reporting
and Analysis Centre for Information Assurance
is managing a public-private partnership.
One of the greatest challenges for the future
is that of raising awareness among individuals
travelling abroad. Intelligence activities directed against Swiss interests do not necessarily
take place in Switzerland. For security reasons,
recruitment attempts and the handling of Western sources actually seem to be more likely to
take place abroad. Intelligence services have
control over the environment in their own countries and do not need to fear hostile surveillance.
All Swiss residents should report any such approaches to the FIS. Immediate reporting of any
suspicious approach or recruitment attempt can
prevent any harm being done and ensure that
the individuals concerned do not get into a situation in which they open themselves to charges
of espionage.


-----

-----

-----

### List of abbreviations

AIIB...........................................................................................Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank

AKP......................................................................................................Justice and Development Party

AQAP............................................................................................ Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula

AQIM.............................................................................................. Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb

CCTV............................................................................................................ China Central Television

FDFA....................................................................................... Federal Department of Foreign Affairs

FAI...................................................................................................Federazione Anarchica Informale

GCHQ............................................................................ Government Communications Headquarters

IAEA.......................................................................................... International Atomic Energy Agency

ICT................................................................................ Information and communications technology

JCPOA.........................................................................................Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action

LTTE................................................................................................Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam

MELANI...................................................Reporting and Analysis Centre for Information Assurance

NATO............................................................................................ North Atlantic Treaty Organisation

NSA..............................................................................................................National Security Agency

Pegida.........................................................Patriotic Europeans Against the Islamization of the West

PKK..............................................................................................................Kurdistan Workers’ Party

RAS....................................................................................................Revolutionärer Aufbau Schweiz

RAZ......................................................................................................Revolutionärer Aufbau Zürich

SRI.....................................................................International Red Aid / Secours Rouge International

WEF............................................................................................................... World Economic Forum


-----

-----

###### Editor

Federal Intelligence Service FIS

###### Deadline

February/march 2016

###### Contact adress

Federal Intelligence Service FIS
Papiermühlestrasse 20
CH-3003 Bern
E-mail: info@ndb.admin.ch
www.fis.admin.ch

###### Distribution

BBL, Verkauf Bundespublikationen,
CH-3003 Bern
www.bundespublikationen.admin.ch
Art.-No. 503.001.16eng
ISSN 1664-4719

###### Copyright

Federal Intelligence Service FIS, 2016


-----

-----

**SWITZERLAND’S SECURITY**
Federal Intelligence Service FIS
Papiermühlestrasse 20
CH-3003 Bern
www.fis.admin.ch / info@ndb.admin.ch


-----

