# Swiss Foreign Policy Strategy 2012–2015

### Federal Council report to Parliament
 on the strategic axes of foreign policy

 March 2012


-----

-----

Switzerland is a country of strong in­
stitutions deeply rooted in its pluralist,
democratic, and federalist culture. How­
ever, its independence, security, and
stability are to a large extent the fruit of
cross-border exchange. Indeed, Switzer­
land – so poor in raw materials, so rich in
successful ventures – is the living expres­
sion of openness to the world at large.

But do the Swiss really know this? Are
they aware of the strategic importance
of their foreign policy? Are they aware
of the need to anticipate future issues,
prevent problems with neighbouring
countries from taking on continental
dimensions, affirm their values through
solidarity and responsibility, and con­
stantly strengthen their partnerships?
Do they know that their interests are
often linked with global developments
and that they can influence those devel­
opments?


If we are to answer these questions in
the affirmative, we need to explain the
Confederation’s foreign policy, to make
it accessible, and to be candid. This is the
desire of the Federal Council, which has
just adopted its foreign policy strategy
for the current legislature. In our report,
we affirm the principal objective of safe­
guarding the country’s interests and
promoting its values, as defined in the
Constitution with timeless wisdom. And
we define priorities for the years ahead.

We thank you for reading this report,
sharing its content, and joining with
others in making your contribution to
the future of our country.

Didier Burkhalter


-----

**1 Introduction...................................................................................................... 5**
1.1 Overall objective: interests and values.............................................................. 5
1.2 Principles governing implementation................................................................ 6

**2 The strategic axes of Swiss foreign policy.................................................... 8**
2.1 Neighbouring countries.................................................................................... 8
2.2 The European Union and its member states................................................... 10
2.3 Stability in Europe and beyond........................................................................11
2.4 Strategic partnerships and global issues......................................................... 15

**3 Support for Swiss nationals living or travelling abroad ..................................21**

**4 Implementation of foreign policy and communication abroad.....................23**
4.1 Resources and representations network......................................................... 23
4.2. Communication abroad................................................................................. 24

**5 Conclusion................................................................................................................26**

#### List of acronyms

ICC International Criminal Court

ICRC International Committee of the Red Cross
SDC Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation

FDFA Federal Department of Foreign Affairs
G-8 Group of 8 (Canada, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, United
States (G7) + Russia)

G-20 Group of 20 (Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, European Union,

France, Germany, Great Britain, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Russia,
Saudi Arabia, South Africa, South Korea, Turkey, United States)

Osec Osec Business Network Switzerland

OSCE Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe
PEP Politically exposed persons

SECO State Secretariat for Economic Affairs
EU E U i


-----

The Federal Council asked the Federal

Department of Foreign Affairs (FDFA)
on 11 May 2011 to submit a document
to it at the beginning of each legislature,
setting out the most important strate­
gic axes of Swiss foreign policy. This re­
port is our response to both the Federal
Council’s request and a motion tabled by
Parliament (10.3212 “For a clear foreign
policy strategy”).

This report is concerned with the prior­
ity areas of “general” foreign policy and
therefore does not tackle “sector-relat­
ed” aspects – foreign economic policy,
international financial policy, internation­
al environment policy, etc. – in any depth.
Nevertheless, following the example of
the strategy adopted in recent years in
the field of foreign health policy, the de­
partments responsible will have to draw
up even more joint strategies for safe­
guarding Switzerland’s interests, so as to
better coordinate the Federal Council’s
policies in relation to foreign countries.

#### 1.1 Overall objective: interests and values

The overall objective of Swiss foreign
policy is to safeguard Swiss interests and
promote Swiss values. The Federal Con­
stitution defines these interests and val­
ues in Art. 2 and Art. 54, paragraph 2.
The definition given there is intended to
have long-term validity and thus to im­
part stability to Swiss foreign policy, re­
gardless of changes in the international

it ti t i ti


According to the Constitution, the prin­

cipal interests that Swiss foreign policy
is intended to safeguard are the inde­
pendence, security, and prosperity of
the country. In pursuing these interests,
the Confederation is committed to pro­
moting efforts to combat distress and
poverty in the world, respect for human
rights and democracy, peaceful coex­
istence of nations, and conservation of
natural resources.

In this age of globalisation, countries
have become so interdependent that
a conflict or crisis – even in a faraway
land – often has direct consequences
for Switzerland: threatening our foreign
investments or exports, endangering
our nationals living abroad, or destroy­
ing natural resources. Fragile states and
states in conflict are fertile ground for
organised crime, armed violence, and
illegal proliferation of weapons and
cross-border terrorist networks. The
world economy is vulnerable to threats
to the flow of trade, transportation,
and energy resources. Moreover, we
are subject to the pressure of migration
from countries where insecurity, hu­
man rights violations, poor social and
economic prospects, and degradation
of the environment are commonplace.
Therefore, in committing ourselves to
preventing conflicts, alleviating poverty,
and protecting the environment, Swit­
zerland is fostering international stabil­
ity, which in turn has a positive influence
on the country’s security, access to re­
sources, and prosperity.


-----

#### implementation

Implementation of Swiss foreign policy

is governed by a number of principles
which transcend changing circum­

stances and remain valid regardless of
temporary changes in the international
situation. The three basic principles are
the rule of law, universality, and neu­
trality, to which should be added the
fundamental notions of solidarity and
responsibility:

- **The rule of law: Just as respect for**
the rule of law is accepted without
question in Switzerland, it is clearly
in the country’s interest that inter­
national relations be governed by
law and not by force. Hence the key
importance for Switzerland of pub­
lic international law. In the absence
of rules, international actors may be
tempted to further their interests
by trying to exert pressure, or even
by using force. Switzerland, on the
other hand, has for many years been
firmly opposed to use of force and
in favour of peaceful means of set­
tling disputes;

- **Universality: Switzerland has al­**
ways tried, as far as possible, to
maintain good relations with all
nations of the world. As a country
that is heavily dependent – in par­
ticular economically – on its open­
ness to the outside world (not being
a member of the European Union or
other major alliances or groups of
countries, such as the G-20), Swit­
zerland needs to maintain a wide

t k f l ti hi i d t


This being the case, in a context
characterised by limited resources,
the principle of universality does

not mean an absence of priorities,
and it does not prevent us from rec­
ognising the special importance of
certain partnerships or the need to
develop targeted strategies for par­
ticular countries;

- **Neutrality: By virtue of its status**
as a permanently neutral country,
Switzerland respects the obliga­
tions imposed upon it by neutral­
ity law, first and foremost the duty
not to participate in international
conflicts involving other states. On
the other hand, implementation of
its neutrality policy – intended to
ensure the visibility and credibility
of its neutrality in the legal sense
– is not governed by rules of law;
rather it depends on analysis of the
international situation at any given
moment. While implying the main­
tenance of a degree of impartiality
and objectivity in adopting a posi­
tion, neutrality does not prevent
Switzerland from defending its in­
terests. On the contrary, it can be a
flexible instrument of foreign policy,
facilitating contacts with different
interlocutors. In particular, it is an
asset in Switzerland’s role as a pro­
vider of good offices, which has tra­
ditionally been a strength of Swiss
foreign policy, making our country
distinct from others and enabling it
to play a special role.


-----

policy are supplemented by the notions
of solidarity and responsibility.

In the current context, a state’s influ­
ence and capacity to create the neces­
sary space to safeguard its interests
cannot be measured only in terms of
its military might, economic power, or
demographic size. This capacity also de­
pends on its willingness to contribute in
practical ways to solving global issues,
including the issue of sustainable devel­
opment. As a country that benefits from
globalisation, Switzerland is called upon
to behave in a constructive, committed,


forts in the field of international coop­
eration (with countries of the South and
East, and in providing humanitarian and

economic aid) and in strengthening hu­
man security (peace promotion, human
rights, humanitarian policy, and interna­
tional issues of migration) assume great
importance. Moreover, as one of the
most advanced countries in the fields
of science, innovation, and technology,
Switzerland can help by contributing
specific solutions to challenges our plan­
et is facing, having a special role to play
in this field.


#### 1. NEIGHBOURING COUNTRIES

 2. EUROPEAN UNION AND ITS MEMBER STATES
 4. STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIPS AND GLOBAL ISSUES

 SWISS
 3. STABILITY IN
 NATIONALS
 EUROPE AND BEYOND


-----

## g
 axes of Swiss foreign policy

The international environment in which
Switzerland conducts its foreign policy is
characterised by constant and profound
change. The strategic axes of Swiss for­
eign policy must take this into account,
even though the overall objective, in­
terests, and values it seeks to promote,
as defined in the Federal Constitution,
retain their validity in the long term.
Therefore, Switzerland needs to define
priorities for action while being con­
stantly ready to deal with exceptional
situations and to react appropriately to
them.

In analysing the current situation, Swit­
zerland has identified four strategic axes
for the present legislature:

#### 2.1 Neighbouring countries

As a result of rapidly progressing glo­
balisation, the nature of national fron­
tiers has changed significantly. Although
they continue to define the territory over
which a state exercises its authority, their
function as a barrier to movement of
persons, goods, services, and capital has
greatly diminished. Where movement of
persons is concerned, this phenomenon
is particularly evident in the case of coun­
tries like Switzerland and its neighbours
within the Schengen area. For example,
more than 700,000 vehicles cross the
S i b d d


close ties with its neighbours in the eco­
nomic field and in other areas, such as
energy, introduction of free movement

of persons within the European Union
(and in particular a large increase in the
number of cross-border workers) has led
to far greater contact and a need for co­
operation in a number of areas, including
transport, the environment, social insur­
ance, taxation, health care, etc. Switzer­
land has witnessed development of large
built-up areas straddling its frontiers,
sometimes with more than one country.
This has made it necessary to tackle chal­
lenges of a new kind and magnitude.
This development is likely to be ongoing,
bringing both challenges and opportuni­
ties.

Some issues can be dealt with effectively
within the canton’s framework of crossborder cooperation. The cantons play an
important part in Swiss foreign policy. By
participating in cross-border bodies in
this way, Switzerland’s frontier regions
are managing shared living areas, in con­
junction with, say, Baden-Wurttemberg
and Bavaria (Germany), the Rhône-Alpes
region (France), and Lombardy (Italy) –
all prosperous, densely populated, and
powerful neighbouring regions, major
actors in European regional policy. For
example, development of regional public
transport systems meets people’s travel
needs throughout the basin compris­
ing the cantons of Valais and Geneva
as well as that part of France bordering
them. The FDFA provides necessary po­
litical support, either by coordinating and
facilitating relations within a framework
of bilateral contacts with neighbouring

t i b d l i l l i t


-----

ments within a bilateral or multilateral
framework emanating from the Council
of Europe or the European Union.

### Strategic axis 1

 Maintenance and development of our relations with neighbouring states, with special emphasis on cross-border regions and rapid settlement of disputes.

Other issues need to be tackled in the
context of relations between national
capitals. Experience shows that prob­
lems originating in a cross-border con­
text can very quickly take on a wider
dimension. The issue of Zurich airport
or the bi-national Basel-Mulhouse air­
port, implementation of the agreement
on free movement of persons, safety of
nuclear installations in the vicinity of na­
tional borders, and taxation matters in
relation to Italy are all pertinent exam­
ples.

Good relations with neighbouring coun­
t i th h f d t l t b


taken for granted. Switzerland needs
to foster them and act quickly and
with determination to resolve practical
problems affecting them. The Confed­
eration will be paying greater attention
to these matters in the next few years,
with particular emphasis on Swiss rela­
tions with Liechtenstein. Contacts need
to be strengthened at both presidential
and ministerial levels (with respect to
sectoral policies as well as foreign af­
fairs), and between representatives of
our respective administrations. Contacts
maintained by Swiss parliamentarians
are also a positive factor in efforts to
foster Swiss links with other countries.

Maintaining harmonious and balanced
relations with our neighbours is all the
more important in that the three larg­
est are important members of the Euro­
pean Union, as well as belonging to the
G-8 and G-20 groupings, and one is a
permanent member of the UN Security
Council. Switzerland needs to grasp the
opportunity afforded by having such
neighbours. The Confederation will also
be adopting a similarly active policy to­

d th U it d Ki d t


-----

the G-8 and G-20 groupings, and a
permanent member of the UN Security
Council.

#### 2.2 The European Union and its member states

Switzerland and the European Union
(EU) have close economic, political,
and social ties. Our relations with the
EU are of fundamental importance. De­
spite difficulties it currently faces, the
EU, with its member states, remains the
world’s foremost economic power and
dominant continental player.

The fact that the EU is currently under­
going an economic and institutional
crisis raises some important issues for
Switzerland:

            - firstly, as the pressure on the Swiss
franc has demonstrated, Switzer­
land is directly affected by difficul­
ties facing the EU and the Euro zone;

            - secondly, there is a danger that the
EU’s difficulties and the energy it
must devote to solving them will
cause it to look inwards, having a
negative influence on its readiness

### Strategic axis 2

 Fostering and deepening our relations with the European Union, while safeguarding our political room for manoeuvre and long-term economic interests


Switzerland. Pressure in respect of
taxation is likely to increase. How­
ever, there could be a growing

need for the EU to solve certain
specific problems in a pragmatic
way. Agreements on a withholding
tax, as negotiated by Switzerland
with Germany and the United King­
dom, could prove useful in support­
ing efforts to stabilise the Union;

- thirdly, the history of the European
project shows that major crises are
generally resolved by greater inte­
gration and transfer of powers from
member states to the Union. At the
same time, Switzerland cannot rule
out the possibility that the widely
differing circumstances of the EU’s
member states will persuade the
EU to agree to closer cooperation
and differentiated models of inte­
gration involving a limited number
of its members (variable geometry
Europe).

In the short term, pursuit of the bilat­
eral approach requires that Switzerland
establish a new balance between the
need to find concrete solutions to con­
crete problems – for example, regard­
ing market access and fiscal matters
as well as an appropriate institutional
framework which respects the func­
tioning of both parties’ institutions and
their sovereignty. In particular, it is nec­
essary to find mechanisms for adapting
the bilateral agreements to develop­
ments in relevant aspects of the acquis
_communautaire, and for their interpre­_
tation, supervision of their application,

d ttl t f di t


-----

In addition to our relations with the EU
as an entity, we must, as a non-member
country, make special efforts to nurture
relations with its individual member
States, which constitute our “extended
neighbourhood”. If necessary, Switzer­
land must target particular countries so
as to influence the framework condi­
tions at European level as much as pos­
sible, maintain a good understanding,
and gain acceptance of Switzerland’s
specific characteristics and needs.

#### 2.3 Stability in Europe and beyond

Even within Europe there are economic
and social disparities. And such imbal­
ances and tensions are all the more evi­
dent if we look farther afield to the rest

f th ld d t i b d i


on Europe, which constitute our “wider
neighbourhood”. In this age of globali­
sation, the fact is that Switzerland’s
security and prosperity depend funda­
mentally on a stable international envi­
ronment, as the recent world financial
crisis and events in North Africa have
reminded the Confederation.

This is why Swiss foreign policy attach­
es key importance to fostering stability
in Europe, in the regions bordering on
it, and in the rest of the world. A con­
siderable proportion of Swiss financial
and human resources is devoted to
achieving this aim (see Chapter 4).

Our efforts to foster stability are based
in particular on international coopera­
tion (which includes development co­
operation and cooperation with Eastern
E ll h it i d


-----

mote peace, respect for human rights,
the rule of law, and international securi­
ty. Moreover, as the stability of the inter­

national environment also depends on
the rules which govern it, and on com­
pliance with them, Switzerland ascribes
special importance to public internation­
al law. During the current legislature, co­
ordination of development cooperation,
humanitarian aid, and human security
activities will be strengthened.

**International cooperation**
Where development policy is con­
cerned, Switzerland is recognised as
a reliable partner, efficient, close to
grass-roots realities, innovative, and
respectful of cultural and religious
diversity. Development policy is an in­
creasingly important aspect of Swiss


terdependence between countries

and between different policy areas,
creating conditions for sustainable and

equitable development has become
increasingly important, both for de­
veloping countries and for developed
countries such as Switzerland. Switzer­
land’s security and prosperity in fact
depend on the framework of condi­
tions that pertain internationally. All
countries have many interests in com­
mon, whatever their level of economic
development. Reduction of green­
house gases, conservation of natu­
ral resources, market stability, global
health and the control of epidemics,
peace, respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, etc.,
are all “global public goods” which
can be assured only by joint effort.


-----

has submitted its Message to Parlia­
ment on international cooperation for
2013–2016 with reference to the four

framework credits of humanitarian aid,
development cooperation, coopera­
tion with the countries of Eastern Eu­
rope, and economic and trade policy
measures. The overall objective is to
alleviate poverty and reduce global
risks. For Switzerland, this programme
represents a commitment of one Swiss
franc per person per day. The priorities
are fragile states, development of inte­
grated projects, participation in global
programmes (climate, food, water,
health, migration, finance, and trade),
and cooperation with private actors.
Moreover, Switzerland’s international
cooperation activities will increasingly
be based on a unified strategy involv­
ing all federal departments concerned,
coordinated by the SDC and SECO. By
achieving greater consistency, Switzer­
land’s aim is to act more effectively.
The overall objective of Swiss interna­
tional cooperation is to alleviate pov­
erty and manage global risks by ensur­
ing sustainable global development. In
concrete terms, Switzerland will pursue
five principal lines of action: prevent­
ing and managing crises, conflicts, and
disasters; enabling all countries to gain
access to resources and services; pro­
moting sustainable economic growth;
encouraging the transition to marketeconomy-based democratic systems;
and participating in a form of globali­
sation that favours development and
environmental protection. It is also
essential to maintain a robust capacity
to react to natural and humanitarian
di t


**human rights, the rule of law, and**
**international security**
Switzerland is especially well placed

to act in the field of human security.
As a neutral state – one committed to
dialogue as a way of resolving conflicts
and with a long tradition of providing
good offices and mediation – it also has
incomparable experience of direct de­
mocracy, federalism, and respect for di­
versity. Like international cooperation,
peace promotion benefits Switzerland’s
security and prosperity. Switzerland’s
concrete input (such as its mediation
activities in the Caucasus or its man­
dates to act as a protecting power)
provides the opportunity to strengthen
Swiss contacts not only with the states
directly concerned, but also with the
great powers with an interest in the ef­
forts the Confederation is making.

Following adoption of the Message to
Parliament concerning the continuation
of peace promotion and human secu­
rity measures 2012–2016, Swiss activi­
ties over the next few years will centre
around six priority themes correspond­
ing to Switzerland’s recognised skills:
peace and security; democracy, elec­
tions, and power-sharing; dealing with
the past and prevention of atrocities;
increased promotion and protection of
human rights; protection of civilians in
armed conflicts; migration and combat­
ing human trafficking.

Part of the new framework credit will
also be devoted to initiatives in the
field of disarmament, arms control, and
non-proliferation – an area in which
S it l d i t d t l t


-----

### Continuing and adapting Switzerland’s commitment to stability in Europe, in regions bordering Europe (our “extended neighbourhood”), and in the rest of the world

emphasis during the next few years.
Switzerland’s objective is to strengthen
international stability and security by
reducing the armament levels as far as
possible. Our country’s commitment
to peace is based on a wide range of
instruments, including mediation, civil­
ian peace promotion programmes, and
the Swiss Expert Pool for Civilian Peace
Building. Instruments linked to military
peace support are also an important
and integral part of this commitment.
In line with the 2010 security policy
report, Switzerland plans to extend
its commitment in the field of military
peacekeeping over the next few years,
both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Recent experiences (for example, where
protecting embassies is concerned)
show that the debate on intervention
by the Swiss Armed Forces abroad
needs to continue if Switzerland is to
arrive at a political consensus. The Con­
federation’s commitment to the Part­
nership for Peace (PfP) and the EuroAtlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) will
also remain important. These involve­
ments help to strengthen Switzerland’s
security by contributing to the stabilisa­
tion of Europe and the Mediterranean,
to develop Swiss capacities and knowl­
edge, to modernise the Swiss army, and
to promote Swiss interests in a regional
f k


**humanitarian law**
A commitment to developing and
strengthening public international law

is a constant aspect of Swiss foreign
policy. In particular, Switzerland sees
the rules relating to use of force, inter­
national justice, and international hu­
manitarian law as very important.

Switzerland’s long-standing commit­
ment to respecting, promoting, and
strengthening international humani­
tarian law is part of the country’s hu­
manitarian tradition. As the depository
of the Geneva Conventions and seat of
the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), this accords well with its
neutrality. The principal challenge to in­
ternational humanitarian law at present
is that parties to a conflict often fail to
respect its rules. Internationally, there
is a need to consider ways of remedy­
ing this situation, and Switzerland has a
role to play here.

Another key aspect of public interna­
tional law (and one of growing impor­
tance) is that of international criminal
justice. Switzerland is committed to
combating impunity and to an Interna­
tional Criminal Court (ICC) capable of
fulfilling the vital mandate that states
have conferred upon it. Switzerland was
elected in December 2011 to one of the
two vice-presidencies of the Assembly
of States Parties to the ICC’s Rome Stat­
ute. Therefore, Switzerland will continue
to pay close attention to this commit­
ment over the next few years.

Switzerland has played a pioneering

l th l t 20 i it d


-----

to return the illicit assets of politically
exposed persons (PEPs). On four occa­
sions during the events of the “Arab

Spring” Switzerland adopted measures
to freeze the assets in this country of
people holding key positions in de­
posed governments or assets of their
close familiy members. These measures
inspired other governments and have
now been superseded by multilateral
measures to rapidly freeze the assets of
PEPs associated with deposed regimes.
The four decisions to freeze assets were
based directly on the Federal Constitu­
tion. Legislative work is now in progress
to establish a formal legal basis of cri­
teria and administrative procedures to
govern such seizures of assets.

#### 2.4 Strategic partnerships and global issues

The rapid economic and social develop­
ment of the Asia-Pacific region contin­
ues. New powers are emerging in Latin
America and Africa. Some countries,
such as the Gulf States, Russia, and Aus­
tralia, benefit from strong demand for
commodities. Consequently, the trans­
atlantic dominance that has prevailed
since the Second World War is increas­
ingly being called into question. The tra­
ditional axes of power are shifting.

The Asia-Pacific region now accounts
for one third of gross world product
given purchasing power parity, half
of global economic growth and more
than half of the world’s population.
The economic strength of this region
i t h d b it i liti l


cludes six members of the G-20 (China,
Japan, India, South Korea, Indonesia,
and Australia) and is, after the EU but

ahead of the United States, the most
important region for the Swiss econo­
my. Brazil is of growing importance in
the Americas, moving from the status
of regional power to that of key global
player and affirming a determination to
exert its influence on geostrategic de­
velopments. In addition to the United
States and Brazil, this continent is home
to a further three G-20 members: Can­
ada, Mexico, and Argentina. In Africa,
where development varies enormously
from country to country, South Africa is
playing a key role. The largest recipient
of Swiss exports on the African Con­
tinent, South Africa, also absorbs the
bulk of Swiss direct investment in subSaharan Africa.

In the multilateral sphere, these emerg­
ing powers are claiming a political and
decision-making role commensurate
with their economic weight and grow­
ing populations. The issue of interna­
tional architecture and global govern­
ance is becoming crucial. Reform of the
Bretton Woods Institutions, attempts
to reform the UN Security Council’s
composition, strengthening of govern­
ance for sustainable development and
the environment, and emergence of
new groups such as the G-20 (whose
restricted composition raises problems)
are all aspects of this difficult issue.

Switzerland needs to redefine its po­
sition proactively in response to these
new factors. On one hand, we need to
d l d di if bil t l l ti


-----

the other, to strengthen our multilateral
commitment.

**Strategic partnerships**
Of course, our “extended neighbour­
hood” will continue to be of primary
importance. In the Balkans, the Con­
federation is deploying all the foreign
policy instruments available. For several
years now, the Swiss have paid close
attention to relations with the Balkan
countries, Russia, and Turkey, in accord­

### Strategic axis 4

 Strengthening and diversifying our strategic partnerships; commitment to improving global governance in areas where Switzerland has special skills; systematic promotion of international Geneva

ance with foreign policy guidelines set
out by the Federal Council in 2005. In
the Caucasus, Switzerland is very much
in the spotlight as a result of its work
in mediating between Russia and Geor­
gia and between Armenia and Turkey.
Switzerland also has close relations with
the countries of Central Asia, based in
particular on their membership in vot­
ing groups led by Switzerland within
the Bretton Woods Institutions and the
Global Environment Facility.

Within the regional European organi­
sations to which it belongs (Council of
Europe, OSCE), Switzerland is especially
concerned with respect for human

i ht d fli t ti F


form of the European Court of Human
Rights. Switzerland is also interested in
strengthening the OSCE, an organisa­

tion with a large number of members,
which takes a broad view of security
policy issues. Preparations for Swit­
zerland’s chairmanship of the OSCE in
2014 will need to be given due priority,
and FDFA resources must be allocated
to reflect Switzerland’s commitment to
this task throughout the period when
it will become part of the presidential
“troika” (2013–2015).

The Mediterranean region also de­
mands a special effort on Switzerland’s
part. The main thrust of Swiss activi­
ties in North Africa, decided on by the
Federal Council in March 2011, is to
support the transition to democracy,
economic development, and coopera­
tion in the field of migration. It is in
Switzerland’s interests to work for po­
litical and economic stability through­
out the region, and the same is true of
the Middle East. This being the case,
Switzerland will endeavour to maintain
balanced relations with all countries in
the region, working to promote human
rights among other goals.

Following the foreign policy guidelines
defined by the Federal Council in 2005,
relations with the United States, China,
India, Japan, Brazil, and South Africa
have been deepened considerably.
These efforts need to be continued
and extended to include, for example,
political dialogue, extension of the
contractual network, and multilateral
cooperation. The short-term priority

ith th U it d St t i till t ttl


-----

important issues that remain outstand­
ing. Switzerland is maintaining regular
political dialogue with China supple­
mented by dialogue in a dozen sectors,
and negotiation on a free-trade agree­
ment is progressing positively. Contacts
have been made with Brazil with a view
to launching a dialogue on financial is­
sues.

In addition to the priority countries
identified in 2005, special emphasis
needs to be placed on deepening re­
lations with the emerging powers, in­
cluding those belonging to the G-20. In
the Asia-Pacific region, we must keep
pace with the economic dynamism by
intensifying our political relations. De­
veloping these relations – particularly
through regular political dialogue, in­
creased multilateral cooperation, and
th f t di l ti


network – is a priority if we are to
position our country effectively in the
multi-polar world of the 21st century.
Relations with the Gulf States, which
are playing a growing political role on
the international scene and are major
economic partners with considerable
investments in Switzerland, are also of
increasing importance. Switzerland’s
network there needs to be strength­
ened accordingly.

**Global governance**
Because of their multilateral character,
international organisations are particu­
larly well placed among those on the
international stage to take up the chal­
lenges deriving from globalisation and
the shift in the axes of power. Switzer­
land wishes to see the rule of law serve
as the basis for international relations

d i itt d t ltil t l


-----

therefore has a fundamental interest
in being involved in those institutions
where decisions are taken and in exert­

ing its influence where matters of gov­
ernance are concerned. This also means
building alliances with like-minded
countries or organisations, depending
on the area of concern (human rights,
the environment, etc.). The European
Union, for instance, may be a “natural”
partner of Switzerland in the multilat­
eral context.

The objectives of the United Nations
correspond on the whole with those of
Swiss foreign policy. The UN’s almost
universal composition and very broad
mandate give it unparalleled legitima­
cy and scope. Switzerland is therefore
concerned that this unique organisa­
tion (of which it is a full member) is not
robbed of its substance by fragmen­
tation of its decision-making mecha­
nisms, to the advantage of groups of
lesser legitimacy.

In a targeted and consistent way, Swit­
zerland will continue to advocate for
the UN to be able to act with greater ef­
ficiency and effectiveness. In 2012, the
tenth anniversary of Switzerland joining
the United Nations, it will have the op­
portunity to demonstrate the interest
and scope of commitment to this or­
ganisation. Switzerland would also like
to be actively involved in discussions on
reforming the Security Council. Moreo­
ver, Swiss candidacy for a seat on the
Security Council during 2023–24 gives
the Confederation a clear objective to
work towards during the second dec­

d f UN b hi Fi ll


de la Francophonie, of which Switzer­
land holds the presidency until October
2012, Switzerland will continue to work

to improve human security, respect for
international law and human rights,
and promotion of cultural and linguistic
diversity.

**Global issues**
The multilateral framework (and par­
ticularly the UN framework) provides
Switzerland with a good platform for
defending its interests and developing
its special skills in key areas – all with
a view to meeting some of the major
challenges facing the world today. The
areas in question are those in which
Switzerland plays a front-rank role and
in which its contribution as a construc­
tive and creative partner are widely
recognised. They include, for instance,
the economy and finance, the environ­
ment, science and research, and health.

Given the importance of the financial
sector for our country’s economy and
the global role of Switzerland as a fi­
nancial centre, we have an enormous
interest in maintaining international fi­
nancial stability. Switzerland is one of
the world’s 10 most important financial
centres and the leading nation in crossborder asset management; the Swiss
franc is one of the world’s currencies
most in demand. Through targeted ac­
tion within the competent international
bodies (in particular the International
Monetary Fund and the Financial Sta­
bility Board) and by deploying our spe­
cial skills in financial, economic, and
monetary matters, the Confederation

k b t ti l t ib ti t


-----

commitment is all the more important
in that Switzerland is not a member of
the G-20.

In the field of the environment – one
of the major global challenges today –
Switzerland also enjoys credibility and is
recognised as having much to contrib­
ute. Switzerland is working in particular
for protection and sustainable use of
natural resources and application of a
“polluter-pays” approach and the pre­
cautionary principle. Switzerland places
the emphasis on consolidating and
developing existing instruments, on
strengthening international governance
of the environment, and on mobilising
sufficient resources to ensure effective
implementation. By conducting an ac­
tive policy in this field, Switzerland en­
courages establishment of fair competi­
tion and sustainable economic growth,
thereby helping to alleviate poverty and
promote social stability and peace.

Finally, the commodities trading sec­
tor has experienced unprecedented
growth in Switzerland over the last dec­
ade. Switzerland has a strategic interest
in fostering development of this sec­
tor, because raw materials are in many
cases strategic assets concentrated in
emerging countries. Thus growth in
this sector stimulates the labour market
and tax revenues, and its development
gives Switzerland greater international
weight. However, there are significant
associated risks, particularly as regards
the country’s international reputation,
issues of speculation and price volatil­
ity, illegal and illicit trading, taxation

d it f t ll


people. Switzerland must adopt a co­
herent foreign policy in this field and
increase inter-departmental capacity to

anticipate the potential risks involved.

The comparative advantages our coun­
try enjoys need to be further devel­
oped. This will mean demonstrating
what makes Switzerland special (hav­
ing a special role to play) and pursuing
a targeted and innovative policy, i.e.,
concentrating on areas of strength,
having innovative ideas, and putting
them into practice.

**International Geneva**
With Geneva as one of the favourite
host cities for international organisa­
tions and events, Switzerland has a
considerable asset for deployment of
its foreign policy. Some of the princi­
pal organisations active at the global
level in fields the Swiss give high prior­
ity (including trade, the environment,
human security, and health) have their
headquarters in our country. Sustain­
able promotion of international Ge­
neva, and constant improvement of the
framework conditions for international
institutions, states (universality) and
non-governmental organisations will
continue to be a central pillar of Swiss
policy. As host nation, Switzerland
makes a substantial contribution to es­
tablishment of peaceful international
relations and to tackling the great chal­
lenges of our times. At the same time,
having international Geneva enables
Switzerland to play a role disproportion­
ate to the size of its national territory. In
early 2012, the Federal Council planned
t t i t t ith th


-----

perpetuate the institutional framework
of political and technical dialogue con­
cerning international Geneva.


-----

## pp
 nationals living or travelling abroad

The Swiss are a very mobile people, and
this makes the “public service” activi­
ties of the FDFA and its representations
abroad all the more important:

            - Almost one tenth of Swiss citizens
(approx. 700,000) live abroad.
These individuals depend on Swiss
representations for provision of
consular services; in fact Swiss rep­
resentations play a role similar to
those of municipal administrations
back home.

            - The Swiss are some of the world’s
greatest travellers, making roughly
16 million trips abroad each year.
Even though half of the trips they
make are to neighbouring coun­
tries, a large number of visits are
also made to countries significantly


conflict, or natural disasters. In an
emergency, Swiss citizens are enti­
tled to seek assistance from Swiss

representations.

This mobility, in itself positive and an
advantage for Switzerland, is matched
by an increasing demand for the con­
sular services provided by the FDFA
and its representations abroad. Expe­
rience shows that public expectations
are growing where these services are
concerned. The FDFA has regrouped
and modernised its provision of consu­
lar services within a newly established
Consular Directorate. It has installed
the “FDFA HelpLine” as a one-stop
shop covering all requests for consular
services and has set up a Crisis Manage­
ment Centre to support Swiss citizens
in the event of kidnapping, political
unrest, armed conflict, or natural dis­
aster. Hence the FDFA is well equipped
to tackle problems Swiss citizens may
encounter abroad. The FDFA will also
enhance the coherence of its policy on
the Swiss Abroad generally by aiming


-----

which takes into account their specific
needs as well as increased international
mobility in general.

In the next few years, the aim will be
to consolidate these new developments
and to examine how the modern com­
munication tools available (such as so­
cial media) can be used to enhance ser­


– in particular the advice provided for
travellers. Another important task will
be to draft specific legislation on Swiss

nationals abroad, as required by Parlia­
ment. The responsibilities of each indi­
vidual traveller for his or her personal
safety and the limits of state assistance
must be reviewed.


-----

## p
 of foreign policy and communication abroad

#### 4.1 Resources and representations network

In 2012, the FDFA can draw on a total
budget of CHF 2.9 billion to implement
its foreign policy objectives. Roughly
two-thirds of this sum (CHF 1.76 bil­
lion) is allocated to international coop­
eration, including development aid and
humanitarian aid, while the remaining
third is devoted to conventional diplo­
matic activities and defence of Swiss
interests.

In this latter area, the last few years have
been characterised by increased budg­
ets for the various agencies within the
federal administration active in foreign
policy, particularly the State Secretariat
for Education and Research (SER) and
the State Secretariat for International
Financial Matters (SIF). Also benefitting
are those funded to a large extent by
the Confederation, such as Osec/Busi­
ness Network Switzerland, Switzerland
Tourism. In contrast with this general
tendency, the share of FDFA resources
devoted to the safeguarding of Swiss
interests has remained steady.

The FDFA has tried in several ways to
free up resources for the purpose of
safeguarding Swiss interests and it will

ti it h f dditi l


ing the present legislature.

In implementing its foreign policy, the

FDFA operates a network of almost 140
diplomatic and consular representa­
tions in addition to its head office. This
network is constantly subject to checks
on its efficiency, taking into account
developments in the international situ­
ation, to ensure that the allocation of
resources guaranties the best possible
safeguarding of Switzerland’s interests
as defined by its foreign policy strategy.
This also applies to cooperation with
other federal departments and organi­
sations attached to or integrated into
the network, including Swiss Business
Hubs and Swissnex.

In respecting the principle of univer­
sality while having to meet constantly
changing needs with fixed resources,
Switzerland will seek to free up re­
sources to meet the new needs by look­
ing for gains in efficiency and exploit­
ing synergies.

Creation of regional consular centres
based in one city, which manages con­
sular services for a group of countries,
is one aspect of this approach. Through
these measures, resources have been
freed up to establish a Consular Directo­
rate to cope with the growing demand
for consular services from Swiss citizens
living or travelling abroad. The regroup­
ing and rationalisation of certain con­
sular services has been made possible
by modern technology. This has made
it possible to introduce support meas­
ures aimed at ensuring quality services

t ll ti i l di i h


-----

experienced as constrictive (e.g., the
capturing of biometric data).

This reorganisation of Swiss consular
services has not resulted in a single
embassy closure. It has even been pos­
sible to open a new embassy in Arme­
nia, in a region (the Caucasus) where
Switzerland is actively committed,
and to take the decision to open an
embassy in Qatar. Finally, a consulate
general has been opened in the Indian
city of Bangalore, an important centre
for innovation and research, in parallel
with the opening of a fifth branch of
the Swissnex network which promotes
Swiss science and technology (Boston,
San Francisco, Shanghai, Singapore,
and now Bangalore).

One of the key tasks of Switzerland’s
representations abroad is issuing visas.
The Confederation’s efforts to support
the Swiss economy (and particularly to
maintain and develop Switzerland’s at­
tractiveness as a tourist destination and
a business location), requires the coun­
try to facilitate movement of people
and, therefore access to the visas they
require. With this in mind, Switzerland
is cooperating closely with many Eu­
ropean partner countries to make the
best possible use of the Schengen rep­
resentation instrument. This coopera­
tion will continue.

As part of the programme to re-exam­
ine tasks performed by the Confedera­
tion, the FDFA, in concert with other
federal departments concerned, is re­
quired to assess the functioning of its

t k f t ti d i


tives from other federal offices at its
embassies. The aim is to make the most
of synergies and modernisation to

achieve greater work coherence of the
people concerned with a view to safe­
guarding our country’s interests more
effectively.

#### 4.2. Communication abroad

In the information and communication
society era, it is not enough just to con­
duct a good foreign policy. Foreign pol­
icy needs to be supported by active and
adequate communication measures.
This is particularly true of Switzerland,
because some of its activities and char­
acteristics – in particular the important
economic and financial role it plays –
are subject to close scrutiny, not always
of a benevolent kind. In the next few
years, Switzerland will need to continue
making determined efforts to improve
the way in which it is perceived abroad.
This relates to both potentially sensi­
tive areas (such as its role as a financial
centre) and areas with a clearly positive
connotation (such as science, innova­
tion, and the environment). Several
major events will take place in the next
few years: the Olympic Games in Lon­
don and Sotchi, the Yeosu Exhibition, in
2012, and the Milan Exhibition in 2015,
Switzerland’s co-presidency of the Eu­
ropean Space Agency (2012–2015), its
chairmanship of the OSCE (2014, and
as part of the troika 2013–2015), and
its presidency of the Eureka Research
Initiative (2014/2015). These big events
will provide a favourable setting for

iti i ti I dditi


-----

project will provide an opportunity to
assess and make greater use of new
means of information and communica­

tion, in particular the social media, in
communication abroad.


-----

In today’s complex and dynamic in­

ternational environment, Switzerland
obviously needs a clear foreign policy:
Our interests must be safeguarded and
our values promoted. Developments in
Switzerland’s immediate vicinity as well
as global challenges – which know no
national borders – have a direct influ­
ence on our independence, prosperity,
and security. Swiss foreign policy must
respond to these challenges in a coher­
ent, practical, and effective way.

It is on the basis of the rule of law, uni­
versality and neutrality, supplemented
by the fundamental notions of solidar­
ity and responsibility, that Switzerland
is best able to perform this mission.

As has been demonstrated many times
in the past, foreign policy is not im­
mune to extraordinary major develop­
ments. The strategic axes of Swiss poli­
cy therefore need to be defined in such
a way as to meet the challenges and
grasp the opportunities that arise. This
is why, during the present legislature,
Switzerland’s foreign policy will be
based on following four strategic axes:

- Switzerland will maintain and de­
velop its relations with neighbour­
ing States, paying special attention
to cross-border relations and the
rapid settlement of disputes.


en its relations with the European
Union, while safeguarding its po­
litical room for manoeuvre and its

long-term economic interests.

- Switzerland will pursue and adapt
its commitment to stability in Eu­
rope, in regions bordering Europe
(our “extended neighbourhood”)
and in the rest of the world.

- Switzerland will strengthen and di­
versify its strategic partnerships; it
will commit itself to improving glob­
al governance in areas where it has
special skills; it will systematically
promote international Geneva.

To these strategic priorities, Switzerland
must add the task of supporting Swiss
nationals living or travelling abroad, in
response to the growing mobility of
Swiss citizens.

It is imperative that Switzerland be fully
committed to its foreign policy, that it
work in unity to safeguard its interests
and promote its values. This being the
case, it is appropriate to allocate the
necessary resources to its implementa­
tion and to strengthen Swiss communi­
cation abroad. This needs to be done in
close cooperation with the proper de­
partments, to ensure that the available
resources are used efficiently across de­
partments and embassies, and in com­
munication abroad.


-----

-----

#### Imprint

Publisher:
Federal Department of Foreign Affairs FDFA
3003 Bern
www.eda.admin.ch

Design:
FDFA Visual Communication, Bern

Photographs:
Parliamentary Services, 3003 Bern; iStockphoto.com;
Stock.XCHNG; Presence Switzerland

Orders:
FDFA Information
Tel.: +41 31 322 31 53
E-Mail: publikationen@eda.admin.ch

Distribution:
SFBL, Distribution of Publications, CH-3003 Bern
www.bundespublikationen.admin.ch
No 201.001.eng

This publication is also available in German, French
and Italian.

B 2012


-----

