**The Founder of modern Turkish Republic M.Kemal ATATÜRK**

# DEFENSE WHITE PAPER 2000


-----

## PREFACE

The White Book 2000 has been prepared with the objective of providing the public in
Turkey and abroad with a better understanding and clarity of the basic information on the
National Defense Policies and the Turkish Armed Forces constituted by secular and
democratic Turkey, which places the highest priority on deterrence for the establishment and
maintenance of peace in the region, that is a critical region from all aspects.
Turkey, which is located in the center of a region full of instabilities and uncertainties,
such as the Middle East, Caucasia and the Balkans, where the balances are in a process of
change, also during the post Cold War period has to take into consideration the risks and
threats such as terrorism and radical religious movements, regional conflicts stemming from
ethnic differences, weapons of mass destruction and long-range missiles.
The basic principle determining the national security policy of Turkey is defined by
Atatürk's succinct precept, "Peace at Home, Peace in the World". Starting from this basic
belief, Turkey is developing her relations with all countries based on the foundation of
friendship and cooperation by taking as the fundamental principle the preservation of its
national unity and the rights arising from international agreements.


-----

Within this framework, Turkey actively participates in joint defense systems with the
objective of supporting regional and world peace and contributes to the peace and stability
and continues without interruption her humanitarian aids in various regions of the world, from
Kuwait to Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Turkey believes that it will be able to realize both the preservation of her territorial
integrity and contributions to world peace by having her Armed Forces equipped with high
technology, which is ready to meet the needs of the twenty-first century.
It is aimed to produce in Turkey the high technology military weapons, vehicles and
equipment and to establish the production facilities by forming the necessary infrastructure
and by encouraging and supporting the defense industry facilities that have been established,
with the objective of meeting the needs of the Armed Forces in a reliable and stable manner.
The Turkish Armed Forces, which is determined on the subject of the preservation of
the human values defended by the entire world, disciplined, capable and well-equipped, will
continue to be an important element of the national strength today, as it has been in the past.

Ankara, 1 August 2000
Sabahattin ÇAKMAKOGLU
Minister of National Defense


-----

**PART ONE**

**SECTION ONE**

**GENERAL**

The most important problem today is to make peace and stability permanent. Today, in
the shrinking world environment, the importance of organizations, such as the United Nations
(UN) in the lead, followed by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), European-Atlantic Partnership Council
(EAPC), Mediterranean Dialogue and the Western European Union (WEU), have increased
and the need for coordinated activities between them has become prominent. Particularly,
security organizations such as NATO and WEU, have acquired an even greater importance in
the realization of this goal.
In the region, the activities for NATO's preservation of the Euro-Atlantic ties and for
attaining a flexible character in its military structure, the attempts of the European allies for
assuming a more visible role in the defense field and the subjects of the development in the
European Security and Defense Identity (ESDI), have become prominent as the significant
dimensions of the transformation process being experienced. After the Czech Republic,
Poland and Hungary joined NATO, at the 1999 NATO Washington Summit, a Membership
Action Plan was proposed to nine countries composed of Bulgaria, Romania, Estonia, Latvia,
Lithuania, Slovenia, Slovakia, Macedonia and Albania, and the standards for membership
have been determined.
Furthermore, in the Amsterdam Treaty, which went into effect in May 1999, it was
targeted to develop closer organizational relations between the European Union (EU) and the
WEU within the framework of the European Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).
A need for a European Security Architecture emerged that would be composed of
organizations which would mutually support and complement each other after the evaluation
that the European security could not be provided solely by NATO and/or the WEU. The
relations between NATO, WEU, OSCE, EAPC, NATO-Russia and NATO-Ukraine and the
EU are the cornerstones of this architecture.
The Partnership for Peace (PfP) Program, started in 1994, has acquired a new
dimension with the steps taken at the Washington Summit towards making the relations of
NATO-PfP countries more effective under the name of "Enhanced and More Operational
Partnership". The PfP program is of importance from the aspect of NATO's establishment of a
cooperation with the new democracies focused on security.
Turkey places great importance on the PfP activities, that will provide contributions to
regional and world peace within the principles of the EAPC. Within this framework, the
Educational Center for the Partnership for Peace (ECPfP) has been established in Turkey.
As for NATO's Mediterranean Dialogue, which was initiated in 1994 with the
participation of Israel, Jordan, Egypt, Tunisia, Morocco, Mauritania, and finally Algeria, is
another activity that Turkey considers to be important and NATO is continuing its functions
successfully for the prevention of misinterpretations, which could be formed in the Dialogue


-----

Countries about NATO activities, and the development of security, clarity and cooperation in
these activities.
Turkey provides support to the Peace Support Operations carried out under the
sanctions or control of the UN, NATO or the OSCE for world and regional peace, in the
direction of the principle of "Peace at home, Peace in the World". Within this framework,
Turkey has adopted as a principle to provide contributions to these activities so that similar
humanitarian tragedies do not occur in the region and the entire world that were experienced
in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo.
Turkey believes that all kinds of problems can be solved with reciprocal dialogue,
cooperation and clear policies.
Turkey also believes that at present the fight against international terrorism in the
world, the illegal arms trade, drugs smuggling and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction occupy an important place in providing regional and world peace.
Terrorism, which threatens regional peace and even world peace, even if it stems from
different ethnical, ideological or religious views, obviously has a global attribute with the
results it entails.
At present, it is not possible to say that the international community shows the needed
reaction to terrorism. However, progress has started to be made on the issue of fighting
against terrorism in many countries. Turkey invites all countries to be sensitive on this subject
and asks these countries, even if indirectly, to avoid making mistakes that would support
terrorism.
Turkey has been fighting against terrorism for approximately 30 years, against the
Armenian-ASALA terrorist organization and the extreme leftist organizations between 19731983 and against the PKK terrorist organization since 1984. The PKK terrorist organization,
whose leader was captured and delivered to Turkish Justice, has been reduced to the level of
extinction. The PKK had murdered, in its terrorist acts, thousands of civilians without making
any distinction between women, children and the elderly. The PKK has also partially reversed
the economic and social development process against the interests of the people living in the
region. Towards the end of 1999, the military aspect of the fight against the PKK terrorist
organization has almost been concluded with success and the time has also come to succeed in
economic and social areas by motivating all the other national elements of power.
On the other hand, the religious fundamentalism movement emerges as an important
factor threatening, in particular, the security of the Mediterranean Basin. It aims at shaking the
foundation of the democratic order and threatens the democratic and civilian communities.
For this reason, religious fundamentalism constitutes a destructive power which endangers
peace and stability.
Although it is a fact that Islamic fundamentalism flourishes among the Muslims, the
threat of religious fundamentalism should not only be confined to Islamic fundamentalism.
The secular and democratic Republic of Turkey, with a great majority of its population
being Muslim, has adopted the western civilization as a model to be implemented from the
date of its establishment until the present, condemns all religious fundamentalist currents,
from whichever religion they originate.
The primary responsibility of every country is to monitor the process of change
experienced in the world and to take the necessary measures. Cooperation of countries and
international organizations against the elements and activities threatening world peace will be
the most effective course.
Turkey continues to fulfill its duties in this fight.
Turkey, which is located right at the center of the regions where instabilities and
uncertainties are experienced, will continue to be an island of stability with its secular and


-----

democratic structure, its form of administration based on the supremacy of law, its market
economy and its multi-dimensioned cultural structure.
The success of the Turkish model constitutes an example to the moderate Islamic
countries and the Central Asian Republics. Turkey, which is a bridge connecting three
continents, will continue to form the greatest obstacle for the export of the religious
fundamentalism movement to Europe.
Turkey, which is a reliable ally of NATO and a candidate member of the EU, is
determined on its course to full membership in the EU and WEU.
Turkey, which will be a full member of the EU and WEU, that constitute the corner
stones of the European Security Architecture, will provide great contributions, not only to its
own stability and security, but also to European and world peace.


-----

**SECTION TWO**

**TURKEY'S GEOPOLITICAL, GEOSTRATEGIC AND ECOSTRATEGIC**
**IMPORTANCE**

Turkey is a significant state of the world as she is in 16th place according to
population within 185 countries, in 32nd place according to size of territory and in 16th place
according to economic strength. Turkey, according to her geopolitical and geostrategic
position, is in an influential location in:
— The Middle East and the Caspian Basin, which have the most important oil reserves in
the world,
— The Mediterranean Basin, which is at the intersection of important sea lines of
communication,
— The Black Sea Basin and the Turkish Straits, which have always maintained their
importance in history,
— The Balkans, which have undergone structural changes as the result of the break up of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) and Yugoslavia, and
— The center of the geography composed of Caucasia, which has abundant natural
resources, as well as ethnic conflicts, and Central Asia.
Turkey, which has a very important geostrategic location and connects three
continents to each other, is at the same time a European, Asian, Balkan, Caucasian, Middle
Eastern, Mediterranean and Black Sea country. Briefly, Turkey is a Eurasian country. The
following attributes strengthen the geostrategic importance of Turkey which:
— Has a democratic, secular, social legal state and as a country that has accepted a
market economy, she applies the western systems and has adopted integration with all of the
western institutions;
— Has a cultural union coming from history and positive, developing relations with the
Balkans, which have been the scene of great changes since 1990s, as well as with the Middle
East, Caucasia and Central Asian countries;
— Contains one and the most important of the routes determined for the transport of the
oil and natural gas from Caucasia and Central Asia to the west;
— Has an indisputable importance on the European Security Architecture, with her
participation in the initiatives directed to peacekeeping, regional security and stability of the
UN and NATO and with the leading role it has assumed in some of them, and
— Has a powerful Armed Forces, both in terms of quality and size, in Europe and in her
region.
The radical and rapid developments towards the end of the twentieth century caused
Turkey to assume both different responsibilities and also opened up new opportunities and
horizons. Turkey ceased to be in the location of a flank country of the North Atlantic Alliance
and assumed the central position in the Eurasian belt connecting Europe to Asia and assumed
a great role and gained importance from the political, security and economic aspects.
Turkey lives in a geography which is as extensive as its problems, conflicts and
instabilities. However, Turkey has demonstrated success in preserving the attribute of being


-----

an island of peace and stability in such a region. Turkey is one of the rare democracies located
in vast geography extending from Europe to the Pacific Ocean and to the Middle East.
The Republic of Turkey, which has adopted the finest aspects of humanitarian values
that have been created in her territories which have the characteristic of a geopolitical
crossroads throughout history, with the wealth presented by the Anatolian Peninsula,
constitutes a superb synthesis of various cultures. A democratic, affluent and stable Turkey is
a striking evidence that the values of the east and west can be integrated and live together.
Both the eastern and western aspects of Turkey are showing themselves in the variety of
international organizations in which it is a member. Turkey is the only state which is a
member at the same time in NATO, the European Council, the Organization for Cooperation
and Development (OECD), the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC), the Economic
Cooperation Organization (ECO), the D-20 and the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO).
Turkey, just as she is a part of the east from the aspects of her history, geography and
culture, is also indisputably a part of the west when she is evaluated with the same criteria.
The most obvious evidence of this is Turkey's six hundred years of common history with
Europe. Turkey, which connects the well-established democracies and market economies of
the west and the promising young democracies of the east, the Black Sea and the
Mediterranean Sea, NATO with the Islamic world, the developed countries with the
developing countries, and different continents with each other, is a bridge of friendship and
cooperation between Islam and the other religions. Turkish history is full of the richness of
these facts.
Furthermore, Turkey is assuming the role of a natural bridge for transporting the
natural resources of the Caspian and Central Asia to the west in the next century. Seventy
percent of the world natural energy sources is around Turkey. The Baku-Ceyhan Project,
which envisages the transport of the Caspian oil to the west and having extensive support
from the international community, presents the most stable and reliable environment from the
aspect of the transport of the oil and carries the minimum risk from the viewpoint of
environmental protection.
Turkey, which considers the operating and transporting to the west of the rich natural
resources in the region, as a golden opportunity for regional cooperation and for increasing
prosperity, supports the use of more than one route for the transport of the subject resources to
the world markets and sets forth its political will in this direction. Similarly, along with the
transport of the natural resources of the Caspian Basin to the world markets, Turkey is also a
key country from the aspect of the realization of the Trans-Caucausian Transport Corridor,
necessitated by the increased traffic of people and goods directed to Caucasia and Central
Asia. If the new potential economic opportunity, introduced by history to Eurasia is properly
evaluated, then it will be possible to transform peace, stability, prosperity and cooperation in
this geographical region into a permanent status.
The developments in the geography of the Balkans, Black Sea and Mediterranean
Basins, Caucasia, Central Asia and the Middle East, which form the most sensitive regions of
the world after the Cold War conditions, have brought new dimensions and vivacity to the
roles and activities of Turkey in these regions. The developments in this geography will play a
determining role in the future of Europe and the world. On the one hand, Turkey is trying to
fulfill with all of her strength, responsibilities produced by these developments, and on the
other hand, to benefit from these new opportunities. Turkey is obliged to continue in the next
century her effectiveness and determining role in such an important and vast geography. It is
not possible for Europe and Asia to be integrated in the full sense of the word as long as peace
and stability is not provided in the Balkans, the Middle East and Caucasia. Turkey's
contributions to initiatives for quelling the conflicts in the Balkans, Middle East and Caucasia
is directed to the realization of this integration.


-----

Turkey is in the position of a country expending great efforts to reflect peace, stability,
democracy and tolerance in its surroundings. This situation necessitates the focusing of
extensive efforts, patience and energy at many points at the same time. The desire and effort
of Turkey in this direction stems from the principles defended for years, from its geography
and known historical realities. The foreign policy applied by Turkey is based on both the
geostrategic, economic and cultural realities in the special geography in which she lives and
on the peaceful principles set by Great Atatürk.
Turkey is a country that is powerful in her region and in the world, integrated with the
world in every field, which is respected, confident, the guarantor of peace and stability in its
region with its significance and effectiveness and a country whose friendship and cooperation
is sought. Turkey is one of the most important countries from the political, social, economic
and military aspects at the present and in the future as well.
Turkey, as center of attraction, can become a driving force of change for peace,
stability and prosperity in the troubled geography in which she is located, with her attribute of
being an island of peace and stability, in addition to her abundant resources, demographic
structure, her democratic, secular regime based on the supremacy of law and respect for
human rights, the dynamism of her economy, production capacity and the competitive power
of her industry. Turkey, with this structure, is an exemplary country in the region and her
importance is gradually increasing due to her geopolitical, geostrategic and ecostrategic
location in the changing world conjuncture.
Turkey, from the aspect of integration with the world economies, on the one hand, has
taken her place within the globalization movements, and on the other hand, has continued her
commercial relations with the North America Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the
Pacific Region and has revealed its will to fully participate in the European integration
movement.
After the Cold War, Turkey wants to acquire new and sound dimensions to her
relations with the European continent, that is advancing towards different structurings
compared with the past. The growth, production and export capacity attained by Turkey has
made it necessary for her to take her place within the world that has started to display a threedimensional appearance economically, with the influence of the process of globalization that
has appeared in the United States and the Pacific Basin, as well as in Europe.
Turkey has a special place within the Atlantic-European and Eurasian zones. She is in
the position of aiming at integration with the western society, in addition to being a
democratic, secular and contemporary country of the Islamic world. Turkey is also at the
center of a population of 200 million people who speak Turkish in the Balkans, Caucasia and
Central Asia. She forms a model which is taken as an example by the new independent states,
led by the societies that speak the Turkish languages. Turkey, with her existence and
successes, is a concrete evidence that the Islamic religion and democracy are compatible with
each other and that social and cultural development can also be realized in a democratic
environment. The reconciliations sought in the world are existing in the structure of Turkey.
Turkey is determined to continue the effectiveness of her foreign policy with her function of
bringing together reconciliation, peace and cooperation obtained from this structure.
Turkey believes that an environment of political peace and security in a region
confronted with various problems could be possible by the activation of political and
economic cooperation potentials and by making prosperity widespread. For this reason,
efforts are directed towards contributing to peace and security in the global and regional plan.
Turkey plays a leading role and acquires the attribute of being a model in the cooperation
schemes for the best utilization of the historical opportunities emerging after the end of the
Cold War.


-----

The reinforcement of European security in the Balkans, Eastern Europe, Middle East
and Caucasia, and the targets of strengthening peace and cooperation can only be realized
with the participation and concrete contributions of Turkey. Turkey is the defender of the
contemporary norms and rules of behavior that should be valid in international relations. She
displays all kinds of efforts for putting these into practice at the global and regional levels.
It is natural for the political objectives followed by Turkey abroad to be directed
towards taking under control the existing and potential disputes in her surroundings and
providing permanent peace and stability by means of regional integration and cooperation.
The basic philosophy of the role played by Turkey in the region is formed by the targets of
development of economic relations, establishment of political stability and providing for the
integration of the regional countries with the world. With this perception, Turkey reflects
democracy, tolerance, the attributes of a legal state and secularism to her surroundings,
because Turkey is one of the rare countries that is in a position to achieve these in the best
way and is undertaking her responsibilities on this subject.
Turkey sides with democracy, basic rights and the supremacy of law. The ideology
that Turkey adheres to is the ideology of modernism and civilization. Turkey does not belong
to or side with any other ideology.
Turkey's vision in the twenty-first century is to bring the regional resources to Europe
within the objective of being integrated with it, to advance globalization, to emerge as a
country having a principal role within this movement and finally, to become a leading country
and side with peace and in the development and cooperation efforts for progress. This vision
is about to be realized. New horizons have been opened for Turkey from the Balkans to
Central Asia, and brand new opportunities for cooperation and solidarity have been attained.
With this perception, Turkey is opening herself and outreaching the present world where
geographical distances are not important, and is seeking friends, markets and new networks of
relations within a broad spectrum extending from the Far East to Latin America. In short, she
is advancing on the course to becoming a global state.
Turkey is preparing for the role she will assume in the twenty-first century with the
awareness of her responsibilities, because Turkey is a model country with her secular and
democratic regime and will continue to preserve these attributes in the twenty-first century as
well. Furthermore, Turkey will attain the status of being the center of a multi-dimensional
economic relations network in the new century. On the other hand, Turkey will continue even
more effectively in the twenty-first century her successful function of being a bridge from
various aspects between the east and west.


-----

**PART TWO**

**INTERNATIONAL DEFENCE PARTICIPATION**

**SECTION ONE**

**TURKEY'S VIEWPOINT ON NATO, WESTERN EUROPEAN UNION AND THE**
**EUROPEAN SECURITY AND DEFENSE IDENTITY**

Turkey and NATO:
NATO membership has continued to be the corner stone of Turkey's defense and
security policy for approximately half a century. Collective defense has not lost any
importance, both during the Cold War period and also in the present period when the risks
have gradually increased in variety and instabilities prevail. Cooperation carried out in the
security and defense fields in the framework of NATO has been continued with success until
the present and has been based on the principle of sharing the burdens and benefits.
Turkey has considered the Alliance system to be important for her own security and
stability of the world ever since Turkey has joined the Alliance and as an active member, has
assigned extensive forces to the Alliance with self-sacrifice. The number of forces presently
assigned to NATO by the Turkish Armed Forces is as follows:
NATO Command Forces:

-  To the European Allied Command Mobile Force AMF (L): 1 Combat Engineer
Company, 1 Artillery Battery and 1 National Support Unit;

-  To the European Allied Command Allied Rapid Reaction Corps (ARRC): 1 Tactical
Mechanized Division Headquarters, 2 Brigades and 1 Combat Engineer Company;

-  To the Standing Naval Forces-Mediterranean (STANAVFORMED): 1 Frigate
(helicopter embarked);

-  To the Mine Counter Measure Forces-Mediterranean (MCMFORMED): 1 Minehunter
and 1 Mine Command and Control ship;

-  To the Reaction Forces Air South (RFAS): 5 F-16 and 2 F-4 Squadrons.
NATO Assigned Forces:

-  3 Army Headquarters, 8 Corps Headquarters, 1 Infantry Division, 1 Tactical
Mechanized Division Headquarters, 3 Infantry Brigades, 12 Armored Brigades, 13
Mechanized Brigades, 2 Commando Brigades and 2 Gendarmerie Divisions;

-  15 Frigates, 2 LSTs, 17 Patrol Boats, 9 Helicopters, 11 Minesweepers/hunters 1
Logistic Support Ship, 7 Submarines and 1 Amphibious Infantry Battalion;

-  6 F-16, 3 F-4E, 2 RF-4E and 1 F-5 Squadrons;

-  Air Defense Systems.
An important part of the remaining forces is in the status of other forces for NATO.
As it can be seen, Turkey has assigned almost all of the Turkish Armed Forces to
NATO, and provided important contributions at the expense of great self-sacrifices for the
security of the Alliance and Western Europe during the Cold War period and for the creation
of the positive conditions prevailing in Europe today and benefitted from the protective
umbrella and solidarity provided by NATO membership. In the present-day security
conditions, NATO has surpassed being only an organization that protects the territories of its


-----

members, and is also of importance in contributing to the general stability of the EuroAtlantic region. In fact, NATO has undergone an extensive adaptation in recent years for this
purpose without losing sight of its essential characteristics and basic duties, has developed
partnership and cooperation relations and started to assume the peacekeeping activities in a
general sense. In the same manner, decisions were taken for the expansion of the Alliance
with the objective of contributing to the stability of Europe and at the first stage, three
countries (Hungary, Czech Republic, Poland) joined the alliance in 1999.
Turkey has supported the adaptation process of the Alliance and continues to make
constructive contributions. Similarly, participation in peacekeeping and humanitarian aid
activities outside NATO area has become an important aspect of Turkey's security policies.
Turkey is also supporting the expansion of the Alliance. Turkey is of the opinion that it is
necessary for this process to continue in the direction of the decisions taken at the 1997 and
1999 Washington and Madrid Summits. Turkey also shares the views that neither the internal
nor the external adaptation should weaken the effectiveness and essential functions of the
Alliance. On the contrary, it is also sharing the views of contributing to the stability, peace
and security of the Euro-Atlantic region and that NATO should preserve its characteristics of
being a defense alliance and a forum for political consultation.
Furthermore, Turkey believes in the usefulness of the activities of NATO carried out
to provide mutual assistance and cooperation related to natural disasters and supports efforts
in this direction.

Turkey and the Western European Union (WEU):
As a result of the Western Europeans satisfying their security and defense
requirements during the Cold War years by relying on NATO utilizing the nuclear umbrella
of the United States, the WEU could not be active for a long time and merely remained as a
defense organization on paper. However, within the framework of the initiatives to develop
the political and security fields of the European economic integration in the foundation of the
German-French cooperation, it started to be activated by decisions taken in the 1980s.
Presently, the WEU has a total of 28 members, composed of 10 full members, five observers,
six associate members and seven associate partners.
In the European Union Treaty accepted at Maastricht in December 1991, it was
emphasized that the WEU is an integral element of the European integration movement. The
WEU Council of Ministers, in a declaration published at the same time as the Maastricht
Treaty, has set forth the characteristics and modalities of the WEU's relations with the EU and
NATO. According to this, the WEU has assumed the role of the EU's security dimension,
while it would function as a means to strengthen the European arm of the Alliance.
Furthermore, at Maastricht, the condition of being an EU member was adopted for
becoming a full member of the WEU. Upon this development, Turkey, which is a NATO
member, but not a member of the EU, along with Norway and Iceland, have been invited to
become a associate member in the WEU. All three countries, which accepted this invitation
and the WEU member countries have signed the "Document on Associate Membership" in
Rome on 20 November 1992. The partnership member status went into effect on 6 March
1995. Turkey is also a full member of the Western European Armaments Group (WEAG) and
the Western European Armaments Organization (WEAO), which have been transferred from
NATO to the WEU, and are responsible for carrying out all of the armament activities of
Europe.
By taking into consideration, on the one hand, the evolution of the WEU and the
position it reached after Maastricht, and on the other hand, the indivisibility of the European
security and defense and that Turkey is an inseparable part of this system, efforts are being
made for the inclusion of Turkey in the European integration process and in every security


-----

organization unique to Europe. In fact, Turkey has accepted the invitation for associate
membership in the WEU by evaluating it in the direction of the full membership target in the
EU and the WEU and within the general framework of her relations with Europe. Although it
is not yet a completely satisfactory arrangement, Turkey considers the associate member
status as a temporary phase on the course of realizing full membership in the WEU.

Turkey and the European Security and
Defense Identity (ESDI):
The European Security and Defense Identity (ESDI) has constituted one dimension of
the activities started in 1994 with the Brussels Summit for the adaptation of NATO to the new
security conditions and strategic environment. Development of the ESDI within NATO was
adopted with the decisions taken in 1996 at the WEU and NATO Ministers' meetings.
On the other hand, for some period of time, the European Union has been developing
the Common European Security and Defense Policy (CESDP), based on the probabilities
related to crisis management, peacekeeping and peace support operations to be realized under
the leadership of the EU in which NATO will not participate as a whole and with the
objective of the development of the EU's capabilities in this field.
At the end of the negotiations carried out during NATO Washington Summit held
between 23-24 April 1999, it was stated that the development of the ESDI will affect all the
Allies. Providing for the European Allies, which are not EU members, to participate in the
crisis management operation under the EU leadership as extensively as possible with the
mechanisms to be built upon the existing consultative mechanisms in the WEU and the
perception of the envisaged measures to be decided upon later by NATO Council by taking
into consideration the development within the EU has been adopted. In other words, a delicate
balance could be found for NATO to recognize the EU's potential security dimension in the
future connected to some stipulated conditions and in return to include all of the European
Allies in this process on the basis of the arrangements between NATO and the WEU.
However, after the Washington Summit, at the EU Cologne Summit, of 3-4 June 1999,
only the EU's requests among the decisions taken at the Washington Summit have been
discussed in a selective manner and the decision for actually progressing to a multidimensioned structure envisaged with the Amsterdam Treaty, with the EU also acquiring a
security dimension, has been confirmed.
Furthermore, the subject of the European Allies participating in the future EU
operations has been evaluated in the same category with the third countries, which are not
members of NATO and EU. Thus, the consensus reached in Washington that the future
arrangements should be on the basis of the foundation developed with NATO-WEU was not
taken into consideration. In other words, the EU did not respond with the same openness to
the initiative of NATO made at the Washington Summit.
At the EU Helsinki Summit held in December 1999, a "Headline Goal" was
determined that the EU member countries should keep as of 2003 an rapid reaction force of
50-60,000 soldiers composed of 15 brigades ready to be deployed to the crisis region within
60 days in the framework of a military operation and be able to sustain this force for at least
one year. Turkey, as an indication of its will to contribute to the efforts for the development of
the ESDI, has informed the EU of its proposal to participate in this headline goal with a unit at
the level of a brigade supported by a sufficient number of air force and navy units.
The EU has taken decisions for the formation of new structures in connection with the
CESDP. In this framework, it is of importance that Turkey is included as soon as possible in
the activities of the Political and Security Committee and the European Military Committee
and the Military Headquarters.


-----

At the meeting of the North Atlantic Council of Foreign Ministers organized in
Brussels on 15 December 1999, it was emphasized that the decisions taken at the Washington
Summit constitute the foundation on this subject; that the development of the ESDI should not
harm the priority role of NATO and these developments cannot be materialized without the
full participation of the European allies which are not EU members. The balance established
between the Washington Summit Declaration and the Strategic Concept on the subject of the
ESDI was this time recorded as a single text at the level of Foreign Ministers.
At the meeting of NATO Foreign Ministers held in Florence between 24-25 May
2000, the previous decisions taken by NATO were confirmed and in this connection, it was
clearly stated that NATO-WEU mechanisms should be taken as the basis.
On the other hand, at the EU Feira Summit held between 19-20 June 2000, the
chairmanship report and its appendices in connection with the CESDP have constituted the
first important phase of the process in the direction of the development of the EU's European
Common Security and Defense Policy. The conclusions of the Feira Summit in relation to the
CESDP were far from satisfying Turkey's expectations.
At the EU Feira Summit, the framework of the initial stage of the EU Common
Security and Defense Policy, that was being formed At the Feira Summit of the European
Union, was determined. This framework is insufficient from the aspect of the attributes
related to "Crisis Management". The subjects related to the participation of the "non-EU
European Allies", including Turkey, concerning the regulations for the CESDP, including
crisis management, are far from being satisfactory. In fact, the Feira decisions have not taken
into consideration the important points of NATO's Summit and Council decisions.
Turkey will monitor closely the decisions taken at the EU Feira Summit as regards
CESDP and their reflections on NATO. She will evaluate separately the possible requests of
the EU from NATO within the framework of the principles stated above, Turkey's national
interests and Europe's security. Presenting capabilities of NATO for the automatic use of the
EU is not being considered.
NATO is the primary organization in the fields of Europe's collective defense and
security and it also has priority in crisis management. This was confirmed at NATO's 1999
Washington Summit and subsequently at the Council of Foreign Ministers.
The relations between NATO and the EU Security and Defense Policy were
determined at the 1999 Washington Summit and later in NATO Council of Ministers
decisions in Brussels in December 1999 and in Florence in May 2000. According to this, EU
requests from NATO will be considered on a “case by case” basis and with a decision in
which all NATO members participate “by consensus”.
At the Washington Summit, it was envisaged that the position of NATO members,
which are not EU members, in the crisis management operations under the leadership of the
EU, should be shaped in the framework of the regulations of the Western European Union.
Turkey's approach and policies towards the EU Common Security and Defense Policy
will be realized within the framework of these principles.
Turkey evaluates the CESDP by taking into consideration own national interests,
Europe's security and the above elements and with the responsibility of being an EU member
candidate. In this connection, Turkey wishes to take an effective place and function in the EU
Security and Defense Initiative as regards the preservation of her acquired rights. Naturally,
this and similar formations throughout Europe should be developed in conformity with the
principles of the "Indivisibility of Security" and the "Preservation of the Transatlantic Link".
It is very important not to create inequality and division within the alliance.
An important matter that Turkey defends in the efforts for developing the ESDI is the
preservation of the WEU acquis and by further developing it to establish it in an institutional
framework that will make it possible for the full participation of the non-EU member


-----

European Allies in the restructuring within the EU. In this connection, in the framework of the
decrees included in the Strategic Concept and Washington Summit Declaration it is of
importance:
– To provide for the regular participation of Turkey in the daily planning and
consultations, as it is presently done in the WEU, on the subjects related to European security;
– To provide for Turkey's full and equal participation in operations under the leadership
of the EU where NATO capabilities will be used in the process leading to a decision and in
the application stage; and
– To provide for Turkey's full and equal participation in the decision-making process
and in the decision mechanism related to operations under the leadership of the EU where
NATO capabilities will not be used.
On the other hand, for Turkey which is not yet a full member of the EU to be aware of
the efforts for the development of the CESDP and to be able to express its views timely, an
institutional relation based on reciprocity and transparency between the EU and NATO should
preferably be carried out on the basis of a framework agreement to be concluded between the
two organizations.
The efforts to develop ESDI constitute an ongoing process. Turkey, which has
provided significant contributions to the European security and defense since 1952, believes
that it will take the place it deserves within the new restructuring. With this belief, the
initiatives for satisfying our expectations on the subject of participation will be continued at a
high level in the upcoming period. Turkey wishes that the EU will show common sense for
determining a satisfactory regulation on the subject of the participation of the non-EU
European Allies, such as Turkey. Undoubtedly, such a regulation will facilitate reaching an
agreement on the modalities of NATO-EU relations, which are envisaged to be established.


-----

**SECTION TWO**

**TURKEY'S VIEWPOINT ON THE ORGANIZATION FOR SECURITY AND**
**COOPERATION IN EUROPE, PARTNERSHIP FOR PEACE AND EUROPEAN-**
**ATLANTIC PARTNERSHIP COUNCIL**

Turkey and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE):
Turkey has placed importance on the OSCE ever since its establishment as the most
extensive Euro-Atlantic organization from the aspect of geographical area and number of
members and has made active contributions to the development of the OSCE. The OSCE has
a broad concept of security, however, its interest is not restricted only to the field of security.
A wide spectrum, led by human rights and democratization, and from environmental subjects
to economic matters, enter into the field of activities of the OSCE. Within the framework of
the concept of extensive security based on cooperation, the basic function of the OSCE
appears in the field of the prevention of conflicts. In this connection, the OSCE applies
preventive diplomatic means at all stages of a conflict, such as early warning, prevention of
conflicts, crisis management and post-conflict rehabilitation. With these attributes, the OSCE
has a special role for the increase, within democracy and stability, of the level of prosperity
and the development of cooperation in all regions.
Turkey, which has taken an active place in the OSCE process from the beginning,
hosted its summit held in Istanbul between 18-19 November 1999, and once again
emphasized the importance it attributes to the OSCE. In the summit, which brought together
all the Heads of State/Government of the OSCE member countries, as the last summit of the
twentieth century, important documents were accepted such as the European Security
Provision, the Istanbul Summit Declaration, the agreement related to the adaptation of the
Treaty on the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) and the Vienna Document 1999. Turkey
considers the OSCE's activities conducted in the fields of prevention of conflicts and postconflict rehabilitation in Bosnia-Herzegovina and other regions to be commendable and
contributes to them. Furthermore, after the end of the Cold War and the emergence of the new
republics, which separated from the Soviet Union, Turkey also supports the OSCE's
orientation to this region, the establishment of stability in the direction of the indivisibility of
security, the development of cooperation, the application of the OSCE's principles and
responsibilities in this region through democratic mechanisms, the transformation of the
region into a free market economy and providing contributions to the global integration of this
region by assisting in accomplishing democratic reforms.

The Partnership for Peace (PfP) and the
Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC)
Within the framework of external adaptation started in the direction of the new
security concept based on the cooperation and partnership of NATO, the North Atlantic
Cooperation Council (NACC) was established in 1991. At the NACC Summit held in
Brussels in January 1994, an initiative was started with the objective of strengthening the
security and stability in Europe and the "Interested and Capable" NACC members and OSCE


-----

countries were invited to join a new and comprehensive cooperation program called
"Partnership for Peace (PfP)". The PfP has proved its success within time and has become one
of the basic elements of the European-Atlantic Security Architecture.
Allies and partners, who have taken into consideration the success in the application of
the PfP, have taken a decision in the direction of strengthening this initiative even more at the
summit realized in Madrid in 1997. In this framework, the EAPC, which has the attribute of a
consultative forum on subjects of security and defense, was formed to replace the NACC. To
provide for the practical dimension of the cooperation, the report, "Towards a Partnership for
the 21st Century in Which the PfP Has Been Strengthened and Transformed into a More
Operational Condition", was accepted at NATO Washington Summit held in 1999.
Turkey is of the opinion that the PfP and the EAPC have become an important element
of the European Security Architecture. Turkey has actively participated from the beginning in
the activities for the strengthening of the PfP and the formation of the EAPC. On the other
hand, Turkey also emphasizes the importance of not creating discrimination among the
partners as the result of the rapid development displayed by the PfP, which is a dynamic
process.
Turkey attributes special importance to having the PfP acquire a more operational role
and the development of regional practical cooperation within the PfP; due to the fact that it
would strengthen the security and stability in the Euro-Atlantic region, in general, and due to
Turkey's belief that it will contribute to good neighborly relations, in particular. Turkey also
points out that it is necessary to be careful that regional cooperation does not lead to
"Regionalization". The Southeast European Multinational Peace Force (MPFSEE),
established with the initiative of Turkey, and the PfP Educational Center (PfPEC), which
commenced activities in Ankara in 1998, are examples of Turkey's concrete contributions to
regional cooperation.
Furthermore, Turkey also expresses the importance of the principles of the
"Indivisibility of Security" and the "Prevention of the Formation of New Spheres of Influence
and Divisions" as being more in conformity with the general philosophy of the PfP, in the
negotiations related to the political-military criteria of the regional cooperation within the
Alliance.
In the direction of this approach, Turkey also attributes special importance to regional
cooperation among the Balkan countries on the subject of security. In this connection, Turkey
is of the opinion that the meetings, held regularly since 1997, of the South Eastern Europe
Defense Ministrials (SEDM), whose countries are members of NATO and PfP, is a beneficial
consultative process.


-----

**SECTION THREE**

**TURKEY'S VIEWPOINT ON THE UNITED NATIONS AND THE PEACEKEEPING**
**ACTIVITIES**

Turkey's contributions made to the efforts in the direction of providing peace and
prosperity in the international arena and to the objectives of the United Nations (UN) are
continuing. On the other hand, the UN, just like the other organizations, is also making efforts
to adapt itself to new international conditions. In this framework, the realization of a series of
reforms is on the agenda of the UN in order to be able to play a role with the desired
effectiveness in providing universal peace and prosperity, which is the common aspiration of
all humanity. Turkey provides support to the reform efforts of the UN Secretary General to
reach this objective.
Within this scope, Turkey has undertaken to participate with a Battalion Task Force to
the UN Ready Peace Force of which the establishment activities are continuing and has made
the necessary application to the UN.
Participation in activities connected to peacekeeping, in general, constitutes an
important place in the security policy of Turkey, which believes that all countries have a
responsibility for the preservation of international peace and stability. Turkey, which has
supported the efforts expended for the preservation of peace and security and for the
prosperity of all mankind in the socioeconomic fields throughout the half century history of
the UN, has made significant contributions to the UN Peace Forces and the UN Peacekeeping
Activities. Within this framework, the participation of Turkey in the UN Peace Forces started
in 1950 when she participated in the Korean War with a brigade and since 1988, the Turkish
Armed Forces have joined in actively in various peace support operations with various
observation functions. In the past, Turkey participated in:
— The United Nations Iran Iraq Military Observer Group (UNIMOG),
— The United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM),
— The United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Sirmium (UNTAES).
Turkey is at present an active participant in:
— The United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR).
— The United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM),
— The United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG),
— The United Nations International Police Task Force (UNIPTF) and
— The United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
Turkey has supported the use of NATO's military resources and capabilities developed
during the Cold War years for peace support operations and encouraged the adaptation of the
Alliance in this direction. Within this scope, Turkey took part in NATO's Sharp Guard and
Deny Flight Operations performed at the Adriatic Sea and in the Implementation Force
(IFOR) in accordance with the UN sanctions activities in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Presently,
Turkey is participating in the activities of the Stabilization Force (SFOR), which took the
place of the IFOR and the Kosovo Implementation Force (KFOR) in Kosovo.


-----

Furthermore, Turkey also believes in the importance of the regional and multilateral
peacekeeping activities conforming to the UN Charter. In this scope, Turkey participated in
the ALBA Operation performed under the leadership of the OSCE directed at Albania and in
Operation Provide Comfort directed at Northern Iraq, carried out in accordance with the UN
sanctions. Turkey is also participating at present in the Northern Watch Operation, which
replaced Operation Provide Comfort. Turkey has provided a significant contribution to the
establishment of the Southeastern European Multinational Peace Force, which aims to
contribute to regional security and stability in Southeastern Europe and in the Balkans, in
particular.
Turkey is also included in the international observer mission named the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron (TIPH), established for the purpose of monitoring and
reporting the evacuation of the city of El-Halil (Hebron) on the West Bank by the Israeli
forces and its transfer to the Palestine National Administration. Turkey has also assigned
personnel to the OSCE-Georgia Observation Group.
Turkey believes that each problem has unique attributes from the aspect of historical,
ethnic and social realities and for this reason, believes that peace support operations should be
clearly defined and should be feasible and should be based on a suitable duty framework.
Turkey, by taking into consideration the gradually increasing importance of
peacekeeping operations in taking regional crises under control and providing stability, will
also continue to contribute to regional and world peace in the future, as it has done in the past
and present.


-----

**SECTION FOUR**

**TURKEY'S APPROACH TO SOME REGIONAL PROBLEMS**

The Balkans:
Developments that would radically and permanently change the political structure of the
region have occurred in the Balkans since 1989. The collapse of communism, the
disappearance of the formation of ideological, military and economic blocks, the acceptance
of western-type democracy and free market economy as national objectives that were also
supported by the people, composed the most evident characteristics of this change. In contrast
to this, some problems stemming from the traditional structure of the Balkans also emerged.
However, what can be said definitely, even if relatively so, is the existence of a general
consensus on the peaceful solution of problems in all the Balkan countries and cooperation
with all of the Euro-Atlantic institutions.
Turkey, in light of these developments, has tried to develop the existing bilateral relations
with the countries in the region and to provide the support needed by these countries. In this
framework, multilateral relations are continuing, especially with Bulgaria, Romania,
Macedonia and Albania.
Turkey, which is trying to develop bilateral relations with the countries in the region, also
plays an active role in the Southeastern European Countries Cooperation Process (SEECP),
which is the only cooperation forum with the participation of the countries in the region and
originating in the region with the objective of developing cooperation. The "Southeastern
European Good Neighbor, Stability, Security and Cooperation Provision", that was prepared
in 1998 during the period chairmanship of Turkey, was signed at the SEECP Summit of the
Heads of State/Government held in Romania between 11-12 February 2000.
Turkey also supports the Stability Pact for Southeastern Europe, which has the objective of
providing stability and permanent peace in the Balkans after the Kosovo crisis, of
reconstructing and restructuring of the region in the economic field and of meeting the
security requirements of the countries in the region and she makes active contributions to the
Three Working Desks established in the framework of the Pact.
The Kosovo Issue:
Within the framework of the series of problems that emerged in the Balkans upon the
disintegration of the Former Yugoslavia, after finding a solution, even if temporary, to the
tragedy by stopping the conflicts in Bosnia-Herzegovina, the Kosovo Crisis, which acquired a
dimension that threatened the peace, security and stability of Europe in general as well as the
region, came onto the agenda of the international community. It was possible to take the
Crisis under control with the determined attitude of the international community and as a
reflection of it, NATO air operations and a new period started in Kosovo with the Resolution
No. 1244 of the UN Security Council.
Turkey, which is at the same time a Balkan country and which has humanitarian, historical
and cultural ties with the region, expended great efforts from the very beginning in the
bilateral and international plans on the subject of the diplomatic solution of the Kosovo
problem. Turkey, with the awareness of its responsibility to NATO and to the region, also


-----

actively participated in NATO air operations, which were started when it became impossible
to solve the problem peacefully. Turkey wanted the solution related to the problem to include
an extensive autonomy beyond Kosovo's existing status and for the solution to be found to
guarantee equally the legal rights of all the Kosovan communities, including those of Turkish
origin. The preservation and development of the acquired rights of the Turks in Kosovo
constitute one of the basic points of Turkey's policy in the region. Turkey also contributed to
the civilian UN Temporary Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Implementation
Force (KFOR).
Caucasus:
Caucasia, which forms a crossroads between the east and west, north and south, and which
has an important potential in natural resources and manpower, is a region where Turkey
places importance and priority. The existing cultural and historical ties with this region adds a
special dimension to the relations.
Finding permanent and peaceful solutions to regional problems, normalization of relations
among the countries in the region, increasing regional cooperation by preventing polarization,
is the basic goal of Turkey's policy for Caucasia.
The most important obstacles preventing peace and security in the Caucasian region from the
viewpoint of Turkey is the Nagorno Karabag dispute and the fact that the Abkhaz problem has
still not been solved. This situation prevents the establishment of regional cooperation and
integration of the economies of these countries with the international markets.
It is necessary to find a lasting solution to the Nagorno Karabag problem on the basis of the
territorial integrity of Azerbaijan and respect for the rights of the people in the region. Within
this framework, Turkey continues to actively participate in the endeavors of the Minsk Group
and supports the solution process. Along with this, Turkey considers the direct negotiations,
started at the level of Heads of States, would contribute positively to the solution of the
problem. Turkey will support a solution that will be accepted by both countries.
The efforts by Armenia, directed at having their own special perception of historical events
accepted in the international arena, is considered by Turkey to be an obstacle to the
normalization of bilateral relations. Adoption by Armenia of a positive point of view for the
future in the relations and trying to find a solution to the Nagorno Karabag dispute, will
facilitate the normalization of its relations with Turkey. A development in this direction will,
before everything else, strengthen the independence of Armenia and contribute to the
formation of an environment of cooperation in the region.
Another problem that prevents peace and security in the region is Abkhazia. Turkey considers
that this problem should be solved peacefully and through dialogue within the territorial
integrity of Georgia. The Istanbul Meeting hosted by Turkey between the Georgian and
Abkhazian delegates, under the supervision of the UN and with the participation of the OSCE
and the Friends' Group (United States, Russian Federation, Germany, France and United
Kingdom) of the UN Secretariat General, has been an important development from the aspect
of the continuation of the dialogue between the sides and for taking mutual confidencebuilding measures.
The Middle East:
Turkey is of the opinion that the prevalance of peace and stability in the Middle East has a
crucial importance both for her own security and for regional and global peace and security.
Turkey's peaceful and balanced policy directed at the Middle Eastern region continues.
Within this framework, on the one hand, places importance on the relations with the Arab and
Islamic world that are historically close and defends the legal rights of the Palestinian people,
and on the other hand, continues her relations and cooperation with Israel that will serve for
the establishment of peace, stability and prosperity, that is not against any country in the
region. Turkey considers the Middle East Peace Process (MEPP) as an important opportunity


-----

for providing a just, lasting and extensive peace in the region and with this perception, has
supported the peace process from the beginning. Turkey wants the successful completion of
the process by accelerating all of its channels.
Turkey is at the top of the countries which suffered the most from the UN sanctions applied
against Iraq and wants the requirements of the UN Security Council resolutions to be
implemented as soon as possible. Turkey places importance on the independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and the preservation of the union of Iraq as undertaken by the
international community in the UN Security Council resolutions related to Iraq. Turkey
expresses that she will not tolerate any activity that will harm, on the one hand, the territorial
integrity and political unity of Iraq in Northern Iraq and developments in this direction, and
on the other hand, Turkey applies with decisiveness all kinds of measures to make ineffective
the terrorist elements, who are taking advantage of the lack of authority and are trying to settle
in this region.
Turkey is concerned about the spread of Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) and missile
launchers in the region and stresses the importance of the participation as soon as possible of
the countries which are not a party to the international agreements for providing universality
to international agreements and regimes directed at the prevention of the spread of the subject
weapons and launchers.
The Mediterranean:
Turkey, which is a Mediterranean country, is of the opinion that the security of Europe and
her own security cannot be separated from the security of the Mediterranean and supports the
strengthening of peace, stability and prosperity in the Mediterranean Region. Particularly,
when it is taken into consideration that the new and cross-border risks and regional hot
clashes are taking place in this region, such as the spreading of the weapons of mass
destruction, terrorism, mass migrations, drugs and weapons smuggling; peace and stability of
the Mediterranean Region acquire an even more vital attribute. The sub-regions of the
Mediterranean spreading over a wide geographical area, show different characteristics.
Turkey believes that a comprehensive approach, which also includes political, economic and
social dimensions, is necessitated for the strengthening of peace and stability in this region.
Within this framework, Turkey expends efforts at both bilateral and multilateral levels for the
intensification of economic relations and the development of joint projects. Turkey supports
the Mediterranean Dialogue, carried out within the framework of NATO and also actively
participates in the European-Mediterranean process of the EU. Similarly, it also places
importance on the Mediterranean Cooperation Programs within the framework of the WEU
and the OSCE.
The Black Sea:
Turkey, which is a Black Sea country, attributes great importance to reciprocal cooperation in
the region. With this objective, Turkey played a leading role in the establishment of the Black
Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) Organization, which aims to make the Black Sea a sea of
peace, stability and prosperity, by taking into account the existing geographical proximity,
historical ties and complementary attributes of the economies among the members and has
become a functional model aimed at concrete projects.
Turkey also believes that the starting of a Confidence and Security-Building Measures
(CSBMs) process in the Black Sea region will provide an important contribution to the joint
efforts in transforming the region into a stable area and with this objective, she is actively
participating in the preparations for a CSBMs regulation in the maritime field of activities
among the Black Sea countries.
On the other hand, Turkey has provided great contributions to the initiative for establishing
the Black Sea Naval Cooperation Task Group (BLACKSEAFOR), composed of the countries
sharing the Black Sea coasts.


-----

-----

**SECTION FIVE**

**THE AEGEAN SEA AND CYPRUS**

The Aegean Sea:
There are a series of interconnected problems between Turkey and Greece, which are
stemming from the Aegean Sea.
Turkey believes that the Aegean Sea, which is a common sea between the two countries,
should constitute a bridge of friendship.
Turkey, with this perception, has called Greece repeatedly for a dialogue with the objective of
attaining a solution to the Aegean problems with goodwill, equitably and peacefully and has
expended efforts to find a lasting solution for these problems as a whole based on
negotiations.
The Aegean Sea is a semi-closed sea, with its own unique geographical characteristics, and
has equal strategic, economic and political importance for Turkey and Greece. These basic
characteristics necessitate the establishment and continuation of a delicate balance between
the interests of the two countries in the Aegean.
The problems between Turkey and Greece stemming from the Aegean Sea are:
– The width of territorial waters,
– The restriction of the continental shelf,
– Problem related to the air space led by the abuse of the responsibility of the Flight
Information Region (FIR),
– Arming of the Eastern Aegean Islands in violation of the decrees of the international
agreements,
– Geographical Formations (islands, islets and rock formations) in the Aegean Sea for
which the Sovereignty have not been transferred to Greece with Agreements and
– The nonexistence of an agreement determining the sea boundaries between Turkey
and Greece on the Aegean Sea.
Turkey is in favor of solving these problems peacefully as recorded in Article 33 of the UN
Charter, led by negotiations to be mutually agreed upon. The problems stemming from the
Aegean Sea have not been included in the dialogue process started in various areas of
cooperation between the two countries. The solution of these problems as soon as possible
will form an important contribution to the strengthening of regional peace and stability.
Cyprus:
The Island of Cyprus is the joint homeland of two different people, the Turkish and the Greek
Cypriots. At present, there are two separate, equal and sovereign states on the Island,
representing the two peoples.
The fact that the Turkish and Greek Cypriots are equal owners of the Island and these two
peoples have separate rights of "Self Determination" was clearly accepted by the British
Government before it relinquished its sovereignty on the Island with the statements made in
1956 and 1958.


-----

After the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from Cyprus, the "Republic of Cyprus" was
established in 1960 on the basis of a partnership between the Turkish and Greek Cypriot
peoples with the 1959 London and Zurich and 1960 Guarantee Agreements. This partnership
state, envisaging the political and sovereign equality of the Turkish and Greek Cypriots and
the participation of the two peoples in a joint administration with equal rights, has not been
long-lived. It was destroyed in 1963 with force by the Greek Cypriots, who were aiming to
unite the Island with Greece. The Turkish Cypriot People were expelled from all of the organs
of the state, of which they were the joint founders, and the Turks on the Island have been
subjected to cruel attacks and massacres for years.
With the objective of finding a solution to the problem, international initiatives have been
made since 1964 and the UN Peace Forces were deployed on the Island. In 1968 the bilateral
negotiation process was started under UN supervision.
In 1974, upon the initiative started for annexing Cyprus to Greece, Turkey intervened on the
Island by using its right as a guarantor stemming from the founding agreements and thus
provided for the continuation of the existence of the Turkish Cypriot People on the Island.
The efforts for finding a solution to the Cyprus problem, which have continued for the past 36
years, have not yet brought results.
The main reason for this is constituted by the claims of the Greek Cypriots that the "Republic
of Cyprus", which was destroyed by themselves in 1963, still exists and has the right of
sovereignty over all of Cyprus.
Whereas, the Turkish Cypriot People, who formed their own self-administration, in time after
the exclusion from the state organs in 1963, have preserved their basic rights and status,
political equality, self-determination and rights of sovereignty and subsequently, with their
sovereign will, established the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC) in 1983.
The unilateral application, in violation of the established rules of law, of the Southern Cyprus
Greek Administration (SCGA) in 1990, under the name of "Cyprus", to the European Union,
has introduced a new negative dimension to the problem. The decision taken by the EU after
this application to start full membership negotiations with the SCGA, has caused the
strengthening of the irreconcilable attitude of the Greek Cypriots. Naturally, this situation has
made the efforts for a solution even more difficult.
At present, the most logical and constructive approach for a permanent and equitable solution
of the Cyprus problem is the confederation proposal made by the President of the TRNC on
31 August 1998, since this proposal envisages the unification of the two sides on the Island
under a common roof by taking the realities on the Island into consideration, on the basis of
sovereign equality and the continuation of the internal and external balances based on the
1959-1960 Agreements.


-----

**SECTION SIX**

**TERRORISM**

Terrorism is a phenomenon which aims to reach different goals by always using
practically the same destructive methods to reach its goal, which can have international
dimensions and threatens all countries to the same degree without making any distinction
between developed and developing ones. Terrorism has the objective of destroying the
traditional feeling of trust and protection between the state and the people, by applying a
systematic and undiscriminating strategy of violence against governments and innocent
civilians, by means of increasing political instability and internal tension in a country and by
instilling the belief that the government could not cope with terrorism without resorting to
oppressive methods.
In twenty-first century, it is being witnessed that terrorism, in the world in general, has
reached a destructive potential heretofore unseen in any period of history, both in
technological resources and from the aspects of the area targeted.
The developments have shown that no country is immune to terrorism. It is now
accepted that even if violent acts are initiated within the borders of a specific nation state, the
fact that every terrorist organization is dependent on elements outside the borders of the state
in which the actions are carried out, on matters such as finding personnel, providing logistic
support, training of the organization members and providing financing for terrorist activities
and finding a place to shelter. On this point, the connection of the terrorist organizations with
other criminal organizations in various forms has also become evident.
For this reason, the formation of the necessary legal and institutional foundations on
the international platforms, along with bilateral cooperation mechanisms to be established
among states, constitute vital importance in the prevention of terrorism.

The PKK Terrorism:
The PKK terrorist organization is an organization that has adopted the MarxistLeninist ideology and plays the role of the religious fundamentalists depending upon
circumstances and aims to weaken and divide Turkey with actions based on violence and aims
to establish a Marxist Kurdish State in Turkey. The PKK terrorist organization uses the
method of "Revolutionist Violence" to reach its goal and tries to subdue the people in
Southeastern Anatolia by terror and pressure. This primitive, savage and bloody terrorist
organization, with the claim of protecting the rights of the so-called Kurdish people, has
brutally murdered over 5,000 defenseless, innocent civilian citizens without any distinction
among women, children and the elderly in the Eastern and Southeastern Anatolia regions.
The PKK is making a false propaganda to the domestic and foreign media that it is
fighting for the freedom of the so-called Kurdish people. Each and every Turkish citizen
benefits from equal rights recognized to them and under the guarantee of the Constitution and
have always participated actively in the political, social and economic life of Turkey. The


-----

citizens living in Southeastern Anatolia are also an inseparable part of the Turkish Nation.
These people are freely benefitting from the constitutional rights and have the opportunity to
reach the highest positions in the state. Presently, there are many politicians, military and
bureaucrats from this region in the administration and in high ranks in the military.
On the other hand, the status of the minorities in Turkey has been officially registered
in the international arena with the Lausanne Treaty of 1923. According to this treaty, there is
no minority other than the non-Muslim groups in Turkey.
The PKK terrorist organization is able to continue its existence through the shelter and
monetary support provided by some countries. Furthermore, the PKK terrorist organization
organizes aid campaigns through its auxiliary organizations in Europe to increase its financial
resources and by collecting funds by force from the citizens of the Republic of Turkey living
in those countries and it also engages in drug smuggling. The money obtained from drug
smuggling has a very large share in the total revenues of the organization. The organization is
able to purchase weapons, ammunition and equipment, thanks to the considerable profits
obtained from this illegal trade.
The PKK terrorist organization commits all kinds of organized crimes besides its
terrorist activities. The organization increasingly resorts to drug smuggling followed by
weapons and human smuggling and money laundering activities in order to finance its
endeavors.
The terrorist identity of the PKK has been accepted by the main western countries led
by the United States, United Kingdom, France and Germany. Furthermore, France and
Germany banned the activities of the organization and its auxiliary branches in 1993. Upon
the prohibitions and restrictions brought by many Western European countries, the
organization has shifted these types of its operations to Eastern Europe and the Balkans and
continued many of its operations in the Western European countries under the guise of
"Cultural Activity". In this connection, the PKK terrorist organization continues to form many
associations which it claims have humanitarian purposes.
Turkey has obtained significant successes in recent periods against the terrorist
organization, which she has been fighting against for over 15 years. In addition, she also
provided for taking concrete steps on the subject of the discontinuation of the support
provided to the organization from abroad. In this connection, Syria, with the Adana
Agreement signed on 20 October 1998, has for the first time accepted the PKK to be a
terrorist organization and agreed to close down the auxiliary branches of the organization in
Syria. Furthermore, the founder and chief of the terrorist organization, who was secretly sent
to Kenya to hide, was captured on 16 February 1999 and brought to Turkey.

Turkey's Attitude on the Fight Against Terrorism:
Turkey has been subjected to practically all types of terrorism as of the end of the
1960s, such as terrorism with political aims, terrorism with religious origins, terrorism
stemming completely from abroad and ethnic terrorism. Turkey believes in the necessity of
cooperation at a national, regional and international level in the fight against terrorism, for
countries to prevent and eliminate terrorism and take the necessary measures by taking into
consideration her accumulation of knowledge in the fight against terrorism and she is
expending great efforts in this direction. Additionally, Turkey expresses at every opportunity
that she is ready to share the experience she acquired as a result of its fight against terrorism
for a long time and is open to all kinds of cooperation on this subject. The UN Security
Council, which is responsible for the preservation of international stability and security,
stresses the importance of cooperation against international terrorism in its Resolution No.
1269.


-----

Turkey has signed bilateral cooperation agreements against terrorism with 33
countries. These agreements envisage cooperation at the bilateral and international levels in
the areas of organized crimes, smuggling of drugs and psychotropic substances and fighting
against terrorism and in this framework, the exchange of information and experience.
Along with this, Turkey has contributed and continues to contribute to the steps taken
in the direction of the formation of a codification on this subject by playing an active role in
the realization of various international agreements and resolutions related to terrorism.
Within this framework, Turkey is also a party to 11 basic international agreements
accepted up until the present in the field of the fight against various types of terrorism,
including the "International Agreement for the Prevention of Terrorist Bombings", for which
the ratification procedures are continuing.
Turkey has provided important contributions in the preparation and acceptance of the
most basic documents accepted up until now on the subjects of the prevention of terrorism
and the fight against terrorism for the international and regional organizations of which
Turkey is a member, led by the UN and the European Council.


-----

**SECTION SEVEN**

**ARMS CONTROL, DISARMAMENT, CONFIDENCE AND SECURITY-BUILDING**
**MEASURES AND PREVENTION  OF THE PROLIFERATION OF WEAPONS OF**
**MASS DESTRUCTION**

Turkey attributes special importance to the subjects of arms control and disarmament.
Active participation in the international efforts in the fields of arms control and disarmament
and to be a part of the related international agreements and to fulfill its obligations stemming
from these agreements constitute important elements of Turkey's national security policy. As
a result of the important changes in the European security architecture in the past ten years,
the emergence of a general trend directed to the establishment of a new security system based
on cooperation and its acceleration on the subjects of disarmament and arms control has been
considered to be positive by Turkey.
Treaty on the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) signed in 1990, went into effect in
July 1992. The CFE provides major reductions in conventional equipment in five categories:
tanks, armored combat vehicles, artillery, combat aircraft and attack helicopters and adopts a
separate restriction in every category for the countries which are a party to the agreement.
Turkey considers the agreement as the touchstone or criterion of the European security
architecture. Turkey has actively and constructively participated in the negotiations, which
started in Vienna and concluded in Istanbul, to adapt the CFE to the new conditions emerging
with the termination of the two axis structure of the Cold War period.
The agreement related to the adaptation of the CFE, signed in Istanbul on 19
November 1999, introduces restrictions that are legally binding for the armed forces of the
countries which are a party to the agreement from the Atlantic to the Ural Mountains. The
Agreement will increase peace, security and stability in Europe.
The preservation of the flank regime and its adjustment to the new agreement structure
has constituted the most important and definite aspect of the adaptation process for Turkey.
The essence of this important element of the agreement has been kept in the modified CFE.
Turkey expects every country to complete the ratification process as soon as possible
and attributes great importance also to the complete implementation of the existing
agreement.
Turkey evaluates the Open Skies Agreement (OSA) signed in 1992 as a basic
confidence-building instrument and as an important mechanism for the verification of the
arms control agreements. Turkey is aware of the OSA's importance and the potential
contribution it will provide to European security and has approved the agreement in 1994 and
is ready to make contributions to the efforts directed to its going into effect as soon as
possible.
Turkey considers the bilateral and regional level Confidence and Security-Building
Measures (CSBMs) as a complementary element of the other disarmament activities. In this
connection, the Vienna Document is an important CSBMs instrument that effectively
contributes to the stability and security in the OSCE region and will continue to constitute an
important part of the joint efforts directed to the establishment of a more secure and
transparent environment in Europe in the coming century. The implementation of the Vienna


-----

Document has been successful up until the present. One important reason for the successful
implementation of the document is its structure which is open to change in response to new
conditions. Within this perception, the process recently started for further development of the
document has been successfully concluded, just as the reviews of the document previously
realized in 1992 and 1994, and the Vienna Document was finally accepted during the 1999
Istanbul Summit. Turkey believes that this important CSBMs regulation with its updated
form, will contribute even more to the openness and transparency in the OSCE region.
Turkey, as an indication of the importance she attributes to cooperation in the field of
regional security, has started to form bilateral CSBMs regulations, by taking the Vienna
Document as an example, with her neighbors in the Balkans, starting from 1990. In this
framework, she has concluded and put into effect the "Sofia Document" in 1991, followed by
the even more developed "Edirne Document" in 1992 with Bulgaria; the "Tirane Document"
in 1995 with Albania; and the "Skopje Document" in 1995 with Macedonia. Turkey has made
proposals to the other countries in the region with the objective of forming similar regulations.
In the post-Cold War period, while hopes for a more secure world appeared, it is being
witnessed that when the regional confrontations and armed conflicts became widespread,
developed weapons systems, including Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) and launchers,
are displaying a trend of spreading in a manner which creates instability.
Turkey, because of its proximity to the regions where the risk of spreading is high, is
monitoring the developments in this field carefully and contributes to collective efforts related
to measures directed at reversing this alarming trend.
In this framework, Turkey became a party to the Nuclear non-Proliferation Treaty
(NPT), was among the first signers of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) and
became a party to the Chemical and Biological Weapons Agreements. Turkey was among the
founding members of the Wassenaar Regulation in 1996 related to the export controls on
conventional weapons and dual purpose materials and technology. She joined the Missile
Technology Control Regime in 1997 and became a full member of the Zangger Committee in
1999. Turkey plans to become a member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Australia
Group to provide for the completion of the framework.
Turkey believes that all countries should display collective efforts in order to be
successful in this field, both at the regional and at the global level, for participating in the
target of the prevention of nuclear proliferation.


-----

**PART THREE**

**NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY**

National Security issues, which were considered within the framework of the activities
of the armed forces in general in the international field up until the Second World War,
necessitated the development and use of all the related national elements of power of the state
in providing national security, by also making use of the experiences acquired in the Second
World War. In this context, National Security Organizations have been formed in various
countries in the post-Second World War period.
In Turkey, the National Security Council has passed through various phases since
1933 and reached its present position. With the evolution experienced, Turkey
institutionalized her own National Security System and attained a status of being able to meet
the security needs of the country.
Initially, the Supreme Defense Council General Secretariat was formed by a decree
having the force of law in 1933. The area of duty of the Supreme Defense Council was
determined to be national mobilization. The preparation of the National Defense Policy was
included in the scope of the duty of the National Defense Supreme Council and the General
Secretariat that were established with a law promulgated in 1949. Subsequently, the National
Security Council (NSC) became a constitutional institution with the 1961 Constitution. With
the NSC Law No. 129 promulgated on 11 December 1962, the formation of the National
Security Council and the General Secretariat was envisaged. The Council was also given the
duty of determining the internal, external and defense policies.
National Security Council:
The NSC presently in effect was formed with Law No. 2945, dated 9 November 1983,
in accordance with the 1982 Constitution. According to the 1982 Constitution, it is composed
under the chairmanship of the "President" and includes the Prime Minister, Chief of General
Staff, Minister of Defense, Minister of Internal Affairs, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Land
Forces Commander, Naval Forces Commander, Air Forces Commander and the Gendarmerie
General Commander. Depending on the agenda, related ministers and persons can be called to
attend the council meetings for their views. The General Secretary of the NSC also
participates at the meetings of the Council, but he does not have the right to vote.
The agenda of the Council is prepared by the President. The proposals of the Prime
Minister and the Chief of General Staff are taken into account in the preparation of the
agenda. The Council takes its decisions with a majority vote. In case of a tie, the side
including the Council Chairman is assumed to form the majority. The decisions of the Council
are sent to the President and to the Prime Ministry to be discussed at the Council of Ministers.
The Council decisions have the nature of a recommendation to the Council of Ministers.
The Duties of the NSC:
In the Law No. 2945, the duties of the NSC are summarized as follows:
– It determines an opinion on the subjects of making decisions related to the
designation, determination and application of the national security policy of the state and
provision of the necessary coordination.


-----

– It determines the measures related to the realization of the national objectives
determined in the direction of the national security policy of the state and the national plan
and programs prepared.
– It continuously monitors and evaluates the national elements of power that can affect
the national security policy of the state and the political, social, economic, cultural and
technological conditions and developments. It determines the basic principles to provide for
strengthening in the direction of the national targets.
– It determines the measures deemed necessary on the subject of the preservation of the
existence of the state, her independence, territorial integrity and indivisibility of the country
and the peace and security of the society.
– It determines the necessary measures preserving the constitutional order, providing for
national unity and integrity, orienting the Turkish Nation around the national ideal and values
by uniting around the Kemalist Thought, Atatürk's Principles and Reforms.
– It determines views for state of emergency, martial law, mobilization or war.
– It determines the necessary principles for measures related to total defense, national
mobilization and other subjects to fall upon the public and private institutions and
organizations and the citizens in cases of ordinary conditions during wartime, conditions
necessitating war and post-war conditions and for providing for the inclusion of funds in the
development plans, programs and annual budgets.
– It determines the necessary principles for providing the inclusion of measures and
funds related to financial, economic, social, cultural and other subjects necessitated by the
matters envisaged by the national security policy of the state and services related to the
society and services necessitated by total defense to be included in the development plans,
programs and annual budgets.
– It determines views concerning the international agreements made or to be made on
subjects included in the scope of National Security. The NSC informs the Council of
Ministers in the form of a council decision of the views, measures and principles it has
determined and carries out other duties given to it by the laws.

The Principles of the National Security Policy:
In Law No. 2945, National Security expresses, "The preservation and protection
against all kinds of internal and external threats to the constitutional order of the state, her
national existence, her integrity and all her political, social, cultural and economic interests
and contractual rights in the international arena." The elements, "constitutional order, national
existence, integrity, national interests and contractual rights" included in the definition of
National Security are included among the national values of the state having vital importance.

The National Security Policy is defined as follows in Law No. 2945:
"It is a policy including the principles related to internal, external and defense type
operations determined by the Council of Ministers within the views determined by the NSC
with the objective of providing national security and attaining the national goals."
The preservation and protection of the vitally important values of the state formed by
the constitutional order, national existence, integrity and national interests and contractual
rights included in the definition of the concept of National Security against all kinds of
internal and external threats directed to Turkey forms the legal parameters of Turkey's
National Security Policy.
The principle of "Peace at Home, Peace in the World" included in the Constitution of
the Republic of Turkey, is an inheritance from the Atatürk period. With this principle, Turkey
has determined her national goals as to establish peaceful principles, to provide stability and
to realize socioeconomic development in an environment of peace in her region.


-----

Turkey aims to reach these goals by determining the policies within the framework of
the principles of solving the existing problems with her neighbors in a peaceful environment
and by mutual negotiations, with respect for the independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and equality of rights and without interfering in the internal affairs of each other.
Despite Turkey's peaceful approaches, the resolution and determination of Turkey to provide
national security to prevent and repel all sorts of assaults directed at her by countries
continuing their hostile attitude, is the accepted common denominator of all the governments
in Turkey and her national security system has the resources and capabilities for providing
this.
According to Article 5 of the Constitution, the basic goals and duties of the state is
expressed as "To protect the independence and integrity of the Turkish Nation, the
indivisibility of the country, the republic and democracy, and to provide for the prosperity,
peace and happiness of individuals and the society". Attaining the highest national interests
that can be defined as the "Eternal Existence of the State and the Prosperity of the Nation"
through the achievement of the above-mentioned national objectives has also been guaranteed
by the National Security Policy.
The unitary state attribute of Turkey reflects a profound spirit of solidarity stemming
from the societal structure. This unity and solidarity is the result of a common political culture
and Turkey is determined to preserve it. Additionally, the principle of secularity, guaranteed
by Articles 2 and 4 of the Constitution, is being preserved with utmost care and sensitivity.
The citizens of Turkey have the right to enjoy freedom of conscience, religious belief and
conviction. However, according to Article 24 of the Constitution, "No one shall be allowed to
exploit or abuse religion or religious feelings, or things held sacred by religion, in any manner
whatsoever, for the purpose of personal or political influence, or for even partially basing the
fundamental social, economic, political and legal order of the State on religious tenets." This
matter is of great importance from the aspect of internal security.
In conclusion, as an element of stability at the center of a region where major interests
are at stake and where complex strategic problems exist, Turkey on the one hand ensures with
determination her security against internal and external threats directed towards her national
values, and provides for socioeconomic development. On the other, thus trying to reach a
superior level of security and prosperity which is in her higher interests.


-----

**PART FOUR**

**TURKEY'S DEFENSE POLICY and MILITARY STRATEGY**

**SECTION ONE**

**TURKEY'S NATIONAL DEFENSE POLICY**

Turkey's National Defense Policy:
The threats and risks directed at Turkey's security in the post-Cold War period are
rather different from those in the past.
At the end of the Cold War and the struggle between blocks, there was a search for a
new world order directed at globalization, which also changed the concepts of threat. While
the concept of threat was previously evident and large at the beginning of the twenty-first
century, it has become multi-directional, multi-dimensional and variable and instabilities
dominate the environment. The traditional concept of threat has now started to contain new
threats and risks emerging in the form of:
– Regional and ethnic conflicts,
– Political and economic instabilities and uncertainties in the countries,
– Proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and long-range missiles,
– Religious fundamentalism,
– Smuggling of drugs and all kinds of weapons and
– International terrorism.
Turkey is located at the center of the triangle formed by the Balkans, Caucasus and the
Middle East, where the new threats and risks are concentrated. Turkey is in a region where the
interests of the global powers and formations intersect. This situation, stemming from
Turkey's geostrategic location, has not changed until the present and will not change in the
twenty-first century. It is evaluated that the importance and place of Turkey in the new world
order will become even more strengthened.
Turkey's Defense Policy is directed at defense due to her natural characteristics and is
prepared to protect and preserve national independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and
vital interests of the country. For that reason, the following are the targets of Turkey in her
National Defense Policy at the beginning of the twenty-first century as a requirement of the
period:
– To contribute to peace and security in the region and to spread this to large areas,
– To become a country producing strategy and security that could influence all the
strategies aimed as her region and beyond,
– To become an element of power and balance in her region and
– To make use of every opportunity and take initiatives for cooperation, becoming
closer and developing positive relations.
The basic principles of the Defense policy determined in the framework of the
principle, "Peace at Home, Peace in the World", set forth by Atatürk, are as follows:
– To make a maximum contribution to reducing all kinds of international tensions and
provision of just and lasting peace,
– To preserve and protect independence, territorial integrity and the republic,


-----

– To take all measures to prevent crises and conflicts and
– To take an active part in collective defense systems and to fulfill the responsibilities
entrusted to it.
Turkey's Military Strategy:
Turkey's Military Strategy contains four important matters to be able to support the
specified defense policy:
– Deterrence,
– Military Contribution to Crisis Management and Intervention in Crises,
– Forward Defense and
– Collective Security.
Deterrence
Maintaining a military force that will provide a deterrent influence on the centers of
risk and threat in the environment of instability and uncertainty surrounding Turkey
constitutes the foundation of the National Military Strategy.
Military Contribution to Crisis Management and
Intervention in Crises
In the crises concerning Turkey's security, for the peaceful solution of the
disagreements in conformity with the diplomatic, economic and other crisis management
measures, for the Turkish Armed Forces to be ready to contribute to reducing tension,
preventing them from transforming into armed conflicts or restricting the aggressor, is one of
the most important elements of its strategy.
The contribution of the Turkish Armed Forces to the international efforts for the
solution of crises threatening peace and stability within the United Nations and Alliances to
which it is a party, in connection with political decisions along with the crises in its region
and to be ready to preserve, establish and maintain world peace are also in the lead among the
subjects that cannot be relinquished.
Forward Defense
To be able to determine as soon as possible the scope of a probable aggression and
when subjected to an actual external aggression, the principle of stopping this aggression
constitutes the foundation of forward defense.
Collective Security
Active participation in international and regional alliances/organizations existing, with
NATO and the WEU in the lead, and those being formed, such as the European Security and
Defense Identity (ESDI), continues to be one of the basic elements of the Turkish National
Military Strategy.
To contribute with military forces to international organizations, alliances and related
states in accordance with the national security and foreign policy of Turkey; continuation of
providing cooperation, technical assistance and training related to military subjects constitute
the basis of Turkey's collective security concept.
The formation of a force structure conforming to the defense policy and strategy, of
which the main principles are summarized above, is of great importance. For Turkey to attain
a military power having the resources and capabilities of supporting the National Security
Policy of Turkey, which is subject to multifaceted threats due to her geopolitical and
geostrategic position, maintaining and developing this force according to the requirements of
the conditions and the period, constitute the basis for Turkey's Defense Policy and Strategy in
the twenty-first century.


-----

**SECTION TWO**

**RESTRUCTURING**

The new political-military strategic environment in the post-Cold War period, in
which the instabilities and uncertainties stemming from micro-nationalism in Caucasia, the
Middle East and the Balkans, territorial demands, terrorism, ethnic cleansing, proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and religious reactionism prevail, necessitates that the Turkish
Armed Forces (TAF) suitably reacts to new security problems and crises and be ready for
uncertainties. In the restructuring of the TAF, in order to provide for the security of the
country against various threats and risks, it is taken into account that besides classical warfare,
it is also necessary to be prepared to perform activities such as supporting peace, supporting
crisis management, humanitarian aid, aid in natural disasters, use of limited force and fighting
against terrorism.
In this framework, the TAF is adapting itself to the needs emerging in the new
political-military strategic environment in order to be able to fight against new security
problems. For this purpose, importance and priority are given to the formation of multi-role,
flexible units that can perform different duties, to the procurement of weapons and systems
that are the product of advanced technology rather than quantity, having force multipliers
such as command control, early warning, electronic warfare, advanced ammunition, operation
capacity and capability in all weather conditions that will increase the effectiveness of these
weapons and systems.
The restructuring of the TAF is being performed in the form of modernization and
partial reduction in the Land Forces and in the form of modernization in the Naval and Air
Forces.
In the political and military environment in which the global and regional balances
have not yet been formed, besides contributing to peace and stability in the region and in the
world, in the restructuring of the TAF, providing the defense of the country against risks and
threats, maintaining and developing the following capabilities are targeted. These are:
– Deterrent military force,
– Command, control, communications, computer, intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance (C4ISR) systems,
– Superior operational capability and fire power,
– Advanced technology weapons and systems based on the principle of quality rather
than quantity,
– Air/missile defense and NBC protection capability against weapons of mass
destruction,
– Capability for rapidly transforming from a state of peace to a state of war,
– Capability for performing various types of operations such as supporting peace,
supporting crisis management, use of limited force, blockade, embargo, aid in natural
disasters, humanitarian aid, prevention of migration, and fighting against terrorism, besides
classical warfare,


-----

– Capability for performing joint and combined operations and
– Capability for being able to reciprocally use the armed forces of the alliance member
countries.
By taking into consideration that the TAF will participate in peace support operations
in a gradually increasing manner in the first quarter of the twenty-first century, with the
objective of contributing to world and regional peace and stability, a special importance is
placed on developing the existing resources and capabilities in this field.
The TAF will continue its restructuring activities within the framework of the new
political-military strategic environment formed in the post-Cold War period, the risks and
threats directed to Turkey's security and the duties given to it by the Constitution and laws.


-----

**SECTION THREE**

**UTILIZATION OF TURKEY'S NATIONAL SECURITY FORCES FOR INTERNAL**
**SECURITY**

The elimination of all kinds of threats directed at the state order, democratic and
secular structure and indivisible integrity of the Republic of Turkey, which is designated in
the Constitution, is under the responsibility of the Ministry of Internal Affairs for "Internal
Threats" and of the Turkish General Staff and the Ministry of National Defense for "External
Threats".
The "Gendarmerie General Command" and the "Police Organization", in the structure
of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, are used as a police force for providing public order and
internal security. Under ordinary conditions, in case these two forces become inadequate for
providing internal security, then the Provincial Administration Law No. 5442 gives the
governors the authority to request help from the military forces. According to the subject law,
the military units are obliged to satisfy this request.
Under state of emergency conditions, the government appoints special public order
units formed within the framework of the State of Emergency Law No. 2935 and appoints
military units within the framework of the "Martial Law No. 1402", provided that it is ratified
by the Turkish Grand National Assembly (TGNA), for providing public order and general
security.
The Republic of Turkey continued her struggle against extreme left and right
organizations during the bipolar Cold War period. Since 1984 she has been fighting against
the extensive and violent PKK terrorist organization, which is supported and sustained by
countries that maintain historical ambitions over Turkey.
The struggle against the PKK terrorist organization had been carried out within the
framework of the Martial Law No. 1402 until 1987.
In 1987 the "Martial Law Application" was lifted and the fight against terrorism was
turned over completely to the responsibility of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. In this
transition period, in order to provide the uninterrupted continuation of the fight against
terrorism, the "State of Emergency Law" No. 2935 was put into effect.
To provide effectiveness in the fight against terrorism, given to the responsibility of
the Ministry of Internal Affairs with the State of Emergency Law No 2935, with the decree
having the force of law within the scope of the law, the "State of Emergency Governor's
Office" and the "Gendarmerie Public Order Command" were established connected to the
Ministry of Internal Affairs, and sufficient police forces were assigned to them. With this law,
the State of Emergency Governor can also use the military forces in the region in the fight
against terrorism when necessary. This struggle is carried out completely under the control
and management of the legal civilian authority.
In this connection, the Prime Ministry State of Emergency Coordination Council and
the Internal Security Evaluation Council have been established under the chairmanship of the
Minister of Internal Affairs and some additional measures were taken.


-----

With the legal measures taken after this date, the "Penitence Law" has been
promulgated for the rehabilitation of the youth who found themselves in the midst of the
terrorist organization. Many people who had been involved in terrorism have surrendered with
this application and have been rehabilitated.
As the result of the measures taken and the determination in the fight against
terrorism, the PKK terrorist organization entered into a disintegration process. However, due
to the Gulf Crisis that erupted in 1991, the PKK started to escalate its actions by exploiting
the authority void in Northern Iraq.
The "Law for the Fight Against Terrorism", which increased the authorities of the
security forces and the penalties for terrorists, was promulgated in 1991 against the crimes
committed by the PKK terrorist organization, that started to exploit the legal loopholes and
human rights values in the environment of freedom provided by the democratic regime.
With the support received from the people in the region and the determined struggle of
the security forces, respecting human rights and receiving its authority from the constitution
and laws, the effectiveness of the actions of the bloody terrorist organization have been
broken and reduced once again to a "controllable" level. As of the second half of 1998, thanks
to the measures taken in Turkey and abroad, the chief of the terrorist organization was first of
all driven out of Syria, and later, without giving him an opportunity to be sheltered
permanently in any country, was captured and brought to Turkey, put on trial and sentenced to
death. This situation deeply shook the organization and the terrorist organization entered into
a process of disintegration.
In parallel with these positive developments, the scope of the State of Emergency
Law, put into effect in 1987, is being gradually lifted and being transformed back to normal.
In the regions transforming back to a normal order, just like in the other regions of Turkey,
the provision of public order and general security is under the responsibility of the Ministry of
Internal Affairs. Also, in this framework, in case the Police and Gendarmerie become
inadequate in the prevention of incidents, then the governors can request help from the
military units within the scope of the Provincial Administration Law No. 5442.


-----

**PART FIVE**

**ORGANIZING FOR DEFENSE**

**SECTION ONE**

**GENERAL**

The place in the state structure of the Turkish Armed Forces (TAF), its representation
and use is regulated by the Constitution of the Republic of Turkey. According to the
Constitution, the Supreme Military Command is represented in the spiritual authority of the
Turkish Grand National Assembly (TGNA). The Chief of General Staff, as the Commander of
the Armed Forces, is appointed by the President and is responsible to the Prime Minister for
his duties. The Council of Ministers is responsible to the TGNA for National Security and the
preparation of the Armed Forces for the defense of the country. However, the authority for
declaring war and sending the TAF to foreign countries and giving permission for foreign
armed forces to come to Turkey belongs to the TGNA.


-----

**SECTION TWO**

**MINISTRY OF NATIONAL DEFENSE**

The Ministry of National Defense (MND) is responsible for carrying out the political,
legal, social, financial and budget services of the National Defense functions; and for carrying
out the services of:
– Recruitment in peace and war,
– Procurement of weapons, vehicles, equipment, logistic materials and supplies,
– Defense Industry,
– Health,
– Construction, real estate, housing and infrastructure (NATO Security Investment
Program) and
– Financial and inventory account auditing,
within the framework of the principles, priorities and main programs determined by the
Turkish General Staff, in accordance with the defense policy of the Armed Forces decided on
by the Council of Ministers.
These functions of the Ministry of National Defense are performed by two
undersecretaries and the units connected to them.

The Duties and Responsibilities of the Undersecretary of the Ministry of National Defense:
The Undersecretary of the Ministry of National Defense, as the Head of the Ministry
Headquarters, is responsible to the Minister of National Defense.
The Undersecretary, in order to fulfill his duties in the Organization and Duties Law
No. 1325 of the Ministry of National Defense, performs the duties specified below:
– To perform the procurement services of the weapons, vehicles, equipment and
materials and all kinds of logistic materials and supplies for the Turkish Armed Forces
according to the related legislation;
– To provide for the financial planning and preparation and promulgation of the budgets
in parallel to the defense programs of the Turkish Armed Forces and to provide for its
implementation under the control of one group, to have inspections and auditing made;
– To determine the Defense Industry and Policy of the Turkish Armed Forces, to revise
when needed and to realize the activities for the development of the defense industry facilities
in accordance with these principles;
– To determine the quality control policy and the principles to be applied in the direction
of this policy, to prepare and publish the necessary publications on this subject;
– To coordinate the activities for the preparation of technical specifications, examination
and approval activities, codification activities, inspection and quality control activities related
to all kinds of materials produced or procured for the needs of the Turkish Armed Forces; to
follow the procedures, basis and principles applied by the National and NATO authorities
related to these activities; to determine the national bases that should be applied; and to
provide for their publication and application;


-----

– To coordinate and follow the technological and project management activities related
to these subjects and the research and development activities of the TAF on the subjects of
weapons, vehicles, equipment, materials, food and NBC;
– To prepare the Defense Research and Development and Technology Plan and Program
and to revise it when necessary and to carry out the activities specified in this document;
– To procure and print maps needed by the Ministries and the official departments
through the General Command of Mapping and to provide for the preparation of the military
geography documents;
– To carry out the activities of the Ministry related to financial plans, programs, budget
activities, legal matters, laws and decisions and legal and financial inspections;
– To plan, coordinate, apply and conclude construction, real estate and NATO Security
Investment Program (NSIP) services; the construction, real estate, housing and infrastructure
needs in peace and war, in Turkey and abroad, of the Turkish Armed Forces (excluding the
Gendarmerie General Command and the Coast Guard Command), by resources obtained from
the National Budget and NATO Security Investment Fund, in accordance with the principles
and priorities to be specified by the Turkish General Staff;
– To carry out, follow and control according to the legislation in effect of the military
service procedures of the citizens who are subject to military service obligation in peacetime
by coordinating with the Turkish General Staff;
– To establish, abolish Military Courts, to carry out their administrative procedures, to
supervise, to solve the disagreements, to educate military judges and to evaluate the
complaints and notices about them;
– To perform inspection and control, on behalf of the Minister of Defense, of the
Military Courts and their offices, the Military Prosecutors and their offices, the Legal
Consulting services, the Military Prisons and detention houses in accordance with Law No.
353; of the disciplinary courts, disciplinary officers, disciplinary punishments and detention
houses in accordance with Law No. 477;
– To provide coordination on the subjects of health services among the Turkish General
Staff, Ministries and organizations in Turkey and abroad and
– To provide for the performance of the duties to carry out, follow and control the
mobilization services of the Turkish Armed Forces in coordination with the Turkish General
Staff.

Undersecretariat of the Defense Industry (UDI):
The Undersecretariat of the Defense Industry (UDI), established with the Law No.
3238, is an organization connected to the Ministry of Defense, having a juristic personality
and a special budget, formed with the following objectives:
– To make maximum use of the domestic industry infrastructure,
– To direct and encourage new advanced technology investments,
– To provide capital contributions and cooperation with foreign technology,
– To produce in Turkey all kinds of weapons, vehicles and equipment needed to the
extent that it is possible and economical by encouraging research and development activities.
Its main functions are:
– To structure the existing industry according to the needs of the defense industry,
– To encourage and direct new private, public or mixed investments by loans, advances,
long-term standing orders, participation of the state and other financial and economic
measures,


-----

– To direct research, development and prototype production activities for modern
weapons, vehicles and equipment and
– To coordinate the subjects of the exports of defense industry products and offset trade.
The Defense Industry Organization:
The rapid developments observed in Turkey's industrial infrastructure in the past 1520 years has brought into the agenda the evaluation of the potential formed in general industry
for the defense industry field and establishment of a single-purpose organization having
continuous financial resources. With this objective, the "Defense Industry Development and
Support Administration Chairmanship (DIDSAC)", connected to the Ministry of Defense and
having a juristic personality was established in 1985 with Law No. 3238 and a financial
source called the "Defense Industry Support Fund (DISF)" was constituted. In 1989, as
deemed necessary, the DIDSAC was reorganized with a decree having the force of law as the
"Undersecretariat of the Defense Industry (UDI)", connected to the Ministry of Defense and
having a juristic personality.
The objective of the Law No. 3238 on the Defense Industry constituting the basis for
the establishment of the Undersecretariat of the Defense Industry is to develop a modern
defense industry and to provide for the modernization of the TAF.


-----

**SECTION THREE**

**TURKISH GENERAL STAFF**

Duties and Responsibilities of the Turkish
General Staff:
The Chief of General Staff is responsible to the Prime Minister for overall command
and control of the Armed Forces and
– Effective conduct of military operations and
– The level of combat readiness of the TAF.
The Commanders of the Land, Naval and Air Forces are directly connected to the
Chief of General Staff within the chain of command.
The Turkish General Staff and the Ministry of National Defense are in close
coordination in the fulfillment of their own duties.
The Gendarmerie General Command and the Coast Guard Command, perform their
duties connected to the Ministry of Internal Affairs in peacetime and are a part of the Internal
Security Forces. They are included in the structure of the Land Forces Command and the
Naval Forces Command, respectively, in wartime.
Organization:

LAND FORCES COMMAND

Duties:
As a component of the Turkish Armed Forces, to fulfill the duties given to it related to
the preservation and protection of the Turkish Nation and the Republic of Turkey, determined
by the Constitution.
With this purpose;
– Its duties directed to external military threats are:

-  To constitute and maintain an effective and deterrent land force to prevent war,

-  To defend Turkey's territories,

-  To provide for the security of the national borders,

-  To transfer the operation across borders when necessary and

-  To be ready to use force when needed against threats directed to member
countries in accordance with alliance agreements or within coalition forces to be formed in
multinational environments.
– Its duties to provide internal stability:
To perform the duties specified below within the framework of the decrees included in
the related laws, with public institutions and organizations and with nongovernment and
special organizations:

-  Fighting against terrorism,


-----

-  Providing public order and security in societal incidents and

-  Aid to disasters (forest fires, earthquakes, floods, avalanches, droughts, contagious
diseases, nuclear accidents, environmental problems, control of refugees, etc.).
– Its duties related to the provision of international stability:

-  Peace support operations,

-  Military aid to friendly and allied countries and

-  Disarmament and arms control.
Organization:
The Turkish Land Forces is composed of 4 Army Commands, 2 Independent Corps
Commands, the Land Forces Training and Doctrine Command, the Land Forces Logistics
Command and the Military Academy Command.
The characteristics of its existing structure is based on a concept aimed at reaching a
modern structure, taking the battalion and brigade as the basis in organization and adopting a
transition to mobilization effectively and rapidly.
The Land Forces tries to fulfill its own doctrine, first by using its deterrent power. For
this reason, it takes all kinds of measures and shows that it is ready to fight against the enemy.
In case the deterrence fails, then it stops any aggression that could come to the Turkish
Nation, starting from the border, while it makes the enemy components crossing the border
ineffective, transfers the subsequent operations into the territories of that country, breaks the
determination and will of the enemy to continue combat and captures the targets providing
political and military advantages to the Republic of Turkey.
Personnel:
Soldiers : 402,000
Civilians : 20,500
Activities on the Subject of the Establishment and
Preservation of Peace:
Turkey's contribution to the UN peacekeeping activities directed to the preservation of
world peace dates back to the 1950s when it took part in the Korean War with a unit at the
level of a brigade. The Peace Support Operations in which the Turkish Land Forces have
participated are given below:

– Peace Force Activities in Bosnia-Herzegovina:
The Bosnia-Herzegovina Turkish Task Force Command, which has served at the level
of a regiment since May 1994, was increased to a brigade level during the Implementation
Force (IFOR) period. The same unit is also assigned to the Stability Force (SFOR). It was
reorganized as a 824 person Mechanized Battalion Task Force in the scope of the
restructuring of the SFOR.
– Humanitarian Aid Operations in Albania:
The Albanian Force (AFOR) was formed within the scope of the humanitarian aid
operations planned to be carried out under the leadership of NATO for the refugees from
Kosovo taking shelter in Albania. The Field Service Company including four bakers' sections,
five bathing units and two laundry units and a medical treatment unit formed of three doctors,
six nurses and three ambulances and the humanitarian aid unit for Albania composed of a total
of 162 personnel containing a water supply team that can purify 40 tons of water per hour and
two security and guard squads from the Gendarmerie General Command to provide close
protection of the components, was allocated by Turkey and transferred to Albania on 15 May
1999. All the needs for three months of the 3,500 person refugee camp established at Elbasan
were provided by the Turkish Humanitarian Aid Unit.
– The Peace Force Activities in Kosovo:


-----

Turkey participated with a Turkish Battalion Task Force in the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
established as of July 1999 with the objective of the implementation of the peace agreement
signed between the parties after NATO air operation. The Turkish Battalion Task Force,
formed of a total of 987 persons, is composed of 2 Mechanized Infantry Companies, 1 Tank
Company and Combat Support/Combat Service Support components. The subject Task Force,
under the control of the German Brigade, assumed responsibility of the Prizren, Dragras and
Mamusa regions. It also successfully performs humanitarian aid activities, including medical
and material support directed to the people in the region, along with its duties for
implementing peace.
– Southeastern Europe Multinational Peace Force (MPFSEE):
A unit at the level of a brigade was formed in the Balkans with the initiative of
Turkey. Albania, Bulgaria, Italy, Macedonia, Romania and Greece, along with Turkey are
included as participants in the subject MPFSEE and the United States and Slovenia are
in the status of observers. The MPFSEE headquarters, under a Turkish commander, started
its de facto activities in Plovdiv as of 11 September 1999.
Turkey has allocated to the MPFSEE a Mechanized Infantry Battalion, a
Reconnaissance Company, an Artillery Battery, a Communications Company and some
combat services support components. Furthermore, one Combat Engineer Company is
assigned to the Combat Engineer Construction Unit, planned to be formed connected to the
subject Brigade.
Future Objectives:
The Land Forces are the first priority military force component used against threats
originating internally and externally targeting the territorial integrity of Turkey and the
Republic regime. The Land Forces, in order to have adequate power to be able to fulfill its
duties in the twenty-first century and to be completely prepared for the probable regional
conflicts and combat conditions in the future, is taking the measures that can be summarized
as follows:
– To analyze and design the combat field of the future up to the minutest detail,
– To determine the requirements of the modern combat field,
– To produce solutions suitable for the realities of the country,
– To have well-equipped, well-trained and well-managed combat forces satisfying the
requirements of the future and
– To form organizations that can successfully perform all kinds of duties that may be
assigned.
Within this framework, the Land Forces:
Continues its activities on the subjects of acquiring a structure having:
– A high operations capability and fire power,
– A capacity to determine, identify and recognize the enemy from afar,
– A maneuvering capability, which can perform defense offensively, day and night,
– A high capability for survival,
– A capability for flexible and multipurpose use,
– A sufficient size to be able to perform joint and combined operations,
– An attribute of easy control and management,
– A self-sufficiency from the aspect of command, control, combat support and combat
service support,
– A flexible and rapid mobilization capability and
– A capability for being able to perform peace support activities by the support of the
UN, NATO and OSCE, when necessary.
Modernization Activities:


-----

The Land Forces, from the aspect of weapons systems, in order to be able to fulfill its
duties at the desired level to be given to it in the 2000s, requires:
– Weapons systems that can provide continuous and accurate fire support, that can
launch modern intelligent ammunitions, including long-range ground to ground missile
systems that will influence the enemy from afar,
– Modern tanks having advanced armor and effective anti-tank weapons systems,
– Effective and modern air defense systems to provide for medium and low-altitude air
defense for the Land Forces units and facilities,
– Attack and tactical reconnaissance helicopters,
– Helicopters for the airborne attack units,
– Means that will rapidly establish obstacles for the purpose of preventing the
movement capability of the enemy, means for rapid opening of passages and modern floating
bridges in order to increase the operational capabilities of friendly units and
– Modern intelligence systems providing units at every level to determine, identify and
recognize the enemy within their ranges of interest and influence.
For this reason, the modernization activities of the Land Forces have been accelerated
and the formation of a modern and effective force has been targeted. In this framework, the
main modernization projects are described below:
– Intelligence and Electronic Warfare:

-  Unmanned Aircraft,

-  Thermal Camera,

-  Ground Surveillance Radar,

-  Global Positioning System (GPS),

-  Night Vision System and

-  Land Forces Combat Field Integrated Intelligence System.
– Maneuver:

-  Modern Main Combat Tank and Tank Modernization,

-  Armored Combat Vehicle,

-  Attack and Tactical Reconnaissance Helicopter,

-  General Purpose Helicopter,

-  Cargo Helicopter,

-  Short, Medium and Long-Range Antitank Weapons Systems and

-  5.56 mm Infantry Rifle.
– Fire Support:

-  Multiple-Launched Rockets Systems (MLRS),

-  Missiles,

-  Modern 155 mm Motorized Carriage Howitzers and

-  Automation of Fire Support.
– Air Defense:

-  Portable Stinger,

-  Base Mounted Stinger System,

-  Motorized Carriage Air Defense Gun and

-  Low Altitude Air Defense Systems.
– Command, Control, Communications and Information Systems:

-  Maneuver Control System,

-  Integrated Intelligence System,

-  Early Warning and Modernization of Command and Control System and

-  Establishment of Tactical Field Communication System.
– Systems for Counter Mobility and Survivalibity:

-  NBC Defense,


-----

-  Mine Detection Systems,

-  Rocket Launched Explosive Line Charge,

-  Explosive Anti-personal Minefield Breaching Systems,

-  Remote Controlled (Robotic) Minesweeping Tank,

-  Mine Resistant Boots,

-  Protective Clothing Against Mines,

-  Pontoniers Tank, Armored Vehicle-Launched Bridges

-  Emergency Pedestrian Passage Bridge,

-  Obstacle Breaching Pipe Bundle System,

-  New Generation Fortification Work Machines and

-  Engineer Combat Vehicle.
– Simulator and Simulations:

-  Automation of Logistic Systems.

NAVAL FORCES COMMAND

Duties:
The duties of the Naval Forces Command are the defense of the country against threats that
could come from the seas and preservation and protection of the maritime relations and
interests. In this general framework;
– In peacetime:

-  To show its presence in the seas when necessary for the national interests,

-  To participate when needed in the peace support, humanitarian aid and search
and rescue operations,

-  To cooperate in operations performed against terrorism, drugs and other
smuggling activities with the security forces, allied forces and when needed with the
nongovernmental organizations and

-  To cooperate with the Coast Guard Command for protection of the national
interests and marine environment exclusively within the economic region.
– In times of crisis and war:
In addition to the duties above:

-  To provide strategic deterrence,

-  To take the military measures to be applied in crises,

-  To provide for the control of the sea,

-  To provide for the security of the maritime transport lines and

-  To participate in the operations of alliances and when necessary, in coalitions.
Organization:
The general structure of the Turkish Naval Forces is composed of the Naval Forces
Command and four main subordinate commands connected to it.
Fleet Command:
The fleets and flotillas forming the main combat components of the Turkish Navy,
which is prepared under the command of the Naval Command for war are given below:
– Surface Ships Squadron,
– Fast Patrol Boats Squadron,
– Minewarfare Squadron,
– Submarine Squadron,
– Maritime Patrol Aircraft and Helicopter Squadron,


-----

– Southern Task Group,
– Northern Task Group and
– Logistic Support Ships.
Area Commands:
These are the Northern Naval Area and Southern Naval Area Commands. The basic
duties of these Commands are to provide logistics and coastal support to combat ships and to
manage the bases and coastal support facilities.
Naval Training and Education Command:
The basic training and education of the Naval Forces personnel are provided at the
schools and training centers connected to this command. The Naval Academy, the Karamürsel
Training Center, the Naval High School, the Naval Noncommissioned Officers Preparatory
School and the Training Flotilla are connected to this command.
Personnel:
Military Personnel: 53,000
Civilian Personnel: 12,000
Activities on the Establishment and Preservation of Peace:
– United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR):
Two frigates, oil tankers and MCM vessels from the Turkish Naval Forces, are
assigned to duty in the Adriatic Sea. The first frigate is on duty in the Mediterranean Standing
Naval Forces (STANAVFORMED) and the second is on standby. A total of 18
frigates/destroyers, two submarines, four oil tankers and approximately 5,000 personnel
performed duties during the period between July 1992 and October 1996 when the operations
continued.
– NATO Implementation/Stability Force (IFOR/SFOR):
The Turkish Naval Forces have been participating since 1 January 1996 in the
activities performed in Bosnia-Herzegovina with the purpose of providing stability and the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. Two frigates, one on duty and one on
standby, submarines, oil tankers and MCM vessels have participated in the operations in the
Adriatic Sea.
– The Alba Operation in Albania:
Turkey participated as of 16 April 1997 with a Maritime Infantry Battalion Task Force
composed of 759 persons and a headquarters composed of 20 officers / noncommissioned
officers for a total of 779 personnel in the multinational force established under the leadership
of Italy with the transfer of authority to the OSCE with the Resolution No. 1101 of the UN
Security Council with the objective of being able to distribute with security the humanitarian
aid in Albania. The Turkish unit, that performed duties in Tirane and the region to the North,
has completed its duty on 1 August 1997.
Future Objectives:
The Turkish Naval Forces of the future, while developing the force structure required
for the national interests, gives priority to investments in "Technology" and "Well-Trained
Manpower". The objective related to the dimension of the force structure is to attain a naval
power sufficient to deterrence in peacetime the potential threat or threat coalitions which
could be directed at Turkey in the surrounding seas and to render them ineffective in conflicts.
When developing the Turkish Naval Forces, the security needs of the regional
geography and maritime transport lines and the dimensions of the coastal operations
concentrated on defense and the open sea operations concentrated on control of the sea are
being considered together. With the investments made in recent years and to be made in the
next 15-20 years, the Turkish Naval Forces will be transformed from a force structure
required for coastal operations to a structure that could have a say in the open seas.


-----

A significant progress has been made in this direction with the projects under
construction and contracted for construction. Sea Control Ships, Multipurpose Frigates, Air
Defense War Frigates, Modern Submarines, Patrol Ships, Logistic Support Ships, Naval Air
Components, Special Forces and the necessary force multipliers form the main components of
this force.
Establishment of new bases and the activities for the development of the existing bases
and base facilities, in parallel with the future NATO functions and the needed force structure
necessitated by these, are also being carried out. In this scope, the Aksaz Naval Base is going
to be developed as an Advanced Logistic Support Site (ALSS) to support NATO operations to
be carried out in the Eastern Mediterranean.
Due to the need for restructuring the shipyards of the Naval Forces Command due to
the earthquake which occurred in the Marmara Region on 17 August 1999, the Pendik and
Alaybey Shipyards, connected to the Turkish Shipbuilding Industry, were transferred to the
Naval Forces Command and the shipbuilding capacities of the military shipyards increased
significantly.
After the completion of the activities of the Taskizak Shipyard moving to the Pendik
Shipyard under the name of the Istanbul Shipyard and the integration of the Izmir Shipyard
with the Alaybey Shipyard, it will be possible to build military ships up to 10,000 DWT and
civilian ships up to 170,000 DWT. As a continuation of the projects carried out at the
Istanbul, Gölcük and Izmir Shipyards until the present, it will be possible to realize the design
and building of high technology ships such as frigates, submarines, fast patrol boats and
minesweepers along with landing ships, floating dry docks, coast guard boats, attack boats
and various auxiliary class ships and naval vessels.
Along with the shipbuilding activities, the overhauls and periodic dry dock/breakdown
repairs of all the combat and auxiliary class ships/marine vehicles and half lifespan
modernizations in the inventory of the Naval Forces are being realized at the Shipyard/Repair
Support Commands connected to the Naval Forces Command.
Operational Requirements and
Modernization Activities:
The operational requirements of the Turkish Naval Forces dictate owning modern
platforms having the capacity and capability of undertaking Above Water Warfare, Anti
Submarine Warfare and Air Defense Warfare. Reconnaissance, surveillance and submarine
warfare for preserving and protecting maritime transport in the surrounding seas has an
important place among the duties of the Navy.
The modernization program in the near future of the Turkish Naval Forces, suitable
for its operational requirements is described below:
– The preparatory activities are continuing for the TF-2000 Frigate project, started in the
scope of the procurement of the new generation air defense and air control frigates. The
maximum contribution from the domestic industry and technology transfer are targeted in the
building of the ships.
– As a continuation of the Preveze Class submarines, whose constructions are
completed, a contract has been signed for 1400 ton submarines with advanced guided missiles
and the building activities have been started at the Gölcük Shipyards.
– The procurement activities are continuing for the Maritime Patrol Aircraft and Sea
Hawk helicopters having Anti Submarine Warfare and Anti Surface Warfare capability. The
CN-235 Type Naval Patrol Aircraft will be constructed in Turkey by the Turkish Aviation and
Space Industry Corporation under license from the CASA Company. Furthermore, the
Corvettes having the  Anti Submarine Warfare and Reconnaissance/Patrol capability, are
planned to be constructed in Turkey under the name of MILGEM, with a Turkish design.


-----

– The modernization of the patrol boats, which can perform rapid and effective operations
in coastal waters, and the activities started for the purpose of reinforcement of the existing
fleet with new types of patrol boats, are continuing.

AIR FORCES COMMAND

Duties:
With the objective of preserving the national rights and interests of Turkey, by itself,
or together with the Land and Naval Forces and/or allied forces,
– In peacetime:

-  To deter probable enemies by having a force structure with the capability to determine,
identify, control and eliminate any threat/risk that can come to Turkey from the air and space
and

-  To use this deterrent capability and by using force as necessary in crises to contribute to the
preservation of the regional and international balance and peace.
– In case deterrence fails:
Along with the other Forces, to break down the determination and will of the enemy
for continuing warfare and to destroy or render ineffective all types of surface, air and space
threats directed to Turkey.
Organization:
Four main subordinate commands consisting of two tactical, one training and one
logistical commands are connected to the Air Forces Command.
The First and Second Tactical Air Forces, which are the two main combat commands,
constitute the striking force of the Turkish Air Forces, with 19 combat squadrons composed of
F-16 and F-4E aircraft.
The Air Training Command provides for meeting the training requirements at the
highest level in every echelon of the Turkish Air Forces.
The Air Logistics Command is responsible for providing all kinds of logistic support
needed by the Air Forces. The three Air Supply and Maintenance Centers connected to this
Command perform the activities for technical management and factory level maintenance of
the aircraft systems.
There are two Air Transport Main Base Commands and a Tanker Base Command
connected to the Air Forces Command. In the four squadrons attached to the transport units,
there are C-130, C-160, CN-235, Citation VII and GULF IV aircraft and UH-1H helicopters.
Force Structure:
Combat Aircraft : F-16 and F-4E
Training Aircraft : T-41, SF-260, T-37, T-38 and F-5
Transport Aircraft : C-130, C-160, CN-235, Citation VII, GULF IV
Reconnaissance Aircraft : RF-4E
Tanker Aircraft : KC-135R
The Turkish Air Forces assigns all of the air defense systems in its structure to NATO
during peacetime. Furthermore, it contributes to NATO's reaction forces with two combat
fleets and one reconnaissance fleet.
Personnel:
Military Personnel: 63,000
Civilian Personnel: 9,500
Activities on the Subject of Establishing and Preserving Peace:


-----

– United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR):
An F-16 squadron (18 Aircraft) performed duties at the Ghedi Base in Italy as of 19
April 1993 with the purpose of implementing the flight ban of the UN over the BosniaHerzegovina air space.
– NATO Implementation/Stability Force (IFOR/SFOR):
The Air Force participated with a F-16 aircraft wing (2-4 Aircraft) at the Ghedi Base
in Italy in the IFOR/SFOR activities in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Future Objectives:
The strategy of the Turkish Air Forces in the future will be to attain a modern force
structure based on capable and professional manpower with rapid, high survival capability,
who adapt to high technological developments.
Within the next twenty years, the New Generation Combat Aircraft equipped with
invisibility technology and advanced weapons systems, Electronic Warfare Platforms,
Airborne Warning and Control (AWACS) Aircraft, precision hit capability air ammunition
that can be launched from long-ranges, real or close to real surveillance and reconnaissance
capability and Unmanned Aircraft (UA) in the roles of attack and defense, are the combat
weapons and vehicles that the Turkish Air Forces targets to own.
Besides this, the Turkish Air Forces plans to carry into space within the next quarter
century both its offensive and defensive and its reconnaissance / surveillance and early
warning resources and capabilities, by foreseeing that the air wars in the future will be
realized from the space beyond the atmosphere. Furthermore, the Turkish Air Forces has also
started its projects directed at developing its training system according to the environment of
the future to be able to effectively use these weapons systems it has targeted to own, under all
weather conditions and around the clock.
The Turkish Air Forces has made its plans to have its personnel reach a level of
training to be able to perform all kinds of duties that will be given to it for it to be able to
effectively and economically use these developing weapons systems in the twenty-first
century. The key point for maintaining an air force that is combat ready at any moment, in the
future as well as today, is to have the best quality of airmen. Starting from this point, the
targets have been set forth for obtaining personnel who have had a postgraduate academic
career, for training and developing talented and sufficient manpower.
Modernization Projects:
– Modernization of the F-4E and F-5 aircraft and procurement of the Airborne Warning
and Control Aircraft,
– Procurement of the AS-532 AL Cougar Search and Rescue Helicopters and
– Air Defense Systems with Medium/Long Range Antimissile Capability and Electronic
Warfare Projects.


-----

**SECTION FOUR**

**OTHER FORCES**

GENDARMERIE GENERAL COMMAND

Duties:
The duties of the Gendarmerie General Command, as an armed, military security and
police force, are to provide security and public peace and public order and to carry out the
duties given by the other laws and regulations.
The Main Duties of the Gendarmerie General Command:
– Civil Duties:
To provide, preserve and protect security and public peace and public order, to
prohibit, follow and investigate smuggling and to take preventive measures against the
commitment of crimes.
– Judicial Duties:
To investigate and find the crimes and criminals following the commitment of crimes,
to apprehend the suspected criminals and turn them over to the judicial authorities together
with the evidence of the crime.
– Military Duties:
To perform the duties given to the general police forces by the military laws and
regulations and the duties given by the Turkish General Staff in cases of state of emergency,
martial law, mobilization and war.
– Other Duties:
To perform the duties in the decrees of laws and regulations other than the civil,
judicial and military duties and the duties given by governmental decrees based on them.
Organization:
The Gendarmerie General Command is connected to the Turkish General Staff from
the aspect of military duties and for training and education and to the Ministry of Internal
Affairs from the aspect of the performance of security and public order duties and other duties
and services.
In conditions of martial law, mobilization and war, and when deemed necessary by the
Turkish General Staff, the Gendarmerie units enter under the command of the Force
Commands with the required section and continue their security and public order services as
performed in peacetime, with their remaining section.
Gendarmerie Aviation Units:
The Gendarmerie Aviation Units are formed with the objective of supporting security
and public order duties, control from the air of the opium poppy and marihuana fields that
could be illegal, evacuation of those who are ill and injured, search and rescue and aid to the
public. Presently, there is one Gendarmerie Aviation Group Command in Ankara and one in
Diyarbakir and a Helicopter Fleet Command in Van.


-----

Gendarmerie Criminology Units:
A criminology system has been established throughout Turkey with the objective of
clarifying incidents with scientific methods. In this scope, a Criminology Central Laboratory
has been established in Ankara, Criminology Regional Branches in Bursa and Van and
Criminology Teams in the Provinces. It has been planned to establish Scene of Incident
Investigation Units in the counties.
The Chemical Laboratory, within the structure of the Central Laboratory in Ankara,
sends reports on the subject of the analyses of drugs directly to the UN and to the courts
requesting reports in case of disputes.
Gendarmerie Traffic Units:
Traffic duties were given to the Gendarmerie as of 1 September 1997, upon the
increase in traffic accidents throughout Turkey. A total of 728 Gendarmerie Traffic Teams
were formed for the performance of this duty and it is planned to increase this number to 950
teams.
The Gendarmerie Internal Security Units
Deployed in the Touristic Regions:
The security and public order services in regions where tourists are concentrated are
carried out by the Gendarmerie Internal Security Stations having personnel, who wear special
uniforms, know foreign languages (to the possible extend), and are trained to solve especially
the problems that might be encountered by tourists.
Personnel:
The Gendarmerie Lieutenants, who complete the Basic Infantry Course at the Infantry
School after graduating from the Military Academy, are sent to a Commando Course and
subsequently are given the Gendarmerie Officers Basic Course.
The noncommissioned officer candidates are selected by examination from among
civilian sources and the Specialist Gendarmerie and Specialist Sergeants and Corporals.
Following training and education at the Gendarmerie Noncommissioned Officer School, they
acquire the rank of "NCO Sergeant".
The Specialist Gendarmerie candidates are selected by examination from civilian
sources, then trained and educated at the Specialist Gendarmerie School and then subjected to
on job training at the Internal Security Stations.
The Specialist Sergeants and Corporals are selected from among the successful and
voluntary personnel and are assigned as personnel to the Gendarmerie Commandos, the
Special Operations Group Commands and as the operators of vehicles and equipment
requiring special expertise. Sergeants, Corporals and Privates are trained in units connected to
the Gendarmerie Training Command at the level of a corps.
Presently, approximately 280,000 personnel are performing duties in the Gendarmerie
organization.
Relations Abroad:
The Turkish Gendarmerie is a member of the International Federation of European
and Mediterranean Police and Gendarmerie having Military Status (FIEP) in which France,
Italy, Spain, Portugal, Morocco and the Netherlands are included. Turkey will perform the
period chairmanship of the FIEP as of October 2000.
The cooperation activities are continuing with the French National Gendarmerie, the
Italian Carabinieri, the Georgian Border Units and the Chinese Armed Police.
Cooperation in training is made with the Gendarmeries of Gambia, Senegal, Mali and
Azerbaijan. Activities are continuing to determine the basic principles of cooperation on this
subject with the Gendarmeries of Argentina and France. Similarly, it is planned to cooperate
with the Border Units and Internal Forces of Poland, the Ukraine and Kazakhstan.


-----

In the framework of the bilateral "Military Training Cooperation Agreements", the
guest military personnel coming from foreign countries are given training in the Turkish
language, Gendarmerie Officers Basic Training, Gendarmerie Noncommissioned Officers
Basic Training, On Job Training and Commando Training at the Training institutions and
organizations connected to the Gendarmerie General Command.
The Turkish Gendarmerie components are performing duties in the following
organizations formed within the framework of the UN Sanctions:
– The Multinational Advisory Police Element (MAPE) of the Western European Union
(WEU) stationed in Tirane, Albania,
– The Albanian Humanitarian Aid Force (AFOR),
– The SFOR Headquarters stationed in Sarajevo, Bosnia-Herzegovina,
– The Temporary International Presence in Hebron (TIPH) stationed in Hebron, Israel,
– The Kosovo Peace Force (KFOR) of NATO stationed in Pristina, Kosovo and
– The Peace Force Units to be referred to as the Kosovo Turkish Task Force stationed in
Pristina, Kosovo.

COAST GUARD COMMAND

Duties:
The duties of the Coast Guard Command in the area of responsibility formed of the
territorial waters, exclusive economic zone and search and rescue area along the 8,333 km
coastal strip of Turkey, from Sarp on the border with Georgia next to the Black Sea to
Igneada on the border with Bulgaria next to the Black Sea, and from Enez on the border with
Greece next to the Aegean Sea to Samandag on the border with Syria next to the Eastern
Mediterranean Sea, are to perform Coast Guard (CG) functions including supervision and
control activities in accordance with the related laws, decrees and regulations, connected to
the Ministry of Internal Affairs, within the framework of the law for its establishment and the
regulations related to this law. The CG functions within this framework are as follows:
– To protect the Turkish coasts, territorial waters, internal ports and gulfs and to provide
security,
– To use the rights and authorities remaining outside of the general responsibility of the
Naval Forces Command on seas where Turkey has sovereignty rights in accordance with the
national and international laws and regulations,
– To determine the principles and methods related to the prevention and monitoring of all
kinds of smuggling carried out by sea and to take the necessary procedures for those who are
guilty,
– To prevent and monitor smuggling, to prevent and monitor actions in violation of the laws
for the Military Restricted Zones and Security Regions, Territorial Waters, Preservation of
Historical Works, Cultural and Natural Resources, Cabotage, Protection of Life and Property
on the Sea, Aquaculture Products, Commerce, Customs, Radio, the Turkish Flag, Passport,
Encouragement of Tourism, General Public Health and Environment; to apprehend the
culprits, to perform the necessary procedures and to deliver the persons apprehended and the
instruments of crime to the judicial authorities,
– To take the necessary measures for the untended mines, explosives and suspicious
materials observed in the sea and on the shores and to convey them to the related authorities,


-----

– To investigate the working conditions of the marine navigational aids and to convey
the troubles observed to the related authorities,
– To confiscate the weapons and ammunitions of the refugees who enter Turkish
territorial waters and to deliver these to the related authorities,
– To perform search and rescue duties under the coordination of the Undersecretariat of
Maritime Affairs, within the principles specified in the International Agreement on Search
and Rescue at Seas and the National Search and Rescue Regulations and
– To provide the protection of the industrial complexes having strategic importance
against threats that could come from the sea, to participate in training and exercises planned
by the Naval Forces Command, to provide for maritime security in the firings performed in
marine areas by the Land and Air Forces, to perform the search and rescue duties in missions
performed on the sea by the Air Forces Command and to perform escort functions for the
national/international yacht races organized by the yacht clubs in Turkey.
Organization:
The Coast Guard Command is within the staff and organization of the Turkish Armed
Forces and is connected to the Ministry of Internal Affairs from the aspect of duties and
services in peacetime. Upon the request of the Turkish General Staff, to enter under the
command of the Naval Forces Command, as a whole or partly, during periods of state of
emergency or crisis, and as a whole during wartime.
The organizational chart of the Coast Guard Command is given below. Besides this,
there are three Group Commands each connected to the Regional Commands and 70 Coast
Guard Boats of various sizes are extensively deployed at the coasts and ports in Turkey and
26 Control Boats and Repair Support and Supply Support Commands which provide logistics
and technical support for these boats.
Personnel:
Military Personnel: 2,200
Civilian Personnel: 460
Of the CG personnel, officers, noncommissioned officers and sergeants, corporals and
privates are supplied from the Naval Forces resources; civilian servants and workers are
supplied from civilian sources. The training of the personnel is provided at the CG Training
Center in Antalya, by having them attend various courses organized related to the CG duties
and activities.
Relations Abroad:
Joint activities are being carried out in the framework of bilateral agreements with the
Coast Guard units of the neighboring countries of Bulgaria, Romania, the Ukraine, Russia and
Georgia, in connection with CG duties, and particularly, to prevent sea pollution, to provide
security of life and property on the sea, to fight against smuggling and terrorism and the
control of Exclusive Economic Zones. Furthermore, cooperation is made on Coast Guard
subjects with the CG organization of the United States.
Future Objectives:
Projects have been started on the subject of modern, high speed and large tonnage
coast guard boats, search and rescue helicopters and aircraft and command control and
computer supported communications systems that are the greatest factor in saving human
lives, within the next ten year period in the framework of the important modernization
requirements, necessitated by the CG duties.


-----

**PART SIX**

**CIVIL-MILITARY COOPERATION**

**SECTION ONE**

**CIVIL-MILITARY COOPERATION**

Targets:
– To continue the functions of the government in times of crisis and war;
– To perpetuate the social and economic life;
– To provide for the protection of the people against the threats and risks stemming from
war and disasters;
– To facilitate reconstructing after attacks;
– To contribute to the efforts of NATO/European-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC)
continued at an international level; and
– To provide for the rehabilitation of the disaster regions.
Areas of Activity:
In natural disasters, such as earthquakes, floods, avalanches, landslides and large fires,
the civilian sector will be supported by the military sector. In case of mobilization or war, the
military sector will be supported by the civilian sector. At times of crisis and war, all kinds of
communications and transport equipment belonging to the public and private organizations
can be given to the operations control of the Turkish Armed Forces (TAF), with a decision of
the Council of Ministers, if needed.
This cooperation between the civilian and military sectors, includes various fields
extending from the local to central authority. The civilian-military fields of cooperation in
Turkey are given below:
– The preparation of plans, procedures and principles related to mobilization and
preparation for war,
– The determination of priorities in the planning of the national resources related to the
needs of the Armed Forces, public, private sector and the people,
– The utilization of civilian and military resources and services, such as food,
agriculture, industry, energy, transport, communications, health and manpower,
– The support of military preparations and operations,
– Taking necessary measures against an enemy attack or disasters on the subjects which
enter into the area of civil defense, such as protection of the people including the subjects of
warning, determining and alarm, population movements, search and rescue, medical services,
temporary shelter and the distribution of basic necessities such as food and clothing,
– The identification of vulnarable regions or facilities that might be subject to enemy
threats, including security regions and military restricted zones and security zones,
– The taking of the necessary measures related to various security subjects and internal
turmoils,
– The making of the necessary arrangements for providing the public with information
on training and exercises and
– Coordination of civil military cooperation and NATO Civil Emergency Planning.
The Civil-Military Cooperation Legislation and Regulations:


-----

Comprehensive and various administrative and legal instruments exist in Turkey
authorizing the national authorities to carry out activities related to civilian state of emergency
in crises and war, including peacetime and to constitute an effective mechanism on these
subjects. The important national legislation and regulations within this framework are stated
below:
– Law and Regulations on Mobilization and State of War,
– Directive on Mobilization and Preparations for War,
– Law on National Preservation,
– Law on the National Defense Obligation,
– Emergency State Law and regulations, instructions based on this law,
– National Security Council and the General Secretariat of the National Security Council
Law and Regulations,
– Civilian Defense Law,
– Law Related to How to Perform Transport and Communications Services in States of
Emergency and War,
– National Alarm System Circular,
– Prime Ministry Crisis Management Center Regulations,
– Law Related to the Measures to be Taken and Aids to be Given Due to Disasters that
Influence Public Life,
– Provincial Administration Law,
– Martial Law,
– Law for the Protection Against Overflowing Rivers and Floods,
– Regulations Related to the Principles of Emergency Aid and Planning Related to
Disasters,
– Circular Related to NATO Civilian State of Emergency Planning Activities and
– Law and Regulations related to War Industry Activities.
The civilian state of emergency legislation mentioned above, also regulates civilmilitary cooperation subjects besides the civilian state of emergency activities to be carried
out in periods of peace, crisis and war. A decree in the legislation also specifies the necessity
of coordination based on cooperation between the civilian and military authorities.


-----

**SECTION TWO**

**CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TURKISH ARMED**
**FORCES TO THE LIFE OF THE SOCIETY**

Forestation Activities:
The Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) has the objective of the protection and improvement
of the environment, which is the common property of humans. The fight against erosion is
one of the more important methods of environmental protection. With the awareness of this,
the TAF continues the planned forestation activities throughout the country, by giving priority
to the land allocated to it. On this matter, it provides support, to the extent possible, to the
projects prepared by the civilian institutions and organizations.
The TAF plants an average of 3 million saplings per annum on the lands allocated to
it. In addition, up until the present, close to a total of 1.5 million trees have been planted on an
area of over 10,000 dönüm (1 dönüm=1,000 square meters) within the scope of the
"Mehmetçik (affectionate name given to the Turkish soldiers) Forest" in cooperation with the
Ministry of Forestry on lands outside the barracks.
The TAF provides support, within its means, to the forestation projects organized by
the civilian institutions and organizations. With the "Hand in Hand With the Mehmetçik and
University Youth Project", which is the largest winter youth camp up until the present and
organized in Adiyaman Province between 5-21 November 1999, throughout the GAP
(Southeastern Anatolia Project) Region Afforestation Campaign a total of 2,500,000 saplings
and 300,000 oak acorns were planted in the region. The TAF is aware of the dangers to which
Turkey is subjected on the subject of erosion and will continue and increase the support it
gives to the fight against erosion.

The Fight Against Forest Fires:
The initial fight in forest fires is made by the workers and personnel in the forestry
organization responsible for fighting against forest fires. If these components are insufficient,
then assistance is requested from the military units by the civilian state authorities.
The units assigned duties in the extinguishing of forest fires perform these duties in
accordance with the instructions previously prepared on the subjects of training, organization,
equipment, supply, feeding, health, security and coordination in order to safely succeed in
performing these duties. In this framework, the military units join in almost all of the forest
fire extinguishing activities.
The Fight Against Sea Pollution:
Various measures are being taken by the Naval Forces Command:
– By constructing/allocating new sea sweepers at the bases and ports in its structure,
– By producing/installing biological purification systems for neutralizing wastes in the
ships newly constructed/to be constructed and the ships presently in its inventory,
– By establishing shore bilge and household waste purification facilities at the main
bases and


-----

– By preventing the spread of oil spills and fires which could break out at sea with the
fire/oil barriers that are procured and allocated.
Aid in Natural Disasters:
When a natural disaster occurs, the TAF mobilizes all of its resources and performs
aid activities in coordination with the civilian state authorities. Turkey has been divided under
the area of responsibility of 17 Disaster Regional Commands and based on the request of the
civilian state authorities, it is specified in the Emergency Aid Plans, where and how which
military unit will be utilized.
The Turkish General Staff and the Force Commands activated the Natural Disaster
Evaluation and Coordination Centers in a very short period of time after the Marmara
earthquake on 17 August 1999 and the Düzce earthquake on 12 November 1999 and rapidly
sent the related units to the disaster regions. The components of the Turkish Armed Forces,
while continuing the search, rescue and evacuation activities, also provided the necessary
support to meet the security, health, housing, feeding and transportation needs of the people in
the region.
More than 64,000 TAF personnel were assigned to the search, rescue and aid activities
in the earthquake regions.
A satellite terminal system and mobile communications equipment were sent to the
region to meet the communication needs in the disaster region.
Logistic Support Coordination Centers were established in coordination with the
civilian state authorities in regions where needed for the effective and coordinated distribution
of the aid materials.
The sick and wounded disaster victims were evacuated by air or on land to the
stationary or mobile hospitals. Two mobile surgical hospitals of the TAF have performed
duties in the region.
Twelve tent cities were set up and operated for providing temporary housing for the
people. Various social facilities and units were established and operated at the tent cities
established by the TAF, such as laundry rooms, baths, infirmaries, canteens, etc. so that the
disaster victims could return to normal life. Furthermore, the TAF components also provided
support to activities for the establishment of 41,000 tents and 224 tent cities in the earthquake
region. The TAF also provided help to people suffering from the earthquake which occurred
in Çankiri on 6 June 2000.
The TAF Natural Disasters Search/Rescue (NSR) Unit has been established by the
Turkish General Staff for performing search and rescue activities in the disaster regions for
natural disasters such as earthquakes, fires, floods, avalanches and chemical/biological
leakages. This unit is at the level of a battalion and trained and equipped at international
standards.
The NSR Teams are equipped with the most modern advanced technology equipment
and materials in order to be able to perform effectively the search and rescue duties given to
them.
The Natural Disasters Search/Rescue Battalion will perform all kinds of search and
rescue duties given to it in Turkey and abroad.
Public Relations and Village Support Applications:
The "Hand in Hand with the Citizens and Mehmetçik" campaigns were started for the
peace and happiness of the people in the region in the fight against terrorism, which has
continued for 16 years. In 1999 in the region, within the scope of these activities, health and
veterinary services were provided, vaccination campaigns were organized, schools and roads
were repaired and water and electric networks were renewed.
With the Army-Nation Hand in Hand Campaign, medicines, clothing, shoes,
stationery and educational aid materials were distributed.


-----

Furthermore, the campaigns, "Let My Kirve be Mehmetçik" (at the circumcision
ceremonies) and "Let My Wedding Witness be Mehmetçik" are continuing. In the scope of
these campaigns, in 1999 a total of 4,317 boys were circumcised and 1,180 couples were
officially married.
A total of 551 students were given university preparatory courses and 60 percent of
these students were successful in the university entrance examinations.
On the other hand, some new applications have been started in 2000.
During the semester break in February 2000, 180 successful students from the schools
in the Southeastern region were sent to Ankara and Istanbul as guests and given the
opportunity to get acquainted with these cities.
These applications are continued in the Southeastern region for students from primary
education schools and high schools and the folk dance groups from various provinces and
counties exchanged visits and performances on 23 April (National Sovereignty and Children's
Holiday) and 19 May (Remembrance of Atatürk, Youth and Sports Holiday). With the mutual
visits of the chambers of industry and commerce and other professional groups in the scope of
these activities, it was aimed to bring people closer together and increase cooperation.
Initially, successful students were sent to Iskenderun and Mersin on 23 April and they
participated in the 23 April Festivities in these cities.
During April the "University Youth and Mehmetçik Hand in Hand" tree planting
festivities were held at the Inönü University in the Malatya region, the Çukurova University
in the Adana region, the 100. Yil University in the Van region and the Dicle University in the
Diyarbakir region.
In the autumn of 2000, the scope of the afforestation activities will be expanded with
the participation of the Ankara and Istanbul Universities, in addition to the regional
universities.
It has been planned to teach literacy courses to 100,000 persons due to the fact that the
year 2000 is the education mobilization year. Within this scope, the teaching of literacy
courses is continuing at the provincial and county centers as well as in the villages and is
especially directed at women. Furthermore, in 17 centers, 1,505 students have attended
university preparatory courses, 1,216 students have attended computer courses and 980
students have attended foreign language courses. These activities will be supported by sports
courses and other courses. Thus, it is hoped that the problems of the people living in the
region will be lessened to a certain extent and that they will look to the future with
confidence.
Sports:
Military personnel, who are always required to provide service with superior efforts
and the will to work in both peacetime and wartime, for carrying out their duties in the best
manner is dependent upon them having a superior physical capacity and mental performance,
besides knowing all of their duties very well. Physical capacity is the greatest factor that will
decrease the negative effects produced by war on their physical and mental power. The
viewpoint of the TAF on sports should be evaluated within this general framework.
Military High Schools:
All the military high schools, with various sports teams formed within their structures,
participate in sport competitions in the youth and young star categories in the competitions
among the equivalent schools connected to the Ministry of National Education and the
federations connected to the General Directorate of Youth and Sports. Every year the Military
High School Championships are organized with the aim of becoming acquainted, getting
closer and solidarity among the Military High Schools.
Military Sports Teams:


-----

The Military Sports Teams are amateur sports clubs established within the structure of
the Force Commands and the Gendarmerie General Command. The Military Sports Teams,
that are named after the force to which they belong and the name of the city where they are
established, participated in competitions organized by the General Directorate of Youth and
Sports, Independent Federations, the National Olympic Committee of Turkey, the Turkish
Aviation Institution and the Private Sports Organizations.
The Results Obtained by the Military Sports Teams in their Branches:
International Military Sports Council (CISM) Activities:
The places obtained by the TAF teams at the "Second World Military Games" organized
between 6-18 August 1999 in Croatia are summarized below:
– Track and Field Events:
World sixth place in the 4 x 100 relay race,
World seventh place in the 4 x 400 relay race,
– Wrestling:
World third place among 27 countries as a team,
World second place in the 130 kg free-style,
– Military Pentathlon:
World first place in the Men's relay team race,
– Naval Pentathlon:
Mens's world first place and women's world second place on the agility course,
– Handball:
World fourth place as a team,
– Boxing:
World third place for 91 kg category,
Air Force Pentathlon:
The world first place was obtained in the branch of basketball by the TAF Air Force
Pentathlon Team at the 43rd CISM Air Force Pentathlon World Championship held in Spain
between 16-24 July 1999.
Parachuting:
The world first place was obtained in the target jump branch by the TAF Parachuting
Team at the CISM International Parachuting Championship held in Spain between 14-23 May
1999.
Other International Competitions:
Marksmanship:
The Balkans second place in rifles, for adults at the Air Gun Balkans Championship.
Horseback Riding:
The TAF Horseback Riding Team received the first place in the Samsung Nations
Cup, individual second and third place and the first place at the Federation of International
Equestrians (FIE) Class Golf and Country International Hurdle Race.
Acroteam Squadron-Türk Yildizlari (Turkish Stars):
They represent Turkey by realizing their shows in Turkey and abroad with seven each
NF-5 A/B aircraft. They are one of the rare acroteams in the world which make their shows in
supersonic aircraft.
Military Museums:
The TAF has an established historical past and exhibits for visitors the documents and
objects related to the accumulation of military history at the museums, it has opened
throughout Turkey. The works, war weapons and equipment displayed in the museums,
besides increasing the knowledge of the younger generations on military subjects, also sets
forth the depth of the Turkish Military Culture.


-----

In this framework, examples of various objects, war weapons and equipment that
reflect the establishment and development of the TAF are exhibited at the Harbiye Military
Museum, the Naval Museum and the Aviation Museum in Istanbul; the TCG Gayret Museum
in Izmit; the Naval Museum in Gölcük; the Aviation Museum and the Gendarmerie Museum
in Ankara.
General Command of Mapping:
The General Command of Mapping, which has been providing great services for
Turkish Cartography since 1895, has met the requirements for all kinds of defense and
development purpose maps and cartographical information.
As of the present, the Mapping General Command, with its existing software,
hardware and trained personnel, has the accumulation of knowledge and potential to be able
to provide geographical support at the most advanced level in accordance with technological
requirements of the period for the modern weapons systems that have entered into the TAF
inventory and the various projects started and the requirements of the public institutions and
organizations.
The most recent example of these activities carried out by the Mapping General
Command is the "National Earthquake Program", related to the Marmara Earthquake and
prepared by the National Geodesy and Geophysics Union of Turkey (NGGUT), of which the
Mapping General Command acted as the Chairmanship of the Representative Institution. The
subject program in summary includes the activities envisaged to be made on the subjects
given below:
– Determination of the extensions on land and under the sea of the live fault lines in the
Marmara Region,
– Determination of the seismic activities in Turkey and the Marmara Region (Seismic
Networks, Seismic Refractions and Reflection Activities),
– Determination of the crust model in Turkey and the Marmara Sea,
– Determination of the deformations formed during and after an earthquake and the
deformations formed in the basic geodesic networks,
– Making bathymetric, gravity and magnetic measurements required in the Marmara Sea
and
– Preparation of micro-regionalization maps showing the foundation types and
characteristics of the settlement areas, starting from the Marmara Region, which is considered
to be a pilot region.
The Mapping General Command, with the objective of increasing the combat
effectiveness of the TAF and of being able to perform rapidly and easily in a digital
environment all applications made on classical maps by units and headquarters at every level,
including the company level, has realized the "Turkish Armed Forces Digital Map Supported
Military Applications (TAF-DMSMA) Project" and presented them for the utilization of the
TAF.
With this project, in parallel with the developing technology and the advanced
technology products of weapons and equipment, in the use of maps and cartographic data,
which is gradually increasing and becoming widespread in the TAF:
– A standard digital map and data set for raster maps, vector maps, altitude data and
names of locations, and
– A standard user software including the capabilities needed in military applications
using digital cartographic data
will be provided.
The product is composed of two basic components, the digital cartographic data and
user software and in the scope of the digital data component:
– Raster Maps,


-----

– Digital Land Models,
– Settlement Area Data,
– Vector Maps and
– Land Analysis Data
are presented to the user by being compressed on Compact Disks (CD) or on Digital Video
Disks (DVD).
With this project, it is also aimed to provide digital cartographic support for many
projects, such as the TAF Command Control Information System and the Computer
Supported Image Evaluation System, being carried out in the Turkish Armed Forces.
Navigation, Hydrography and Oceanography Department Chairmanship:
The duties of the Navigation, Hydrography and Oceanography Department
Chairmanship, which performs the navigational, hydrographic and oceanographic services
required by the Naval Forces Command and the civilian organizations are as follows:
– To produce all kinds of naval maps and nautical publications to provide for the
navigational safety and facility of the Turkish warships and commercial ships,
– To perform the oceanographic, hydrographic and geophysical research and activities
that will increase the above water and under water combat adequacy of the Navy,
– To provide seamen with information in various media in the cartographic and nautical
publications on the changes and temporary dangers,
– To present the information having economic and academic benefits obtained from the
activities and research made for the use of the Naval Forces Command and its subordinate
commands and the other related state organizations,
– To perform the services necessitated by the organizations, such as NATO, the
International Hydrography Organization (IHO) and the Intergovernmental Oceanography
Commission (IOC) and
– To coordinate the activities related to Oceanography, Hydrography and Marine
Geophysics made in Turkey and to carry out the duties of the Information Center where the
information obtained from these studies will be collected and distributed.


-----

**PART SEVEN**

**PERSONNEL POLICY**

**SECTION ONE**

**PERSONNEL POLICY**

The Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) personnel system is the chain of activities carried
out for determining the most effective manpower structure and requirement for obtaining the
required personnel in the number and quality suitable for this structure, their training and
employment.
The manpower structure and needs are determined by the Turkish General Staff
according to the predetermined force structure.
The force structure policy of the TAF can be summarized in this manner, "Formation
of a modern and more professional force, fewer in number, but having greater operational
capability and fire power in order to be able to adapt to the rapid technological developments
in the 2000s."
Manpower Policy:
– Equality in Hiring:
Women are also hired in suitable status and branches according to their educational
background and physical capabilities.
– Professional Manpower:
By assigning specialist corporals and sergeants to duties requiring considerable
technical knowledge and expertise, the employment of temporary personnel is decreased and
thus, a professional structure is formed.
– Employment:
Modern management methods are applied to increase functional effectiveness and
productivity of the TAF. The personnel is employed according to the principle of "Personnel
According to the Job" and in the most suitable place of duty for their attributes.
– Motivation:
The personnel is motivated materially and spiritually to make him content with
himself, sure of his future and in a manner that will make him happy and proud to be a
member of the TAF.
– Civilian Personnel:
Civilian personnel are employed in social services and technical fields at the large
headquarters, such as the Ministry of National Defense, the Turkish General Staff and the
Force Commands to provide continuity in the places of duty not requiring the wearing of
uniforms.
– Priority to Combat Forces:
Priority is given in every field to the combat personnel/branches, which constitute the
backbone of the manpower structure.
Manpower Structure:
The following are the existing categories and statuses of the manpower structure:
– Category of Professional Personnel:

-  Officers,


-----

-  Noncommissioned Officers,

-  Specialist Gendarmes,

-  Specialist Sergeants and Corporals,

-  Civil Servants and

-  Workers.
– Category of Personnel Having Military Service Obligation:

-  Reserve Officers,

-  Short-term Sergeants and Corporals and

-  Sergeants, Corporals and Privates.
In the above classification, the uniformed personnel are included in the classification
system to form a hierarchical structure. The military hierarchy from the top going down is as
follows:
– Officers,
– Noncommissioned Officers,
– Specialist Gendarmes,
– Specialist Sergeants and Corporals and
– Sergeants, Corporals and Privates.
Minimum Service Obligation:
The minimum service obligation or the obligatory service, changes according to
category and status.
– Professionals:
Professionals are subject to obligatory service for the periods given below:

-  15 years for Officers and Noncommissioned Officers,

-  10 years for Specialist Gendarmes,

-  Specialist Sergeants and Corporals: 2 years for their first contracts and 1-5 years for
subsequent contracts and

-  There is no obligatory service for civil servants and workers.
– Those Who Have Military Service Obligations:
They are subject to minimum/obligatory service as follows:

-  16 months for Reserve Officers,

-  8 months for Short-term Sergeants and Corporals and

-  18 months for Sergeants, Corporals and Privates.
Sources of Professional Personnel:
Officer sources are the Academy graduates, the civilian personnel who are university
graduates in the fields for which the TAF has a need and the noncommissioned officers who
gain the right to become officers. Furthermore, the activities related to obtaining officers with
a contractual status are continuing.
Noncommissioned officer sources are the noncommissioned officer preparatory
school, high school, vocational school of higher education and faculty graduates and selected
specialist and regular sergeants and corporals.
Specialist gendarme sources are male citizens between the ages of 18-24 who have at
least a middle school diploma.
Specialist sergeant and corporal sources are those who have completed their regular
military service, who have been discharged a maximum of three years prior to applying and
who have at least a middle school diploma.
Civil servants and workers are obtained from civilian sources and are hired with a
centralized examination method when needed.
Promotion:
Promotions in the TAF are made according to the availability of the position. For
promotion to a higher rank, it is necessary:


-----

– To have sufficient positive points in the evaluation record,
– To have completed the minimum required service period at his rank,
– To have performed field service required for his rank and
– To have open positions in the next higher rank.
Within this framework, in order for a rank officer to be promoted to a higher rank, he
should have sufficient positive points among other equally ranking officers to qualify for a
vacant position in the next higher rank duty place. In present practice, it is envisaged that
qualified personnel having superior management capability are promoted to form a dynamic
management and command structure.
Waiting Periods for Ranks:
Officers
General/Admiral 4 years (at each rank)
Colonel 5 years
Lieutenant Colonel 3 years
Major 5 years
Captain 6 years
First Lieutenant 6 years
Lieutenant 3 years
Noncommissioned Officers
Senior Master Sergeant 6 years
Master Sergeant 6 years
Senior Sergeant
First Class 3 years
Sergeant First Class 3 years
Senior Sergeant 3 years
NCO Sergeant 3 years

Financial Subjects and Social Rights:
– Salaries:
The TAF personnel receive salaries in proportion to their duties and receive additional
support as well in the areas of health and social services.
– Social Security:
The basic organization in this field is the "Republic of Turkey Retirement Fund".
Military personnel and civil servants are members of this fund. The second organization, from
the aspect of social security, established by a special law solely for the TAF personnel, is the
Armed Forces Mutual Aid Institution. This institution provides legal aid and salaries to the
personnel when they retire, in return for the membership dues accumulated throughout the
period of their employment. Both organizations provide additional social securities and
assistance in case of death and disability.
– Housing:
Married professional personnel (excluding workers), who perform duties at the TAF
or bachelor personnel living together with relatives for whom they are legally obliged to care
for, can benefit from the military housing. Personnel who cannot benefit from the military
housing are given housing aid.
– Health Services:
Health services are provided for those recruited for military service during their period
of service and for professional personnel and their relatives for whom they are legally obliged
to care for, during their period of service and when they retire.
– Leave with Pay:


-----

Military personnel have the right to 45 days of annual leave with pay. The corporals,
sergeants and privates recruited for military service are given two days leave for every month
of service.
The annual leaves of civil servants who work at the TAF are determined according to
their periods of service. Civilian personnel who have 0-10 years of service use 20 days annual
leave and those who have 10 years or more service use 30 days annual leave.
– Resignation and Dismissal:
There are two ways for separating from service at the TAF. Personnel who have
completed their period of obligatory service can resign if they want or if they have acquired
the right to retire, then they may retire. Furthermore, discharge procedures are applied to
personnel who lose their attributes of staying at the TAF due to inadequacy and for
disciplinary reasons.


-----

**SECTION TWO**

**RECRUITMENT SYSTEM**

The Basic Recruitment policy is the recruitment of educated persons, who have the
best physical and mental capabilities for the Armed Forces. Article 72 of the Constitution of
the Republic of Turkey states the decree, "Service for the country is the right and duty of
every Turk. The manner in which the service shall be performed, or considered as performed,
either in the Armed Forces or in the public service shall be regulated by law."
The essential basic source is the male citizens, who are obliged to assume duties in the
defense of the country as required by the Constitution. Every Turkish citizen who reaches the
age of 20 and who is determined to be suitable for military service at the end of a health
examination, performs his military service according to one of the forms specified below
which is appropriate for his level of education:
– As a Reserve Officer,
– As a Sergeant, Corporal or Private for 8 months,
– As a Sergeant, Corporal or Private for 18 months,
– As a Teacher Reserve Officer or Private,
– As a Short-term Military Service by Payment in Foreign Currency for Exemption from
Full-term Military Service and
– As a Short-term Military Service by Payment for Exemption from Full-term Military
Service.
Practice of the Military Service as Reserve Officers and Sergeants, Corporals, Privates for 8
Months:
Those who are graduates of a four year or longer period school of higher education or
faculty perform their military service obligations as a reserve officer for 16 months or a
sergeant, corporal or private for 8 months. Those who are obliged for military service and
recruited as reserve officers are divided into three groups every year and are called up and
sent to branch schools by their military recruitment centers in March, July and November.
Medical doctors are called up and sent to branch schools by their military recruitment centers
in six groups every year.
Practice of the Military Service of Sergeants, Corporals and Privates for 18 Months:
Presently, those who are graduates of 2 and 3 year higher education schools and those
who enter into a lower educational group are benefitting from this status. They are recruited
and divided into four groups every year and called up in February, May, August and
November.
Practice of the Teacher Reserve Officers or Privates:
In case the TAF has more reserve officer candidates than it needs, then the reserve
officers and privates whose profession is teaching, if the Ministry of National Education
indicates a need and the Turkish General Staff deems this need to be appropriate, then they
are assigned as teachers under the orders of the Ministry of National Education after one
month and 10 days of basic military training.


-----

Practice of the Short-term Military Service by Payment in Foreign Currency for Exemption
from Full-term Military Service:
The practice of the short-term military service by payment in foreign currency for
exemption from full-term military service exists for those who have permission to live and
work abroad as workers or employers, who have lived abroad for a minimum of 3 years or
more and who want to benefit from this. Those obliged for military service who want to
benefit from this right, by paying 10,000 Deutsche Marks or by paying the equivalent
convertible foreign country currency up until the end of 38 years of age, undergo one month
of basic military training and are considered to have completed their military service. The real
purpose of the military service by paying foreign currency is to prevent the Turkish citizens
living abroad from losing their jobs and the other rights they have, due to a long period of
military service.
Practice of Short-term Military Service by Payment for Exemption from Full-term Military
Service:
An opportunity was provided for those with military service obligations who were
born prior to 1 January 1973 and who have not yet started their military service, to pay 15,000
Deutsche Marks and undergo one month of basic military training or those who are 40 years
of age or older, to pay 20,000 Deutsche Marks and not undergo basic military training. This
arrangement was put into effect with the objective of providing contributions for the
elimination of the financial losses created by the earthquake that occurred in the Marmara
Region on 17 August 1999.


-----

**SECTION THREE**

**EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM**

Objectives and Principles:
The Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) has the objective of making contributions to
regional and world peace and stability. The TAF, with the awareness that it has "To Be
Always Ready for War" to preserve and develop peace and stability, gives importance to
training and exercises. Training in the TAF is planned and performed by taking into
consideration the experiences acquired in the operations carried out in the past, probable areas
of utilization of the TAF, joint training requirements in the scope of NATO and the various
risk factors in the region.
The TAF personnel are trained in a manner to be able to grasp the technological
developments and to be able to effectively use the superior technology products of weapons
and systems.
The TAF Training system has a structure parallel to the Turkish National Education
System and Turkish Higher Education System. The TAF training system is a trainingeducation system established with the objective of having the officers, noncommissioned
officers, civil servants, sergeants, corporals and privates acquire necessary capabilities for
performing the duties given to the TAF by the constitution and laws.
The training and education system of the TAF is a whole composed of two subsystems built on the trio of Training Center-School-Unit, which complement each other.
These subsystems are:

-  Individual training comprising the training of officers, noncommissioned officers, civil
servants, specialist gendarmes, specialist sergeants, corporals and regular sergeants, corporals
and privates,

-  Unit training preparing the units for combat.
Individual Training:
Training of Officers:
The source for the regular officers of the TAF are the Army, Navy and Air Force
Academies. In the Academies, regular officers are educated in a 4 year BS degree program.
The aim of the curriculum is to train the officers who will be able to apply at adequate level in
the tactical, technical and administrative activities of the Armed Forces, having military
discipline, sufficient general cultural, scientific and physical capabilities and having the
capacity to pursue specialization education and training in subsequent stages.
As of the 1992 school year, female students are also being educated at the war schools.
Education is provided at the academies at the BS level in the following main scientific
branches:
– "System Engineering" at the Army Academy,
– Industrial, Electrical/Electronic, Computer, Shipbuilding and Mechanical Engineering
at the Naval Academy and
– Aviation, Electronics, Computer and Industrial Engineering at the Air Force Academy.


-----

The professional specialization training for the officers after graduating from the
academies with the rank of lieutenant, and army and air force, ensign in navy is given in the
branch schools. Training periods vary between nine months and two years. At these schools
the officers are trained to be unit commanders, small unit/ship commanders, branch officers
and pilot candidates.
The officers continue their training after they are assigned to units, headquarters and
institutions as on-the-job training, through scheduled courses organized by the Force
Commands.
Universities included in the Turkish Higher Education System are also utilized for
training personnel for the TAF. In the Armed Forces, especially in technical fields, officers
who are university graduates are also employed.
Another higher education institution in the structure of TAF is the Gülhane Military
Medical Academy (GATA). The GATA trains medical doctors and health personnel for the
TAF.
War Colleges are the institutions providing training and education at the highest level
for officers, within the framework of the Great Leader Atatürk's statement, "The power of an
army is measured with the value of its commander and officers."
War Colleges are scientific and specialization organizations in the organization of the
Turkish General Staff providing training and education at an advanced level. They train staff
officers having the attributes of a commander and a staff officer and train the staff officers for
the management of the activities of the joint headquarters and units. The Academies train high
level officials working in the Armed Forces, in public administration, and when necessary,
those working in the private sector, to have them acquire knowledge and capability on the
subjects of national security. Specifically, they are organizations also carrying out research
and development on strategic subjects. The War Colleges are composed of the following:

-  National Security College,

-  Armed Forces College,

-  Army War College,

-  Navy War College and

-  Air Force War College.
All officers who are graduates of the Academies and have a perfect record of duty and
professional success have the right to enter the entrance examinations for the Force War
Colleges, for a maximum of six times. The student officers who pass the examinations attend
pre-college preparatory courses first at the branch schools of their force and then at the War
Colleges and thus they acquire the background needed for further education at the War
Colleges. The personnel, who complete the subject pre-college preparatory courses
successfully, are accepted in the Force War Colleges as a staff officer candidate. Later, the
officers completing the 2-year training, graduate as staff officers with the approval of the
Turkish General Staff.
The duties of the Army, Navy and Air War Colleges are to train staff officers who
have completely adopted the pro-Atatürk views, who have the attributes of a commander and
knowledge of headquarters techniques and whose judgmental and planning capability is
developed, who have the capability for finding suitable type of operations, reaching correct
decisions and applying the decisions reached most effectively, especially in the fields of
military activities.
The function of the Armed Forces College is to provide training and education for the
staff officers for planning, orientation and control techniques at the level of joint and
combined headquarters and units and to manage the activities of these headquarters and units.
As for the function of the National Security College, it is to provide the high level
officials who are working or candidates for working in the Armed Forces, those working in


-----

public institutions and organizations and when necessary in the private sector, with the
acquirement of knowledge and capability on national security subjects.
Training of Noncommissioned Officers:
The noncommissioned officers receive combat, technical and administrative branch
training. The training of the combat noncommissioned officers is given at the three year
noncommissioned officers preparatory school at the high school level and also in the form of
courses. The training of the noncommissioned officers in technical branches is provided in
technical schools related to their branches.
The noncommissioned officer candidates who are high school graduates receive one
year branch school education and subsequently are assigned to their place of duty with the
rank of NCO Sergeant.
Training of Reserve Officers, Specialist Sergeants, Corporals, Regular Sergeants, Corporals
and Privates:
The reserve officer candidates, after completing basic training for 4-16 weeks
depending on their branches, start working at their assigned posts with the rank of Third
Lieutenant.
Specialist sergeants and corporals are given expert sergeant and corporal training at
Branch Schools and Training Centers. The specialist sergeants and corporals who join their
units without receiving this training, are provided with on-the-job training at their units.
Sergeants, corporals and privates receive basic military training for 4-10 weeks and
subsequently they are sent to their own units for 15 month service.
Field Training:
Extensive training activities from individual training to common/joint training in the
field are carried out at the level of units.
Officers, noncommissioned officers and sergeants, corporals and privates who are
assigned to field units are once again given the individual training subjects which are taught at
schools and their combat training capabilities are developed through exercises. These
exercises include many common combat training possibilities.
Furthermore, there are training commands in every force command to form the
necessary infrastructure to establish and prepare for war the TAF of the future, and to develop
doctrines, training, leaders, organization, materials and soldiers with the objective of attaining
perfection to be successful in combat.
Military Training Cooperation:
As of 1999, the TAF has signed military training agreements with a total of 38
countries. Besides, there is NATO/SOFA Agreement (Status of Forces Agreement among
countries which are a party to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization), which provides mutual
education and training opportunities between Turkey and NATO.
Within the framework of these agreements, a total of 1,423 military personnel from 27
countries have been trained at various training centers of the TAF during the 1999-2000
training and education period. The activities for sending a number of military personnel of the
TAF to friendly and allied countries for training and education is continuing.
The training and cooperation activities carried out besides exchange of personnel are
determined by the annual application plans. Application plans have been made with 30
countries in 2000. The activities included in the application plans mostly cover the exchange
of information and experience, military visits, sending observers to exercises, on-the-job
training, providing at-site training support and joint exercises.
Exercises:
Joint and combined exercises are organized with the objective of joint orientation and
coordination of the combat forces and efforts of the Land, Naval and Air Forces, testing the


-----

weapons systems in an environment close to combat conditions as the main target of "To Be
Ready for War".
In these exercises, the orientation of the combat forces and efforts in the dual or triple
forces in the joint and combined operations, that are the main target of contemporary
management, the coordination and integration of the procedures and systems are tested and
new systems and tactics are developed within the framework of the resulting needs.
The training of the commanders, leaders, headquarters officers and those in units, who
will perform duties in the combined and joint operations environment, is considered in the
exercises carried out, by taking into account the dimensions that will be introduced into the
combat field by the technological developments in the future. Activities are being carried out
for the purpose of the testing of the command and control, communications, computer and
intelligence (C4I) systems and increasing their effectiveness.
In recent years, the events experienced in the region where the Republic of Turkey is
located and the geopolitical conditions have increased the importance of the exercises.
The NATO Exercises, the Partnership for Peace (PfP) Exercises and the exercises
carried out with some other countries at the bilateral/multilateral level are also considered to
be an important means in the development of political and economic relations, besides
helping the development of peace among countries.
The Turkish Armed Forces Partnership for Peace Training Center (PfPTC):
The Partnership for Peace Training Center (PfPTC) was opened in Ankara on 29 June
1998 and started activities in the structure of the TAF with the purpose of gaining depth to the
relations with the PfP countries, developing cooperation of these countries with NATO and
within this scope, contributing to the formation of a more effective regional security belt. At
the PfPTC, activities are carried out such as courses, seminars, meetings, etc. in the direction
of the "Common Interoperability Goals".
In the PfPTC activities, having the Turkish personnel, who have experience in NATO
and Peace Support Operations as well as the experts and speakers from NATO countries and
other international organizations giving courses, conferences and briefings and their active
participation in meetings and seminars is provided. A total of 1,057 people from 37
NATO/PfP counties have attended 58 courses given since its opening up until the present. In
these courses, a total of 448 teaching staff performed duties, with 292 from Turkey and 156
from other countries. The activities given below are also carried out by the PfPTC in addition
to giving courses:
– It hosted the meeting of NATO Logistic Coordination Committee Training Group in
Ankara between 21-24 September 1998.
– It participates in the meetings of NATO Training Group and conveys its experiences
and views on the PfP Training programs. The 1999 Spring meeting of NATO Training Group
was held under the coordination of the PfPTC in Istanbul between 17-21 May 1999.
– It has started close cooperation with the UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO). The 1999 UN "Training Assistants Team Seminar" was held at the PfPTC between
2-10 June 1999.
– It cooperates with the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) and
the International Organization of Refugees (IOR) in many of the PfPTC courses.
– The Swedish Peace Force Operations Training Center (SWEDINT) sends experienced
speakers to the PfPTC courses. Furthermore, cooperation is made on the subjects of PfP
training with similar organizations and schools in the world.
– It is planned to open the Tactical Civilian-Military Course of NATO School (SHAPE,
Oberammergau) at the PfPTC.


-----

The courses are generally held for a period of 1-3 weeks and teaching staff from the
other organizations in Turkey and abroad are invited, especially for the courses at the
operative/tactical levels.
It has been planned to open a total of 65 courses in 2001 and it is expected that around
2,000 personnel will participate in these courses.


-----

**SECTION FOUR**

**HEALTH SERVICES**

The Main Objectives of the Turkish Armed Forces
on Health Subjects:
The main objectives of the Turkish Armed Forces on health services is in peacetime to
preserve and improve first of all the environmental, spiritual and physical health of the TAF
personnel, retired and war victims themselves and the dependent family members, widows
and orphans of these and the dependent family members, widows and orphans of those who
died in wars; to treat rapidly and in the best manner possible the personnel who become ill
and to rehabilitate and provide for their returning to their duties as soon as possible; to train
the health personnel and assistant health personnel for the needs of the TAF, according to
peacetime and wartime conditions.
In war and emergency conditions, in addition to their peacetime duties, to establish
and operate an effective medical evacuation and treatment system and to provide for the rapid
transfer of patients to regions at the rear of the combat area, whose treatment would take a
long period of time.
The health services of the TAF are carried out according to the Internal Services Law
No. 211. The TAF has 42 Military Hospitals distributed throughout Turkey. Furthermore,
there are also many health institutions and organizations in the TAF, besides the hospitals.
The "TAF Rehabilitation and Treatment Center" has been established with the objective of
rehabilitating the Turkish soldiers who have become war veterans and to provide for their
lifelong care, if necessary.
The TAF Treatment Units are Listed Functionally as follows:
– Troop Physician Offices,
– Infirmaries,
– Dispensaries,
– Area Support Hospitals,
– Central and Special Branch Hospitals and
– Scientific and Medical Centers.
All the health institutions and organizations connected to the TAF provide services
with modern medical resources. The persons entitled to treatment and whose conditions are
determined with Health Committee Reports, but who cannot be treated in Turkey, can be
treated in foreign countries provided that they pay a 10 percent contribution for their
treatment expenses abroad and the rest of the expenses are paid by the Ministry of National
Defense or the Gendarmerie General Command.
No contributions are collected for travel expenses and from sergeants, corporals and
privates who are sent abroad for treatment in accordance with the decrees of the Fight Against
Terrorism Law No. 3713 and from the legal heirs of those who die.
A total of 20 percent of the cost of medicine for officers, noncommissioned officers,
specialist gendarmes and specialist sergeants, corporals and their dependents are paid by the
health insurance card holder and 10 percent of the cost for personnel who are retired from the


-----

TAF and their dependents, widows and orphans are paid by the health insurance card holder.
No contribution is collected from war veterans. Civilian citizens can also benefit from
military hospitals in the framework of certain methods and principles. Foreign civilian and
military patients can benefit from the military health services under the coordination of the
Turkish General Staff.
The TAF obtains a portion of its needs for medicine from the Ministry of National
Defense Pharmaceutical Plant and through it, also contributes to the production of medicine
and dressing materials in Turkey. Furthermore, antidotes, which are not produced in the
civilian pharmaceutical industry, and are used for treatment against some chemical gases, are
produced at the pharmaceutical plant. This production is made in conformity with hygienic
conditions.
The training of health personnel is made by benefitting from the resources of the
Gülhane Military Medical Academy (GATA) Command, the Land Forces Command Field
Health Service School and Training Center Command, the Land Forces Command Veterinary
Training Center and School Command and the universities and other military and civilian
organizations. Educational institutions in Turkey and abroad are also utilized on subjects for
which a need is felt.
The establishment of the TAF Health Information System has been started with the
purpose of continuing the military health services at the health organizations connected to the
TAF by utilizing computer technology.


-----

**SECTION FIVE**

**JUDICIAL SERVICES**

The judiciary has been separated into three, judicial, administrative and military, in the
1982 Constitution of the Republic of Turkey. The military judiciary is carried out by the
military courts and disciplinary courts. The military criminal judicial organs are the
disciplinary courts, which are the courts of first instance, the military courts and the Supreme
Court of Military Appeals, which is the court of last resort. There is also the administrative
judiciary within the military judiciary. In the Military Administrative judiciary, the first
instance and last resort judicial organ is the Supreme Military Administrative Court.
The basic principles related to the general judiciary, such as independence of the
courts, guarantee of the office of judges and prosecutors, that have been accepted for the
general judicial organs and its members and are also regulated in military legislation for the
military judicial organs and members, in parallel with the general decrees.
Disciplinary Courts:
Disciplinary courts were established by the Law No. 477 Concerning the
Establishment of Disciplinary Courts, Trial Procedures and Disciplinary Crimes and
Penalties.
The authority for establishment and annulment of these courts belongs to the Turkish
General Staff. The law made it mandatory to establish disciplinary courts at the regimental,
divisional and higher commands and in the organization of the Undersecretariat of the
Ministry of National Defense. The disciplinary courts are charged with the duty of handling
cases of military persons on a limited number of disciplinary crimes written in the law and
that is closely related to the discipline of the military unit. The authority of these courts is
limited as a rule by the staff and organization of commands or military institution chiefs and
of the Undersecretariat of the Ministry of National Defense. The disciplinary courts are
formed of three officers, consisting of one chief and two members. In the trials of
noncommissioned officers, sergeants, corporals and privates, one of the members is selected
from the noncommissioned officers.
In case a disciplinary crime is committed, then it is necessary to make an investigation
as soon as possible. Investigation is a procedure related to the collection of evidence,
investigation of the specific incident and obtaining the defense of the suspect. The hearings
are open as a rule. The disciplinary court can decide on the acquittal or conviction of the
suspect, dismissal of the case or nonjurisdiction or lack of jurisdiction of the court. Contesting
the decision is the only legal method open against the decisions of the disciplinary courts. The
extraordinary legal method is the written order method. It is necessary for a decision to be
made by the disciplinary court on the suspect within five months from the date a disciplinary
crime is committed. Otherwise, the case is dismissed due to the statute of limitations.
The immediate commanding officer, if he wants, can punish the suspect who commits
a disciplinary crime, with a disciplinary penalty, included in his own legal authorities.
Military Courts:


-----

Military courts are established by the Law No. 353 on the Establishment of Military
Courts and Trial Procedures.
The authority for the establishment and abolishment of these courts belongs to the
Ministry of National Defense. The law makes it mandatory to establish military courts in the
Corps, Army (an equivalent in the Navy and Air Force), Force Commands and the
organization of the Turkish General Staff. Furthermore, if deemed necessary by the Turkish
General Staff, the Ministry of National Defense can establish military courts or abolish those
already established at other unit commands and in the organization of military institution
directorates. The duties of the military courts are shown in Article 145 of the Constitution and
in Article 9 and subsequent articles in Law No. 353 on the Establishment of Military Courts
and Trial Procedures. According to these, the military courts are charged with the duty of
handling cases related to the military crimes committed by military personnel and the crimes
committed by those against military persons or at military locations or related to military
service and duties.
The military courts, as a rule, are formed of two military judges and one officer
member. In cases where there are 200 or more suspects, then it is formed of four military
judges and one officer member.
The authority of the military courts, as a rule, includes the persons under the
command, from the aspect of staff and organization, of the unit commander or the director of
the military institution, under whose organization the military courts are established and the
members of units or military institutions who are connected to them judicially. Presently, 37
military courts are performing duties.
Supreme Court of Military Appeals:
The Supreme Court of Military Appeals, which is the high court in the military
criminal judiciary, is a Constitutional organization. It is the court of last resort of the decisions
and judgments given at the military courts. Furthermore, it also handles certain cases specified
in the laws of military persons as the court of first instance and last resort.
The Supreme Court of Military Appeals was established by the Supreme Court of
Military Appeals Law No. 1600 according to the requirements of the operation, the
disciplinary and personnel matters of members, its duties, independence of the courts,
guarantees for judges and military services. The Supreme Court of Military Appeals is
composed of the Chairmanship, Chief Prosecutor's Office, Departments, Council of
Departments, General Assembly, Council of Chairmen, Supreme Disciplinary Council and
Service Units. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Military Appeals, the Second Chief
Justice, the Chief Prosecutor and all of the members are selected from among the first class
military judges who are members of the military judge branch. The general duties and
authorities of the Supreme Court of Military Appeals are shown in Article 16 of the law. In
this framework:
– It examines and decides on the unfinalized judgments and decisions given by the
military courts as the court of last resort,
– It provides uniformity in the application of the decrees of the law and legal rules in the
military criminal judiciary and when necessary, unifies the disputes in interpretation
appearing among the decisions and
– It tries the criminal cases related to personal crimes subject to the military judiciary of
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Military Appeals, the Chief Prosecutor, the Second
Chief Justice, department chairmen and members and also tries the restitution and damages
arising from the crimes along with these cases.
Supreme Military Administrative Court:
The Supreme Military Administrative Court, which is the first instance and last resort
court in the military administrative judiciary, is a Constitutional organization. The Supreme


-----

Military Administrative Court was established with the Supreme Military Administrative
Court Law No. 1602 according to the requirements of the independence of the courts,
guarantees for judges and military services.
The Supreme Military Administrative Court is composed of the Chairmanship, Chief
Prosecutor's Office, Departments, Council of Departments, Council of Chairmen, Supreme
Disciplinary Council, General Assembly, General Secretariat and Service Units.
The Supreme Military Administrative Court is charged with the duty of judicial
supervision as the first instance and final resort court for disputes resulting from the
administrative procedures and actions related to military people and military service, even if it
has been established by non-military authorities. This court also performs the duties specified
in other laws.
The Chief Justice of the Supreme Military Administrative Court, the Chief Prosecutor,
the General Secretary and the chairman of every department and four members are selected
from among the first class military judges.
The International Relations of the Military Judiciary:
There are one each judicial consulting office, military prosecutor's office and military
court in the military organizations at the corps and higher levels in the Turkish military
judicial organization. The military prosecutor's office and the military courts perform the
activities recognized for them by the laws. The judicial consultants are legal consultants of the
commanders.
There are military courts and disciplinary courts, which are Constitutional institutions,
within the borders of Turkey. One each disciplinary court has been established in the Kosovo
and Bosnia-Herzegovina units, which are performing duties within the scope of the
peacekeeping operations abroad.
Furthermore, in case individual petitions made to the European Court of Human
Rights are made by TAF personnel or on the subject of direct interest to the TAF, then the
defenses are prepared by the expert military judges in the Judicial Consultant's Office of the
Turkish General Staff.
Military judges give courses every year at the Partnership for Peace Training Center
(PfPTC) on the Armed Conflict Law to the participants coming from the PfP countries.
Furthermore, the Turkish military judges, who perform duties as assistant judicial
consultants, participate in the commissions based in particular on bilateral military training
and cooperation agreements between Turkey and the host countries.


-----

**PART EIGHT**

**MOBILIZATION SYSTEM AND POLICY**

Supporting rapidly the Turkish Armed Forces, when needed, from the aspect of
personnel, vehicles, goods and services constitute the basis of the mobilization policy and
system.
Developments in the world, new considerations in the strategic and tactical fields
necessitate that the Turkish Armed Forces have units which can act quickly and have high
operational capacity and fire power. Within the framework of the concepts developed for this
purpose, it becomes necessary to develop the mobilization system that would meet the
requirements of today and the needs of the Turkish Armed Forces.
The Mobilization System is built on two main components:
– Personnel Mobilization and
– Logistical Mobilization.
The Logistical Mobilization is composed of the following three main elements:
– Mobilization of Goods and Services,
– Mobilization of Vehicles and
– Mobilization of Industry.
The principles of the personnel mobilization are necessity, simplicity, correctness and
speed. The principle for the assignment of reserve officers in the initial period of their reserve
status is the method of assignment to their units, particularly to units already established and
of the more advanced ages of their reserve status by assignment to units to be established in
wartime called the "Regional Mobilization" method.
The purpose of the Mobilization of Goods and Services, Vehicles and Industry is to
meet the needs of the TAF for critical materials, food, beverages, vehicles and equipment
from domestic sources in campaigns and planning the domestic production of the materials
that are normally obtained from abroad, within the capacity and capabilities of the national
industry.
A mobilization film has been prepared and broadcast by the TRT 1 (Turkish Radio
and Television Institution) to inform and refresh the knowledge of the public. The activities
are continuing for broadcasting this film through other channels and inclusion in the TAF
radio and TV programs for the year 2000.
Training for Mobilization:
"Lightning" series mobilization exercises are performed every year for 9-15 days
according to the governmental decree, with the objective of providing for the adaptation of the
personnel, which have been discharged from service in peacetime, to the technological
developments and to their units; for testing the preparations for mobilization of the vehicles,
goods and services of the existing units and those to be established in wartime; and for
acquiring experience by applying these activities in peacetime.
Additionally, with the objective of providing for the adaptation of the working
personnel to their duties and to acquaint them with the mobilization activities, lectures are
given by the Mobilization Department of the Ministry of National Defense to the governors,
district governors, civil defense secretaries, civil defense experts and mobilization officials.


-----

Postponement Procedures:
When mobilization is announced, the critical personnel charged with wartime duties
working at public and private organizations, are subject to postponement procedures
according to the law and their mobilization duties can be postponed for two months. This can
be changed according to the requirements or can be canceled.
The Modernization in the System:
The transformation to full automation of the mobilization activities are continuing.
Within this scope, first of all the automation of the Mobilization Department of the Ministry
of National Defense has been completed. As of the year 2000, it will be provided that the
General Directorate of Security and the entire Recruitment Organization and the units and
institutes with mobilization numbers will be integrated with computer data lines.
The Mobilization Department is connected to the Internet and any citizen who wants
to contact the Mobilization Department can use the e-mail address of the department which is
(sefdbsk@arge.msb.mil.tr).
Activities are continuing for establishing an exercise under the name of Address
Exercise with the objective of reducing to a minimum the troubles and problems that could
arise in a real mobilization.
The "Immediate Notification Project" studies are continuing with the objective of
increasing the notification ratios of the Vehicle Wartime Duty Orders and for the persons
under obligation to find out whether or not their vehicles are included under the Wartime
Duty Order.
International Relations:
Technological developments are monitored closely by maintaining close relations with
the world and NATO countries and adapted to Turkey's mobilization system.
Between 1997-1999, high level officials from the United States, France, Italy, Israel,
Azerbaijan and the Ukraine have visited the Ministry of National Defense to exchange
information on the subjects of mobilization.
Furthermore, close contacts and cooperation are continuing with the National Reserve
Forces Committee (NFRC), Confederation Inter Officer Reserve (CIOR) and Confederation
Inter Officer Medical Reserve (CIOMR) organizations within NATO structure.


-----

**PART NINE**

**DEFENSE EXPENDITURES and FINANCIAL RESOURCES**

**THE PLANNING AND RESOURCES OF DEFENSE EXPENSES**

The Planning of Defense Expenses:
In Turkey, the determination of defense expenses and resources connected to it, are
carried out within the framework of the Planning, Programming and Budgeting System
(PPBS).
Planning is the process of determination of the medium-term (10 years) and long-term
(11-20 years) military strategy, strategic targets and force structure.
Programming is the process of making a project of the targets determined by planning
and showing how these targets will be realized on the basis of resources within a specified
time dimension.
Budgeting is the process of deciding where, for what purpose and how much will be
allocated in each specific budget year from the probable resource allocations specified in the
Ten Year Procurement Programs (TYPP).
When making an evaluation of the probable resources to be allocated to the Turkish
Armed Forces (TAF), it is evaluated what could be the dimensions of the resources that could
be allocated for defense expenses within the plan period in the framework of factors such as
general economic indicators, growth rate, foreign trade balance, price and cost increases,
foreign aid and loan possibilities, development plans, government program and the programs
and obligations in effect.
The Resources for Defense Expenses:
The resources of defense expenses and at the same time, the financial plan are
composed of:
– Allocated Resources from the National Defense Budget,
– Resources from the Defense Industry Support Fund (DISF),
– Resources from the TAF Strengthening Foundation (SF),
– Budget of the Gendarmerie General Command,
– Budget of the Coast Guard Command,
– Foreign State or Company Loans Repaid from the Budget of the Undersecretariat of
the Treasury and
– Revenues based on the Special Laws of the Ministry of National Defense.
Budget of the Ministry of National Defense:
The most important portion of the resources allocated to defense are constituted by the
budget of the Ministry of National Defense. Budget studies for the next year start in the first
half of the current year. In this framework, the "Price Determination and Actual Positions
Committee" is formed and a series of directives are published that explain the principles that
will be taken as the basis in the preparation of the budget.
The requirements are determined at the smallest unit level in accordance with the
PPBS. The draft budgets of the units prepared by taking the unit prices, actual positions, stock
levels and the costs of modernization projects as the basis, following the examination and


-----

arrangements in the Ministry of Defense, are sent to the Ministry of Finance every year at the
end of July as the budget proposal of the Ministry of National Defense, for the process of
examination to be made first at the Ministry of Finance and subsequently at the Parliament.
The budget is composed of four parts according to main service groups:
– Personnel Expenses,
– Other Current Expenses,
– Investments and
– Transfers.
Personnel Expenses:
It is composed of the personnel rights that are related directly to personnel and is
determined according to the related legislation.
Other Current Expenses:
It forms the most significant part of the budget. The modernization projects included
in the Strategic Target Plans (STP), allocations of funds for food and clothing of military
personnel determined in the laws, construction, building repairs, duty travel expenses, fuel,
electricity, water, natural gas, treatment and medication needs, fixed assets, stationery needs,
cargo and transportation services, procurement of spare parts are provided for in this main
service group. Although a significant part of the modernization expenses included in this
group are in the investment category in the economic field, they are accepted as current
expenses due to the fact that they are not subject to the supervision of the "State Planning
Organization (SPO)" according to the functional classification of the budget.
Investments:
These are composed of allocations subject of the approval of the SPO. Procurement of
vehicles, some construction projects and various renovation projects are included in its scope.
Transfers:
Transfers include membership dues to international organizations, nationalization,
payment of debts from previous years and social assistance to be made to various
associations, unions, institutions and organizations.
The Distribution of the Ministry of National Defense Budget:
The share of the Ministry of National Defense budget in the Gross National Product
(GNP) is an average of 2.5 percent and around 9.7 percent of the Consolidated Budget.
On the other hand, an average of 30 percent of the Ministry of National Defense
budget is allocated for personnel expenses, 68.9 percent for other current expenses and the
balance for investment and transfer expenses.
Modernization Expenses:
The duties of the TAF given to it by the Constitution and the laws, are discussed in
light of the military and political evaluations and Turkey's National Military Strategy
(TUNMS) and the TAF Joint Operational Concept are formed. The TUNMS and the TAF
Joint Operational Concept shed light on the medium and long-term Forces structure and
Modernization Plan.
The Planning and Programming Directive (PPD) is prepared in the direction of the targets
envisaged by the TUNMS. The PPD provides in a general sense clarification and orientation
on the subject of which of the medium and long-term needs can be met with the available
resources.
Force commands and other authorities having requirements prepare "Force Proposals"
specifying how much and within which time periods the necessary capabilities can be
acquired in the medium and long-term, provided that these are in the fields and criteria
specified in the PPD.
After these activities, the Strategic Target Plan (STP) is prepared setting forth the
targets of the TAF aimed to be reached on the subjects of the force structure of the TAF in the


-----

medium and long-term, the main systems required for this structure, preparedness for war and
maintaining operations and construction.
Within the framework of activities continued for the modernization and strengthening
of the TAF, the Financial Plan is prepared which is a main planning document covering the
general budget and non-budget resources likely to be allocated for the Armed Forces and
determining the principles and criteria related to the allocation and use of these resources.
The Financial Plan includes the probable allocation of the financial resources, on the
basis of the forces and functional expense groups, for the strengthening, modernization and
maintaining of the Armed Forces during the related plan period.
After the preparation of the STP, the TYPP is prepared based on this plan.This
program is a document including the allocation of resources for the capabilities desired to be
attained during the succeeding ten years, with the objective of reaching the force structure and
strength specified in the STP. It specifies the methods and principles related to the utilization
of financial resources envisaged to be obtained from various resources and constitutes the
basis in the preparation of the 10 year budgets. The current year programs of the 10 year
programs are started to be implemented after it has been brought to the level of resources
allocated by the budget and the budget is approved and spending authorization is obtained.
The programs started to be implemented are reviewed every three months and are subjected to
necessary revisions.
Use of Resources:
The main System Projects are realized by using procedures of:
– Domestic Research-Development (R&D),
– R&D in consortiums,
– Production in consortiums,
– Joint production in Turkey,
– Joint procurement through consortiums and
– By using domestic and foreign procurement.
The preliminary study concerning which of the main system projects needed should be
included in the STP and by which procedures they would be procured is made by the
Planning, Programming and Investigation Committee (PPIC). The procurement method is
determined according to the results of the research and evaluations to be made by the Ministry
of National Defense. In recent years, production through consortiums and domestic R&D
methods have gained a special importance.
Democratic Control of Defense Expenses:
In Turkey, the defense budget is subject to control and auditing in both the planning
stage and in the spending stage as is the case with other ministry budgets.
Within the framework of the PPBS, the preparation of budgets is one of the
responsibilities of the government. The Ministry of Finance assumes this responsibility on
behalf of the government and directs all kinds of budget activities. In order to provide
uniformity and standardization in the budgeting process, a series of directives and guidelines
are published by the Prime Ministry and Ministry of Finance, before starting the budget
studies for the following year related to the macro targets and principles related to the budget,
the measures to be taken and the technical data and restrictions to be observed. Just as it is at
every other ministry, the budget estimations of the Ministry of National Defense are also
collected from the subunits and evaluated in accordance with these essentials and principles
and then sent to the Ministry of Finance by the end of July as the budget proposal of the
Ministry of National Defense.
Following the preliminary evaluation of the "State Revenues Budget" prepared by the
Ministry of Finance and the "Expense Budgets" prepared by the ministries, these are


-----

discussed at the Supreme Planning Board and the first functional magnitudes of the budget
proposal are determined.
Budget proposals are discussed at the Council of Ministers, the Plan and Budget
Committee composed of expert members of parliament and at the General Assembly of the
Turkish Grand National Assembly (TGNA), in that order, and is accepted and goes into effect
as the Budget Law as of 1 January and starts to be implemented.
It is mandatory for the ministries to remain within the limits of the allocations made to
them. The Ministry of Finance, by freezing and releasing the allocations at certain limits, in
accordance with the monetary policy of the government; the auditing units of the Court of
Public Accounts, which is a financial supervisory organization, examine and approve whether
or not the allocations sent by the ministries to their own organizations are in accordance with
the Budget Law and controls the distribution of the allocations.
Additionally, the Ministry of Finance controls the payments and contracts by means of
an organization consisting of the personnel of the Ministry of Finance at all the ministries and
public organizations. The Court of Public Accounts organization, through its auditors, audits
on behalf of the TGNA, the proper use of all budget funds to ensure that they are used in
accordance with the laws. At the end of each financial year, the final accounts related to the
budget implementations are discussed in the TGNA. Furthermore, each ministry has auditing
organs within its own organization.


-----

**PART TEN**

**DEFENSE INDUSTRY POLICY and STRATEGY**

**SECTION ONE**

**THE PRINCIPLES OF THE DEFENSE INDUSTRY POLICY AND STRATEGY**

The Defense Industry Policy:
The Defense Industry policy envisages the formation of the infrastructure of a defense
industry that:
– Is open to the foreign sector as well as the domestic sector,
– Has an export potential and capability to compete internationally,
– Can produce new technology and has a dynamic structure,
– Makes it possible to have a balanced defense industry cooperation between Turkey
and other countries and is influenced to a minimum extent by the changing political
conditions and
– Can also engage in production for civilian purposes.
The Defense Industry Strategy:
The production of high technology war weapons and vehicles in Turkey with the
objective of meeting the needs of the Armed Forces reliably and with stability for the security
of Turkey constitutes the foundation of the Turkish Defense Industry Strategy.
Turkey's National Military Strategy (TNMS) and the Planning and Programming
Directive (PPD) are used as a source in the determination of the Defense Industry Strategy.
Coordination is made with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on the subject of carrying
out the Defense Industry Strategy in conformity with the foreign policies and in compliance
with the international agreements to which Turkey is a party.
The Ministry of National Defense is the coordinating authority in the implementation
of this strategy.
Matters Related to Defense Research and Technology:
The necessary direction is given by the Ministry of Defense to the research and
technology activities with the purpose of preparing Turkey's defense industry for the future.
The research and technological development activities in the field of defense products are
carried out under the coordination of the Ministry of National Defense.
In case of making use of foreign technologies, assimilation of this technology by the
domestic defense industry is the main objective. After the technologies purchased are
assimilated by the domestic industry, their reproduction at a higher level will be supported by
the Ministry of National Defense.
Turkey will closely follow the defense research and technological development
activities carried out in the scope of the Western European Union (WEU), NATO and similar
international organizations, of which Turkey is a member, and participate in those for which
Turkey has a need.
Matters Related to Procurement:


-----

The Ten Year Procurement Program (TYPP) is organized by law to allow for its
revision every two years by taking the resources to be allocated into consideration.
All activities related to the Defense Industry and Procurement are carried out by the
Ministry of National Defense.
It is essential to develop and produce the critical requirements of the TAF and those
that must be national at domestic industrial facilities having appropriate national classified
facility security documents based on research and development.
In the areas where this principle cannot be applied, the defense industry is divided into
sub-sectors and the national main contractor application is used at the selected sub-sectors.
The companies which do not have a facility security document having a suitable national
classified clearance can only be sub-contractors. The principles of application on this subject
are also published by the Ministry of National Defense.
Priority is given first to the domestic defense industry for the equipment and systems
that are decided to be procured. For those to be procured from abroad, priority is given to
proposals which provide an opportunity for direct and/or indirect offset applications that will
provide contributions to the domestic industry. The offset principles are determined by the
Ministry of National Defense.
Furthermore:

-  Emergency procurement applications are decreased, emergency procurements are not
made unless absolutely necessary,

-  Procurement is considered as a whole and no differentiation is made between domestic
and foreign procurements,

-  The differences in procurement legislation making companies located in foreign
countries in an advantageous position against domestic companies are eliminated,

-  In procurement, when deemed necessary, a price difference advantage up to a ratio of
15 percent,  specified in a decision to be taken by the Council of  Ministers for each
competitive bidding, can be recognized in favor of domestic companies and on the basis of
the added value they produced in Turkey and

-  The projects are evaluated according to the cash purchase basis. The subject of loans
are considered separately. However, in case there is elements that will create significant
differences in cost among various loans, then the price proposals are evaluated by also taking
into consideration the loan costs.

Matters Related to Production:
The requirements of the TAF are announced to the related organizations in three
groups of short-term, medium-term and long-term requirements to contribute to the
investment and research planning directed to the future of the defense industry.
The maximum utilization is made of the domestic industry infrastructure.
Participation in cooperation projects as much as possible is targeted in the scope of
the bilateral and multilateral relations for meeting the weapons, vehicles and equipment
requirements of the Armed Forces. Within this scope, the programs related to armament,
defense research and technology development in the structures of the international
organizations such as the WEU, NATO and similar international organizations of which
Turkey is a member, are followed starting from the planning phase. Turkey participates in the
project activities as early as possible and to the degree necessary. Industrial
benefit/participation and similar acquisitions are obtained from the programs in which Turkey
participates.
The probable export possibilities are also taken into consideration in the determination
of the capacities of the existing facilities or those to be established.


-----

It is mandatory to establish the Quality Assurance System conforming to international
standards at the production facilities belonging to the organizations engaged in activities in
the defense industry field. On this subject, it is aimed to develop the auxiliary industry and its
integration with the main industry.
Importance is placed on a codification and identification system in order to contribute
to the exports of the defense industry products. The needed support is provided for integrating
the defense industry products into NATO Codification System.
The production of spare parts and materials, which are presently continuing at the
facilities belonging to the Armed Forces, is encouraged to be decreased according to a plan, in
parallel with the development of the domestic industry, and for these units to return to
maintenance and upkeep activities, which are their real functions.
Civilian needs are also taken into consideration besides defense needs.
Domestic production directed to the meeting of critical requirements which have to be
national, is supported with investment and export incentives by also taking the international
obligations into consideration.
It is assured that work is transferred to the small and medium-sized enterprises in the
framework of projects and it is provided that technology and production are spread throughout
the country.
Matters Related to Competition:
It is essential to develop the defense industry in an environment of open competition
domestically and abroad. Free competition, just as it provides for the equipment to be
delivered to the TAF within the framework of existing resources and to be at a sufficient level
in quality and quantity, it will also decrease the cost of procurement. However, the domestic
industry and related organizations engage in technological cooperation among themselves in a
race for service, but without entering into destructive competition and by observing the
integrity and interests of the state and nation.
Matters Related to Exports and Promotions:
The export of the defense equipment produced in Turkey in the framework of the
Foreign Trade Legislation provides foreign currency inflow to Turkey and thanks to the
increased production quantities, it provides for a more rational production capacity. For this
reason, by providing all kinds of supports including promotion and credit facilities for the sale
of defense equipment to friendly and allied countries, in coordination with the related
ministries and organizations, a suitable credit mechanism is established within the limits of
the financial resources. The promotion of the defense industry is made through a single
channel and financial support is provided by the state.
Matters Related to Education:
The establishment, operation and development of the defense industry and being able
to monitor the modern technology is dependent on the existence of technical manpower in
sufficient quality and quantity. The necessary support and coordination is provided by the
Ministry of National Defense for the purpose of the training of the technical personnel in the
fields deemed necessary in Turkey and abroad.
Defense Industry and Technology Training Center (DITTC):
The Defense Industry and Technology Training Center (DITTC) Command has been
established within the structure of the Ministry of National Defense with the purpose of
meeting the in-service training requirements on defense industry subjects of the personnel
working in the TAF, the Defense Industry Companies and the Public Institutions and
Organizations.
The following courses are planned to be given to the personnel working at the TAF,
the Defense Industry Companies and the public institutions and organizations, who will
participate in the in-service training activities planned to be executed in six periods in 2000:


-----

-  Total Quality Management,

-  Project Management, Cost Analysis and Accounting Techniques,

-  Contract Management and Methods,

-  Risk Management,

-  Quality Assurance and Activities for Quality Assurance in Procurements (AQAP) and
Quality System Documentation Activities,

-  Human Resources Management,

-  Leadership/Management,

-  New Structuring of the Defense Industry in the World and in Turkey,

-  Offset Applications,

-  Continuous Acquisition and Lifelong Support (CALS) Activities,

-  Codification Activities,

-  Configuration Management,

-  Defense Industry Security Concept,

-  Defense Industry Policy and Strategy / Strategic Target Plan (STP) / Ten Year
Procurement Program (TYPP),

-  Domestic Procurement Activities,

-  Foreign Procurement Activities,

-  Planning, Programming and Budgeting System (PPBS),

-  Preparation of Technical Specifications (Applied) and

-  Preparation of the Procurement File (Applied).
Additionally, seminars, conferences, panel discussions, etc. and in-service training
activities are also organized besides courses at the DITTC.
Activities are continuing for transferring the DITTC activities into the Internet
environment through the Technical Information Center (TIC) of the Research and
Development Department. After the completion of the project, the information related to
course notes and programs and information related to activities such as other seminars,
conferences, panel discussions, etc. will be accessed on the DITTC web page.
Defense Technologies Institute (DTI) Project:
The activities for the establishment of an institute has been started with the purpose of
effectively using science and technology in the defense, planning, programming and
armaments activities; to establish cooperation among Universities, the TAF, Industry,
Research Institutions and Organizations; and to provide for a partnership in the functions of
institutions by bringing together the military, civilians, researchers and educators.
The education and training activities of the DTI will be open to military and civilian
participants who would like to make a career in the TAF and the defense industry, will
support master's and doctorate programs and activities and will include studies and short-term
courses that will provide for the development of the defense industry and technologies and on
other subjects for which a need is felt.
Until the DTI is established, the training needs of the TAF on this subject will be met
by the domestic and foreign educational institutions.


-----

**SECTION TWO**

**ACTIVITIES FOR QUALITY ASSURANCE IN PROCUREMENTS AND DEFENSE**
**INDUSTRY SECURITY**

Quality Assurance in Procurements:
Within the framework of the modernization and restructuring activities in the TAF,
first of all, it was deemed necessary for the companies to start the implementation of a
suitable quality assurance system for the procurement of quality products and it was adopted
as a precondition to require a Turkish Standards Institute (TSE)-International Standart
Organization (ISO) or Allied Quality Assurance Level Document (AQAP) from the
companies that would participate in the public competitive biddings. Thus, it was aimed to
have the importance and philosophy of quality comprehended, to develop the awareness of
responsibility, to increase productivity, to take measures before problems arise and to provide
the capability of monitoring by the documenting of every phase related to the production
activities and as a result to assure the procurement of quality products.
As of 1999, a total of 171 companies, organizations and military factories working in
the defense industry field were given AQAP Industrial Quality Assurance System Level
Documents.
The applications in Turkey of the quality assurance services carried out within the
scope of the "STANAG 4107" related to the Reciprocal Acceptance of State Quality
Assurance" among NATO countries, are fulfilled by the Ministry of National Defense, which
is the Quality Assurance National Authority.
In the scope of the development of quality, besides the application directed to the
system, for products that have special features and/or complex characteristics, the application
of performing the Production Line Qualification process has been started before starting mass
production and under the supervision of a committee to be formed at the facilities of the
company, which received the contract.
The performance of these activities directed to assuring quality in the projects being
implemented by the Air Forces Command, the Undersecretariat of the Defense Industry and
the Machinery and Chemical Industry Institution (MKEK) as well as the multinational joint
production projects, have been started at the initial stage with certain foodstuffs,
clothing/wearing apparel, and shoes/boots, which are purchased in great quantities and display
continuity. It is planned to spread this application to all kinds of weapons, ammunition,
materials, equipment and other items.
Defense Industry Security:
Defense industry security is to provide the security of the facilities, personnel,
documents, vehicles, equipment and machinery against all kinds of espionage, sabotage, raids,
destructive activities, theft, fire and work accidents and to prevent unauthorized persons from
accessing the classified information, documents and materials in activities related to the
defense industry.
The military strategy and evaluations set forth the necessity of the procurement
activities of all kinds of weapons and ammunition and war weapons, vehicles, equipment and


-----

materials used with the objective of dissuading the enemy and when needed to confuse the
enemy in the combat field and provide superiority. These activities must be carried out
starting from the project phase in environments in which adequate security measures have
definitely been taken. The activities related to this subject are performed by the Ministry of
National Defense and the industrialists are informed by the briefings and meetings organized
and bilateral contacts.
This application will motivate the private sector organizations and thus, in addition to
the political and strategical advantages to be obtained, the added value to be formed by
production realized and the technology acquired will positively influence the economy of
Turkey. Since the documents given are accepted as valid by the countries with which Turkey
has bilateral and multilateral agreements, then this will increase the chance of the Turkish
companies obtaining contracts from the foreign countries.
The National Authority for Defense Industry Security:
The national authority responsible for the security of the defense industry in Turkey is
the "Ministry of National Defense, Technical Services Department". This duty is performed
by the "Defense Industry Security Branch" in the structure of the Technical Services
Department by coordinating with the related institutions and organizations, led by the Turkish
General Staff, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of
Industry and Commerce and the Undersecretariat of the Defense Industry.
The Duties of the Defense Industry Security Branch:
– To organize meetings and briefings with the objective of making the organization
related to industrial security widespread throughout Turkey and to make the system
operational in a sound manner,
– To determine in coordination with the related state authorities and public institutions
and organizations what will be included in the list of the war weapons and ammunitions
industry that will be subject to control in the scope of Law No. 3763 on the Control of Private
Industrial Establishments Engaged in the Manufacture of War Weapons and Ammunitions in
Turkey and to have it published in the Official Gazette in January every year,
– To give a Production Permit and Facility Security Document to those industrial
organizations that want to produce the materials subject to production control and determined
to have the necessary qualifications and to give a Personal Security Document to real persons
who would become informed of classified information during the production of these types of
materials in accordance with Law No. 3763,
– To examine the requests for visits of foreign persons to the zones and facilities to
which entrance is restricted or where classified defense industry projects are being carried out
and as the Defense Industry National Security Authority, to give permission, provided that the
necessary Counter-Intelligence and Security measures are taken,
– To process the export of war vehicles, equipment and materials in the scope of the list
of materials subject to control within the framework of the procedures explained in the
"Directive for Giving Preliminary Permits for the Exportation of Materials Subject to Control
According to Law No. 3763" Number MSY 332-1 (A) of the Ministry of National Defense
and to give preliminary permits to those determined to be qualified,
– To give "Preliminary Import Permits" with the objective of supervising the imports of
systems and equipment in the scope of the list subject to control,
– To ratify the "End User Document" requested by the original manufacturer or
exporter,
– To prepare in coordination with the related authorities the texts of the "Agreement on
the Reciprocal Exchange and Protection of Classified Information and Materials", for which a
need could be felt in the scope of the bilateral and multilateral relations in connection with the


-----

defense industry security and to finalize these texts following the negotiations with authorities
of the related countries,
– To perform activities for carrying out all kinds of procurement activities, including
research and development projects related to defense systems within the framework of the
need to know principle and by persons and organizations having appropriate security
clearance,
– To determine the measures needed to be taken during the transfer of classified
information, documents and materials among domestic and foreign persons and organizations
and make the necessary coordination and realize the service,
– To participate in the activities of the Multinational Industrial Security Working Group
(MISWG), formed with the participation of the Defense Industry Security authorities of
NATO countries and to implement the decisions taken and
– To follow in coordination with the related authorities the activities of the Wassenaar
Regulation (WR), Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), Chemical Weapons
Agreement (CWA), Biological Weapons Agreement (BWA), Nuclear Procurers Group (NPG)
and the Australia Group (AG).
Facility Security in Defense Industry Security:
The facility security within the defense industry security constitutes an important place
and its importance is gradually increasing along with the developments in the defense
industry. The Facility Security Document, besides being mandatory for the companies
engaging in activities directed to the defense industry, carries the attribute of being a passport
for companies, particularly when they open their domestic defense industry products for
exports.
In general, Facility Security is the procedures aimed at the protection of the security of
all kinds of classified information, documents, projects, materials and services and the places
related to these, to be procured by direct purchasing, by participating in joint project programs
or by incentive or investment means, included in the agreements made in the scope of the
national and international defense industries.
With the Council of Ministers decree on the subject of the "Principles of the Turkish
Defense Industry Policy and Strategy", the principles and procedures to be followed are
determined with the objective of development and production at the industrial facilities
having a Facility Security Document with an appropriate national security clearance and
based on research and development of the critical needs of the Turkish Armed Forces, which
are required to be procured from national sources.
The "Defense Industry Security Directive (MSY 317-2)" was prepared and published
by the Ministry of National Defense with the objective of providing standardization in the
main activities carried out in the field of defense industry security, to collect in a document
the principles and procedures to be followed, to make them clearer and accelerate the
implementation activities.


-----

**SECTION THREE**

**PRIOR NOTIFICATION TO THE INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATIONS OF THE TEN**
**YEAR REQUIREMENTS OF THE TURKISH ARMED FORCES**

The Ten Year Procurement Program (TYPP) for the 2001-2010 period of the Turkish Armed
Forces will be announced to the domestic industrial organizations according to the need to
know principle. Within the framework of the need to know principle, an organization will be
given project information only in its own area of interest, for example, an organization
engaged in activities in the electronics industry will only be given information on the projects
related to the electronics industry.
The required documents for the industrial organizations to obtain the information related to
the projects of interest to them in the TYPP are specified below:
– National or NATO SECRET level Facility Security Document,
– Official Petition Document addressed to the Ministry of National Defense in which the
identity information of the person to receive the information and the matters given below are
declared:

-  That they want to receive information related to the projects in the TYPP which enter
into the area of interest of their organizations,

-  That they will not use the project information to be received for any other purpose
other than orienting the existing and future activities of the organization and preparing in the
direction of meeting the subject needs of the TAF,

-  That the contacts they will make with other organizations in the scope of the projects
will be made one by one, not as a whole for all the projects,

-  That the Ministry of National Defense is free to open or not to open a competitive
bidding for the subject needs of the TAF and to sign a contract with any organization it
chooses, and they will not make any claims for any rights or indemnity in case the
competitive bidding is not opened or it is not opened at the specified time or they are not
invited to participate in the competitive bidding and

-  That the authorized person who will receive the information has a personal security
document with NATO or national secret level clearance.
The information will be given to the subject representative mentioned in the official petition
of the related industrial organization according to the method stated below:
– The representative of the related organization applies personally to the Research and
Development Department of the Ministry of Defense with the required documents and makes
an appointment,
– The projects of interest to the organization are determined from the TYPP database in
the computer and a diskette containing the information is given to the representative and
– The representative signs a document indicating on which projects he received
information.
The organizations which presently do not have the required Facility Security Document, can
obtain TYPP information in the form described above after obtaining this document. Detailed


-----

information on the Facility Security Document can be obtained from the Technical Services
Department of the Ministry of National Defense.


-----

**PART ELEVEN**

**TURKISH DEFENSE INDUSTRY**

**SECTION ONE**

**TURKISH DEFENSE INDUSTRY**

The requirements of the Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) are met by direct purchase from
the domestic and foreign markets or by participation in joint production programs. Direct
purchases from the domestic market are the products developed by the domestic producers or
manufactured under license (technology transfer) from foreign countries. There are also
products that are obtained as the result of the joint activities through research and
development (R&D) of the TAF and the domestic producers. These products constitute the
final target of the purchases from the domestic market.
Turkey, which aims to become a self-sufficient country in the field of defense
equipment and endeavors to develop its defense industry with this objective, has accelerated
its activities and concentrated its efforts in this field.
The Turkish Defense Industry, in order to be able to reach the advanced level
necessary in the production of the modern defense equipment of today, is trying to develop its
production resources and capabilities, either by means of its own resources or by participating
in joint production projects together with the Allied Countries or by means of technology
transfer. In this framework, the cooperation programs carried out with the Allied Countries in
the structure of NATO or the Western European Union (WEU), occupy a significant place in
Turkey's defense industry activities. At the end of these efforts, the development of the
Turkish Defense Industry has further accelerated and its sectoral infrastructure has been
completed to a great extent.
On the basis of main weapons systems, 80 percent of the defense equipment are
presently procured from abroad. It is targeted to change this ratio and increase the domestic
procurement ratio to levels that will make Turkey's defense industry sufficient and
independent.
Providing all kinds of weapons, vehicles, equipment and materials needed by the TAF
from national resources to the maximum extent possible is important from the aspect of
preserving and strengthening the existing defense industry foundation and of creating
employment.
The Main Sectors of the Turkish Defense Industry are classified as follows:
– Aviation and Space Industry,
– Rocket and Missile Industry,
– Electronics Industry,
– Weapons and Ammunition Industry,
– Military Shipbuilding Industry,
– Military Automotive and Armored Vehicle Industry and
– Military Clothing Industry.


-----

A major portion of the companies related to the Turkish Defense Industry are collected
under the roofs of the Defense Industry Manufacturers Association (DIMA) and the Defense
Industrialists Association (DIA).
The DIMA and DIA constitute a bridge between the producers and customers. They
analyze and interpret the information collected and send them to their members and other
related parties. DIMA is also a member of the European Defense Industry Group (EDIG).

INFORMATION RELATED TO THE TURKISH DEFENSE INDUSTRY
ORGANIZATIONS

AVIATION AND SPACE INDUSTRY

TAI Production F-16,CN-235,SF-260,AS-532 COUGAR
Sales (1999) ($) 72,558,000
Exports (1999) ($) 1,000,000
Personnel 1,996
Production Aircraft and Helicopter Engines
TEI Sales (1999) ($) 50,188,000
Exports (1999) ($) 44,629,000
Personnel 524
Production Military Aircraft Tires
PETLAS Sales (1999) ($) 45,404,000
Exports (1999) ($) 11,969,000
Personnel 686

ROCKET AND MISSILE INDUSTRY

Production STINGER Missile Launchers and Flight Engines
107 mm Multiple-Launch Rocket Systems and
ROKETSAN 122 mm Multiple-Launch Rocket Systems
Sales (1999) ($) 40,309,000
Exports (1999) ($) 12,732,000
Personnel 193
Production 2.75 inch, 122 mm Rockets, Antitank Rockets,
Minefield Breaching System
MKEK Sales (1999 ($) 460,000,000
Exports (1999) ($) 6,466,000
Personnel 8,744
Production Multiple-Launch Rocket Systems
Manufacture of Precision Parts
Special Processes
KALEKALIP Sales (1999) ($) 15,000,000
Exports ($) 576,834
Personnel 350

ELECTRONIC INDUSTRY

Production Military Communications Systems and
Equipment, Electronic Warfare and Radar
Systems, Guidance and Navigation Systems,


-----

ASELSAN Command Control and Air Defense Systems,
Electro-Optical Systems and Equipment,
All Kinds of Hybrid Microelectronic Circuits
Sales (1999) ($) 196,518,000
Exports(1999) ($) 23,596,000
Personnel 2,849
Production Software for Military and Civilian Information
Management, Applications and Weapons
Systems, Electronic Warfare, Naval Warfare,
HAVELSAN Electronic Security, Radar, Simulation Systems,
Avionic Systems and Systems Integration
Sales (1999) ($) 11,249,000
Exports (1999) ($) 91,000
Personnel 562
HAVELSAN-EHSIM Production Electronic Warfare, Design and Testing of
Jamming Techniques
Production Air and Sea Electronic Warfare Systems
MIKES Sales (1999) ($) 10,225,000
Personnel 199
MARCONI
COMMUNICATIONS Production HF / SSB Radio
Production Mobile Radars, Signal Processing Units and
THOMSON – CSF Military Real Time Computers and the Required
Software for These Systems

Production Defense Electronics and Software, Manufacture
AYDIN YAZILIM of Radio Transceivers and Computer Units
VE ELEKTRONIK Sales (1999) ($) 17,300,000
SANAYII Exports (1999) ($) 266,000
Personnel 203

Production Products in the Electro-Optical Field
TRANSVARO Sales (1999) ($) 18,000,000
CORPORATION Exports (1999) ($) 440,000
Personnel 100
Production Design and Production of Communications
Security Products,
Design and Production of Fire Control Systems
STFA-SAVRONIK for Land and Air Platforms,
Integration of Communications and
Navigation Systems for Sea Platforms
Sales (1999) ($) 9,700,000
Personnel 65
ORACLE BILGISAYAR Production System Completion and Software
YÜKSEK TEKNOLOJI
ELEKTRIK ELEKTRONIK
MAKINE ve TIC.SAN. Production Electronic Systems and Equipment
ISBIR ELEKTRIK
SANAYII A.S. Production Diesel Generator Sets and Power Plants


-----

ALCATEL TELETAS Production Digital Telephone Exchanges,
Transmission and
Data Communication Systems, Cellular
Communication Units
Production Digital Telephone Exchanges, Transmission and
Data Communication Systems, Cellular
NETAS Communication Units
Sales (1999) ($) 223,781,000
Exports (1999) ($) 54,867,000
Personnel 1,233
BARIS ELEKTRONIK Production Rocket Launcher Tubes, Gyroscopes and
Transformers
ETA ELEKTRONIK Production Test Programming Sets
SIMKO TICARET Production Transmission Line Transformers, Panels and
Exchanges
AKSA MAKINE Production Special Generators
Sales (1999) ($) 50,220,000
Exports (1999) ($) 7,837,000

Production Electronic Warfare, Unmanned Aircraft,
STM Development of the C3I Systems
Sales (1999) ($) 4,651,160
Exports (1999) ($) 93,000
Personnel 189
MILSOFT Production Software Development and System Integration
GANTEK GRUP Production Computer Applications and Solutions,
Software and Hardware
ASPILSAN Production (Sinter Electrode Nickel Cadmium) Aircraft and
Helicopter Accumulators, Military Cells and  Batteries
MTU – TR Production Tank and Ship Engines
BURSAN Production Bomb Outer Shells, Bomb Loading and
Carrying Equipment
Production Missile Containers, Ammunition Shells and
Production Machinery
COSKUNÖZ Sales (1999) ($) 22,300,000
Exports (1999) ($) 4,600,000
Personnel 691
Production Aircraft and Helicopter Spare Parts,
Modernization of Hydraulic Systems
HEMA ENDÜSTRI Sales (1999) ($) 45,416,000
Personnel 800
HIPAK Production Fixing Equipment
MES MAKINE Production Aluminum Mechanical Parts for Rockets and
Weapons
MOLINO Production Air and Water Filter Systems and Spare Parts
FTC – BESTAS Production Aircraft Fastening Elements and Mechanical
Parts

Production Hot Forging and Processing for Various Mechanical Parts
PARSAN Sales (1999) ($) 18,000,923


-----

Exports (1999) ($) 10,000,000
Personnel 454

MILITARY SHIPBUILDING INDUSTRY

GÖLCÜK,
ISTANBUL SHIPYARD Production Military Shipbuilding, Repair
IZMIR SHIPYARD Production Military Ship Repair
SEDEF, YONCA, PKM Production Military Shipbuilding, Repair

MILITARY AUTOMOTIVE AND ARMORED VEHICLE INDUSTRY

Production Wheeled Tactical Vehicles, Development and
Production of Wheeled Armored Vehicles
OTOKAR Sales (1999) ($) 117,223,000
Exports (1999) ($) 3,607,000
Personnel 502
Production Diesel Engines, Wheeled Tactical Vehicles,
Production of Military Trailers,
BMC Modernization of BTR-60, BTR-80 ZPT
Sales (1999) ($) 129,974,880
Exports (1999) ($) 16,000
Personnel 152
MAN Production Tactical Military Vehicles and Military Trailers
Production UNIMOG Tactical Vehicles, Heavy Duty Vehicles,
Tank Carriers and Trailer Vehicles
MERCEDES-BENZ TÜRK Sales (1999) ($) 490,697,000
Exports (1999) ($) 163,000,000
Personnel 2,868
IBRAHIM-ÖRS Production Mechanical Production in the Military
Automotive Industry Field
ASMAS Production Tank Engine Parts, Mobile Carriers for Rockets,
Tank Modernization and Production of Special
Machinery

Production Development and Production of Various
Caterpillar Treads Armored Vehicles
FNSS SAVUNMA Sales (1999) ($) 81,395,000
SISTEMLERI A.S. Exports (1999) ($) 21,000,000
Personnel 378
Production Production of RN 94 6x6 Armored Vehicles
with Rubber Tires and Weapon Stations
NUROL MAKINE Sales (1999) ($) 14,507,000
Personnel 131
Production Caterpillar Treads for Tanks, Armor Steel
HISAR ÇELIK Sales (1999) ($) 20,983,000
Exports (1999) ($) 12,600,000
Personnel 254
SILSAN Production Tank Engine Parts
PARSAT Production Tank Engine Parts


-----

Production Modernization of the M-48, M-60 Tank and
MILITARY FACTORIES M-44, M-52 Howitzer with Motorized Carriage,
Production of Military Vehicles, Weapons
Carrier Vehicles

MILITARY CLOTHING INDUSTRY

SÜMER HOLDING,
CAN TEKSTIL Production Military Clothing
YAKUPOGLU,
YEGIN GRUP, Production Military Clothing
PLÂN TEKSTIL
COSKUN HOLDING,
ETE MENSUCAT Production Military Clothing

JÖN GIYIM, Production Military Clothing
POLAR A.S. Sales (1999) ($) 13,000,000
Exports (1999) ($) 12,083,000
DEMA,
ERDAL KUNDURA Production Military Shoes

Defense Research and Technology Projects:
The defense research and technology projects are collected under the three main
groups specified below:
– System development projects directed to the development of the systems of the TAF
in the categories of "Must Be National" and "Critical",
– Technological infrastructure formation projects related to the technologies on which
these systems are based and
– Basic research projects directed to these technologies.
The system development projects are carried out by industrial organizations;
technological infrastructure formation projects by industrial organizations and the Scientific
and Technical Research Institution of Turkey (TUBITAK) and basic research projects are
carried out by the universities.
Approximately 2 percent of the defense budget is allocated for the financing of
defense research activities in Turkey. Furthermore, the defense industry organizations allocate
2-10 percent of their annual budgets for research and development activities.
However, in spite of the resources allocated, due to the defense budget cuts, the fact
that every country on its own cannot form an adequate infrastructure in all technological
fields and because of the advantages of carrying out joint projects with other countries, great
importance is placed on carrying out joint R&D projects with the friendly and allied countries.
Besides, Turkey participates in the joint research and technology activities in the
structure of NATO and the Western European Union (WEU). Furthermore, planning is made
directed to carrying out joint research and technology projects on a bilateral basis with other
countries, led by the friendly and allied countries.
Western European Armament Group (WEAG) Activities:
The Independent European Program Group (IEPG) was formed in 1976 with the
objective of developing cooperation on the subjects of defense equipment in Europe by the
European members of NATO excluding Iceland and its functions were later transferred to the
Western European Armament Group (WEAG) connected to the Western European Union.
Turkey maintains a close cooperation with Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece,


-----

Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain and the United Kingdom, which
are included in the WEAG, along with Turkey.
Turkey places great importance on this forum, in which it has equal rights and
responsibilities with the other member countries, from the aspect of developing cooperation in
the field of European armaments. The projects in which Turkey participates along with the
other WEAG countries are given below:
– STINGER,
– M483/M864 155 mm Advanced Artillery Ammunition and
– Future Large Aircraft (FLA).
Activities of the Conference of National Armaments Directors (CNAD):
Turkey participates in the main group activities and in the important sub-group
activities within the scope of the Conference of National Armaments Directors (CNAD),
which is an organization connected to NATO Council and established in 1966 with the
objective of coordinating the armaments cooperation among NATO member countries and
takes an active part in both the concept activities and in some of the joint production and
procurement projects. The projects in which Turkey is presently participating in the scope of
the CNAD are specified below:
– Alliance Ground Surveillance (AGS) System,
– Theatre Missile Defense (TMD) System,
– Continuous Acquisition and Lifelong Support (CALS) System,
– Battlefield Information Systems (BICES),
– Tactical Communications Systems (TACOMS-POST 2000) and
– NATO Friend or Foe Identification System (NIS).
In parallel with the rapidly developing defense industry resources and capabilities, it is
aimed for Turkey to engage in cooperation connections based on the principle of reciprocity
with friendly and allied countries and to make concrete cooperation on the subjects of
technology and R&D and also on the joint production and procurement of defense equipment.


-----

**SECTION TWO**

**MAIN PROJECTS BEING CARRIED OUT BY THE UNDERSECRETARIAT OF THE**
**DEFENSE INDUSTRY**

Main Combat Tank Project:
The purpose of the project is for meeting the needs of the Turkish Armed Forces in the
2000s for main combat tanks with the maximum utilization of domestic resources and
capabilities. The needed quantity of tanks is 1,000.
Tactical Reconnaissance/Attack Helicopter (ATAK) Project:
The purpose of the project is production under license in Turkey of 145 each
Attack/Tactical Reconnaissance Helicopters. It is envisaged to finance the project completely
with the sources of the Defense Industry Support Fund.
Airborne Warning and Control (AWACS) Aircraft Project:
The purpose of the project is the procurement of four each aircraft which can realize
airborne warning and control duties in the direction of the needs of the Air Forces, together with
ground support and logistic support elements.
Advanced Technology Industrial Park (ATIP) and Airport Project:
The following will be included at the national technocity that will be established at the
Kurtköy-Pendik region of Istanbul Province:
– Sabiha Gökçen International Airport,
– Free Trade Zone Administration,
– The following are in the status of a Free Trade Zone:

-  Advanced Technology Industrial Park,

-  International Aviation, Maintenance-Repair-Modernization (AMRM) Center,

-  Commercial and Social Zone and

-  Advanced Technology Institute/University.
Unmanned Air Vehicle (UAV) Project:
The project has been started with the aim of meeting the needs of the TAF from within
Turkey through technology transfer for tactical unmanned air vehicle, that can remain in the air
for a long period of time.
Armored Combat Vehicle Project:
Within the framework of the project started with the objective of meeting the
requirements of the TAF for armored vehicles having advanced and superior features, an
agreement was signed in 1988 with the FNSS Corporation. In this framework, the production in
Turkey of four different types of vehicles for a total of 1,698 vehicles consisting of armored
TOW vehicles, armored mortar vehicles, armored personnel carriers and armored combat
vehicles was started in 1990. All of the vehicles have been manufactured and the acceptance tests
of 1,515 vehicles have been completed and delivered to the Land Forces Command. The required


-----

funds have been allocated for an additional 665 each vehicles needed and the procurement
activities have started.
Mobile Radar Complexes Project:
It has been envisaged to procure 13 command, control and combat systems (C3) and 14
radar systems in the direction of the need for the radar systems coverage area of the Air Forces.
In the framework of the project costing 313 million US dollars, the acceptance of the systems
targeted to be procured is continuing.
Cougar General Purpose Helicopter Project:
In 1993, 20 each Cougar general purpose helicopters manufactured by the French-German
Eurocopter consortium were purchased at a cost of 252 million US dollars and included in the
inventory of the Land Forces Command.
In the framework of a second project started with Decision No. 1999/4 of the Defense
Industry Executive Committee, it was targeted to procure through domestic joint production a
total of 30 additional Cougar helicopters, with 10 for the Land Forces Command and 20 for the
Air Forces Command. Within this scope, a contract was signed in February 1997 with a
consortium formed of the Eurocopter and TAI (Turkish Aviation Industry) companies for a cost
of 455 million US dollars.
Seaborne Helicopter Project:
In the framework of the needs of the Naval Forces and as the result of an international
competitive bidding, the Seahawk model manufactured by the Sikorsky Company was chosen
and the contract for the purchase of four helicopters was signed in 1997.
Subsequently, in the direction of the needs of the forces, the contract was expanded to
include eight helicopters. The part of the contract covering the first four helicopters went into
effect in June 1998 and the loan agreement for the part envisaging the procurement of the second
four helicopters went into effect at the beginning of 1999. The project cost is 203 million US
dollars.
Special Forces Helicopter Procurement Project:
The contract was signed with the Sikorsky Company in February 1999 for the purchase of
two Black Hawk helicopters and the modification of eight helicopters, in the direction of the
needs of the Special Forces Command. Two Black Hawk helicopters have already been
delivered. The activities for the modification of the eight helicopters is continuing.
F-16 Electronic Warfare Projects:
– Second Package F-16 Electronic Warfare Systems Project (Spews-II):
Within the framework of the project started for the production in Turkey of electronic
warfare systems composed of radar warning receivers (RWR) and RF Jammers for the 80 F-16
aircraft which are being procured within the scope of the Second Package F-16 project, it has
been decided by the Executive Committee in 1999, to start contract negotiations with the
ASELSAN Company.
– Second Package F-16 Missile Warning Systems Project:
Within the framework of the project started with the objective of manufacturing in
Turkey, 88 missile warning systems (MWS) envisaged to be installed on the Second Package F16 aircraft, request for proposals (RFP) files were sent to the foreign manufacturers having the
necessary accumulation of knowledge and technology on this subject, through the ASELSAN
Company. The project activities are continuing in the direction of the Executive Committee
decision aimed at meeting the MWS requirements also within the scope of this project for the
other platforms of the TAF.
Jamming Techniques (JAMTECH) Project:


-----

This is a project started with the objective of development in Turkey of the jamming
techniques and expanding the national capability in the field of jamming techniques that will be
used in the electronic warfare systems to be installed on the first and second package F-16
aircraft in the direction of the 1996 decision of the Executive Committee. With this objective,
RFP files were sent to five foreign companies in 1998 and the evaluation activities are continuing
on the two proposals received from the companies.
Helicopter Self-Defense Systems Projects:
Activities directed to the procurement of infrared jamming, suppressing and
CHAFF/FLARE launching systems to be installed on the attack and general purpose helicopters
in the inventory of the TAF was started in 1997. Within this framework:
– The Foreign Military Sales (FMS) contract has been signed in 1998 for the direct
purchase of the infrared jamming systems from the United States.
– The contract signed with a Canadian company for the production in Turkey of the infrared
suppressors to be installed on the helicopters went into effect in July 1998 and the production is
being made at the TAI facilities.
– Evaluation activities are continuing on the proposals for the production in Turkey of the
CHAFF and FLARE launchers envisaged to be installed on helicopters to mislead infrared and
radar guided missiles.
Marine Patrol Aircraft Project:
In the framework of activities started for meeting the needs of the Naval Forces
Command for six Marine Patrol Aircraft and the Coast Guard Command for three Marine
Surveillance Aircraft, the CN-235 aircraft made by the TAI-CASA was chosen as the main
platform.
F-5 Modernization Project:
This project was started with the objective of meeting the needs for jet training aircraft to
be used to prepare pilots for combat prior to using the F-16 aircraft and to enhance the existing
operational capabilities of the 48 NF/F-5 A/B aircraft, whose flight lifetimes are almost
completed and are in the inventory of the Air Forces Command and with the objective of
realizing the structural and avionic modernizations of the subject aircraft. It has been planned to
start contract negotiations on this subject with a consortium under the leadership of the Israeli IAI
Company. The project cost is 70.3 million US dollars.
Minesweeper Project:
Within the framework of the decision taken by the Defense Industry Executive
Committee in 1994, an international competitive bidding was opened in 1998 with the objective
of the procurement of six minesweepers. After making the technical and economic evaluations, a
contract was signed in July 1999 with the consortium composed of the German Lürssen
Werft/Abe-King & Rasmussen companies who won the competitive bidding. The total project
cost is 625 million US dollars.
Base Mounted Stinger (BMS) Project:
The BMS Project has been started for meeting the needs of the TAF for a low altitude air
defense system. It is planned to procure 208 systems in the first stage within the framework of the
project.
Long Horizon Project:
In the scope of the project and in the framework of the requirements of the Naval Forces,
it has been aimed to procure the necessary aircraft, radar, electronic intelligence and
communications equipment for the determination, identification and definition of above water
targets and the transmission of the related target information to the operations centers.


-----

Future Large Aircraft (FLA) Project:
With the purpose of meeting the need of the Turkish Air Forces for cargo aircraft in the
2000s, the negotiations on the contract principles have been started within the framework of the
project jointly carried out by seven European countries, including Germany, Belgium, France,
United Kingdom, Spain, Italy and Turkey.
National Ship (MILGEM) Project:
Project activities have been started for the procurement by means of building in Turkey of
eight new type Patrol and Anti Submarine Warfare Ships in the first stage, followed by four
others, in the framework of the needs of the Naval Forces.
Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Project:
Initiatives have been started for participating in the program being carried out by the
United States with the objective of meeting the need for Future Fighter Aircraft, by helping the
domestic defense industry acquire the experience, knowledge and technology for Turkey by
entering at the initial stage into the existing development projects in the international defense
market and for offering a solution to the definition and selection of an aircraft that will answer the
needs of the Air Forces.
X-Band Satellite Communications Equipment Project:
The Defense Industry Executive Committee has decided to start contract negotiations in
September 1999 with the ASELSAN Company for a model where the Matra-Marconi Company
will be the technology providing subcontractor. At the end of the evaluations made within this
framework, the Matra-Marconi Space Company was determined to be the subcontractor. The
contract has been signed between the Undersecretariat of the Defense Industry and ASELSAN
Corporation in December 1999. The project cost is 113 million US dollars.
Wheeled Armored Vehicle Project:
The contracts were signed around the beginning of 1997 related to the purchase of five
6x6 RN-94 vehicles from the Nurol Machinery Industry Corporation and five 4x4 Cobra vehicles
from the Otokar Company to be used in the concept determination activities and meeting the
operational needs of the TAF for armored vehicles with rubber tires. The project cost, including
the cost of 10 wireless sets obtained from ASELSAN is 3.7 million US dollars. The acceptance
tests and inspections of all the vehicles have been completed and have entered into the inventory
of the TAF.
C-130 E Aircraft Avionic Modernization Project:
Within the framework of the project it is aimed to modernize the avionic systems of the
seven C-130 E aircraft included in the inventory of the TAF.
Airborne Fire Extinguishing System Procurement Project:
In the direction of the decision taken by the Defense Industry Executive Committee in
1996, the activities were started for obtaining a fire extinguishing kit for the C-130 cargo aircraft
in the inventory of the Air Forces and at the end of the evaluations made, a contract has been
signed with the Aero Union Company of the United States for one kit. The cost of the project is
11.5 million US dollars.
Black Hawk Depot Level Maintenance Project:
At the end of the negotiations started in May 1998 between the UDI and the Sikorsky
Company in the scope of the project, a contract was signed in January 1999 for a total cost of 41
million US dollars.
Command, Control, Information System (CCIS) Project:
The activities related to the competitive bidding opened with the objective of the
procurement and establishment of the TAF Command, Control, Information System (CCIS)


-----

Message-Document Distribution System (MDDS) have been completed and the contract related
to procurement was signed with HAVELSAN Corporation in August 1999. The project cost is 12
million 114 thousand US dollars.
5.56 mm Infantry Rifle and Ammunition Project:
In the framework of the project for which the necessary investment financing will be
provided by the UDI, with the objective of manufacturing on the production lines to be
modernized at the Machinery and Chemical Industries Institution (MKEK) of the 5.56 mm
infantry rifles and the cartridges and spherical gunpowder for them needed by the TAF, the
contract for rifles has been signed between the MKEK and the Heckler & Koch Company and
went into effect in October 1998. The evaluation of the proposals received from six companies
for the cartridge production project is continuing. In April 1999 the best and final offers (BAFO)
were received for the spherical gunpowder production.
Ammunition Demolition Vehicle Project:
In the framework of the project, activities have been started for the procurement of five
vehicles to be used in the ammunition inspection and demolition activities by the Land Forces. A
proposal was received from the High-Tech Systems Ltd. Company located in Israel and the
contract signed for the procurement of the first system at a cost of 1.3 million US dollars went
into effect in April 1999.
Engine Test System Project:
With this project, it is aimed to transform the "TYNE 22 engine test system" into a
universal test system and have the Eskisehir First Air Supply and Maintenance Center acquire the
capability of engine tests for the C-130, C-160, TCN-235 aircraft and Sikorsky S-70 helicopters
and have the TEI acquire the capability of engine tests for the Cougar helicopters.
High Speed Boat for Rapid Intervention Project:
Within the framework of the needs of the Coast Guard Command, a contract was signed
with the Yonca Technical Investment Corporation Shipyard in 1997 with the objective of
procuring six high speed boats at a total cost of 5.2 million US dollars and as of 1999 the delivery
of the boats has been completed. A protocol was signed with the same shipyard in 1999 for the
building of an additional six boats within the scope of the subject contract.
Coast Guard Helicopter Project:
The competitive bidding opened for the needs of the Coast Guard Command for five
medium class helicopters was won by the Italian Agusta Company, which offered the AB-412EP
model and the contract was signed in 1998. In 1998 one additional contract was signed with the
ASELSAN and NETAS companies for the domestic production of the FLIR, IFF, monitor and
radio equipment to be installed on the helicopters.
90 Ton Coast Guard Boat Project:
The competitive bidding opened in the framework of the need for ten 90 ton boats by the
Coast Guard Command was won by the Yurtsan-Yonca-Onuk partnership and a contract was
signed in 1998 with the subject company.
Port Shore Tugboat Project:
Within the framework of the project started with the objective of having five tugboats for
the needs of the Naval Forces built at the domestic shipyards, a contract was signed with the
Turkish Shipbuilding Industry Corporation in 1997. The approximate project cost is 42 million
Deutsche Marks.


-----

