# National Security
 Capability Review

##### Including the second annual report on implementation of the National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015


-----

© Crown copyright 2018

Produced by Cabinet Office

You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium,
under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
[http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/](http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/)
[or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk](mailto:psi%40nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk?subject=)

Where we have identified any third party copyright material you will need to obtain permission
from the copyright holders concerned.

Alternative format versions of this report are available on request from

bli d @ bi t ffi k


-----

## Contents

**Foreword by the Prime Minister** **2**

**Overview** **3**

**The national security context** **5**

**Our vision, values and approach** **7**

Our Global Britain vision and values 7

Our approach 9

The Fusion Doctrine 10

**Our national security capabilities** **12**

Defence 14

Counter-Terrorism 18

Cyber 21

Serious and organised crime 23

Ports and borders 26

National resilience 28

Global Britain 30

National security communications 34

Economic security, prosperity and trade 36

Development 41

Cross-government funds 44

**Annex: Principal commitments from the Strategic Defence and Security**
**Review 2015** **46**


-----

## Foreword by the Prime Minister

Last year, we commissioned the National Security Capability Review
to establish how best we can apply our national security apparatus to
address the increasing and diversifying threats to our country and to
our way of life. Overall the framework of the 2015 National Security
Strategy and the Strategic Defence and Security Review remains
right. But since it was published, threats have continued to intensify
and evolve and we face a range of complex challenges at home and
overseas: the resurgence of state-based threats and increasing
competition between states; the undermining of the international rules
based order; the rise in cyber-attacks from both state and non-state

actors and the wider impact of technological developments; and the increase in threat posed
by terrorism, extremism and instability.

Over the past year in the UK we have witnessed appalling terrorist attacks in London and
Manchester. But also a brazen and reckless act of aggression on the streets of Salisbury:
attempted murder using an illegal chemical weapon, amounting to an unlawful use of force
against the UK.

Crucially what all of these incidents have made clear is that our national security is conditional
on not only the police and security services who work so hard to keep us safe at home, or on
the brave men and women of our Armed Forces working tirelessly around the world – but on
our ability to mobilise most effectively the full range of our capabilities in concert to respond to
the challenges we face.

So as this report sets out, we have agreed a new approach to the orchestration of our
national security capabilities. Based on the new Fusion Doctrine, this approach will ensure
that in defending our national security we make better use of all of our capabilities: from
economic levers, through cutting-edge military resources to our wider diplomatic and cultural
influence on the world’s stage. Every part of our government and every one of our agencies
has its part to play.

I am confident that we can rise to the challenges ahead and that we can build on our
considerable strengths to enhance our national security.

To leverage our influence as a nation with the largest defence and security budget in Europe
to advocate for peace and stability and promote our prosperity around the world.

To work with our partners and allies to strengthen our collective commitment to the
international rules based order and project our global influence.

And to stand together to defeat attempts to undermine our security and prosperity, to defend the
values that lie at the very heart of our society, and to enhance our ability to protect our people.

As long as we defend our interests and stand up for our values, there will continue to be
those who seek to undermine or attack us. But these people should be in no doubt that we
will use every capability at our disposal to defeat them.


-----

## Overview 

1. The National Security Council (NSC) reviewed the National Security Strategy and Strategic
Defence and Security Review (SDSR 2015) after the general election in 2017. The NSC
concluded that the SDSR, and its three National Security Objectives, should continue to
frame our approach to national security. The NSC commissioned a focused National
Security Capability Review (NSCR) to identify how we could develop, deliver and deploy
our considerable national security capabilities to maximum collective effect.

2. The world has become more uncertain and volatile since 2015. This report updates the
SDSR’s assessment of the complex and overlapping challenges likely to drive UK security
priorities over the next decade. It explains how we are taking a transformative whole-ofgovernment approach in response, bringing to bear the widest possible range of
capabilities. It also highlights areas where we want to sustain dynamic cooperation with
the EU to protect capabilities that keep people safer across the whole of our continent.

3. The NSCR focused on capabilities that are critical to our national security, where we
judged that they could benefit from review to support implementation of the SDSR.
We have not revised any of the SDSR principal commitments as a result of the NSCR.
This document also incorporates our annual report on implementation of the 2015 SDSR.
We set out our progress against commitments in the SDSR and the actions we are taking
as a result of the NSCR:

- We will use a new national security doctrine, the Fusion Doctrine, to improve our
collective approach to national security, building on the creation of the NSC eight years
ago so that we use our security, economic and influence capabilities to maximum effect
to protect, promote and project our national security, economic and influence goals.

- We will further strengthen and modernise Defence and the Armed Forces to
deliver better military capability in an enduringly sustainable way, optimise how the
Ministry of Defence (MOD) is organised and is operating, pursue a more strategic
efficiency and business modernisation programme, and improve our commercial and
industrial approach through the Modernising Defence Programme (MDP). The MDP
will build on the firm foundations of the SDSR and be informed by the work already
undertaken as part of the NSCR.

- We will publish a new counter-terrorism strategy, which will include measures to improve
our ability to disrupt terrorist plots in their early stages and improve frontline
integration of our counter-terrorism response.

- We will continue to implement the National Cyber Security Strategy and ensure it
**keeps pace with the threat, including through the National Cyber Security Centre.**

- We will take a whole-of-government approach to serious and organised crime,
including a single cross-government Ministerial decision-making body, a new intelligence
framework, better community engagement and a National Economic Crime Centre in
partnership with the private sector.


-----

- We will integrate the knowledge and expertise held by all border organisations to produce
**comprehensive strategic threat assessments for the border.**

- We will improve assurance of resilience and readiness of local and national
**capabilities, reinforce mutual aid systems during major disasters and continue to**
develop a holistic approach to supporting victims of emergencies.

- We will strengthen our overseas network so that we can reinvest in our relationships
around the world, champion the rules-based system including free trade and use our soft
power to project our values and advance UK interests.

- We will significantly expand the National Security Communications Team to make
communications an integral part of our approach to national security.

- We will integrate economic goals and capabilities throughout national security.

- We will ensure our development capability responds to changes in global poverty and
national security challenges.

- We will enhance the cross-government funds by improving strategic direction through
the Fusion Doctrine, governance through a new Ministerial committee, and efficient
administration by merging the secretariats into a single Funds Unit.


-----

## The national security context

1. In SDSR 2015, we described how the world is changing rapidly and fundamentally.

We continue to see long-term shifts in the balance of global economic and military power,
increasing competition between states as well as the threat from non-state actors.
While the UK has chosen to leave the EU, we are unconditionally committed to European
security and defence and want to work closely with our European partners to keep all of
our citizens safe and our continent secure.

2. In the SDSR we identified four challenges likely to drive UK security priorities for the

coming decade. The challenges have become more complex, intertwined and dangerous
as the world has become more uncertain and volatile. Domestic, overseas and online
threats are increasingly integrated as adversaries develop capabilities and exploit
vulnerabilities across borders and between the cyber and physical worlds. We have
also added two additional challenges:

- the increasing threat posed by terrorism, extremism and instability;

- the resurgence of state-based threats; and intensifying wider state competition;

- the erosion of the rules-based international order, making it harder to build consensus
and tackle global threats; and

- the impact of technology, especially cyber threats and wider technological developments.

And in addition:

- the ongoing growth in serious and organised crime and its impact; and

- diseases and natural hazards affecting the UK.

Taking each challenge in turn:

3. **The increasing threat posed by terrorism, extremism and instability. 2017 saw a**

shift in the nature of the terrorist threat to the UK, with five attacks in London and Manchester
that led to the deaths of 36 innocent people and many more injured. We responded
decisively, rapidly adapting our priorities and capabilities, to break the momentum of
these attacks. Since March 2017, the police and the security and intelligence agencies
successfully foiled a further ten Islamist plots and disrupted four extreme right-wing plots.

4. We expect the threat from Islamist terrorism to remain at its current heightened level

for at least the next two years and it might increase further. We proscribed an extreme
right-wing group as a terrorist organisation in 2016 and extreme right-wing terrorism
continues to be a growing threat. Northern Ireland related terrorism remains a serious
threat, particularly in Northern Ireland itself where dissident republicans carried out five
attacks in 2017.

5. The protracted nature of conflict in places such as Yemen and South Sudan has

destroyed basic social infrastructure (health, water and sanitation systems) and stalled
education and economic development. Densely populated urban areas in Syria and
Iraq have been directly affected by intense fighting. Conflict and instability create largescale humanitarian and development need and hamper economic growth. This drives


-----

migration, with criminals exploiting the vulnerable including through human trafficking
and modern slavery. Conflict and instability can also allow terrorists and organised crime
groups to thrive.

6. **The resurgence of state-based threats, intensifying wider state competition**

**and the erosion of the rules-based international order, making it harder to build**
**consensus and tackle global threats. The risks from state-based threats have both**
grown and diversified. The indiscriminate and reckless use of a military-grade nerve agent
on British soil was an unlawful use of force by the Russian State. It happened against
a backdrop of a well-established pattern of Russian State aggression. Russia’s illegal
annexation of Crimea was the first time since the Second World War that one sovereign
nation has forcibly taken territory from another in Europe. Russia has fomented conflict
in the Donbas and supported the Assad regime, including when the regime deliberately
ignored its obligation to stop using chemical weapons. Russia has also violated the
national airspace of European countries and mounted a sustained campaign of cyber
espionage and disruption, including meddling in elections. North Korea has flagrantly
violated international law, conducting 20 missile tests in 2017 and testing a nuclear
device. Iran’s destabilising activity in the Middle East continues. Competition between
states in the Middle East, South Asia and East Asia, including in the South China Sea,
brings risks of miscalculation and conflict.

7. **The impact of technology, especially cyber threats and wider technological**

**developments. Malicious cyber activity knows no international boundaries and has grown**
in terms of intensity, complexity and severity over the course of the last year. There are
several established and capable states that seek to target and exploit UK networks and
devices to gather intelligence or intellectual property. Indiscriminate disruptive incidents also
affect the UK and our partners, as exemplified by the ‘NotPetya’ cyber incident in June
2017 which we have publicly attributed to the Russian military. The malware was recklessly
released in a manner that enabled it to spread from legitimate software used by Ukrainian
institutions to then indiscriminately infect European and Russian businesses resulting in
hundreds of millions of pounds in damage. The proliferation of low-cost high-end
commercial capabilities, novel weapons, and sophisticated data-driven technologies
including autonomous systems are also changing the security environment.

8. **The ongoing growth in serious and organised crime and its impact. Serious**

and organised crime presents an increased and sustained threat to our security and
prosperity. Organised crime groups have a daily, corrosive impact on our public services,
infrastructure and reputation. The same forces that benefit legitimate business –
globalisation and technological change – make organised criminal networks and markets
more resilient than ever. Serious and organised crime is inherently transnational and many
of the threats we face within the UK emanate from overseas.

9. **Diseases and natural hazards affecting the UK. One or more major hazards can**

be expected to materialise in the UK in every five year period. The most serious are
pandemic influenza, national blackout and severe flooding. We published the latest edition
of the National Risk Register of Civil Emergencies in September 2017. It provides an
assessment of the likelihood and potential impact of a range of different civil emergency
risks that may directly affect the UK over the next five years.


-----

## Our vision, values and approach

### Our Global Britain vision and values

1. Our vision is for a secure and prosperous United Kingdom, with global reach and

influence, as we set out in SDSR 2015. Everything we do in the UK and around the world
is driven by our determination to protect our people, promote our values and ensure that
our country prospers.

2. We are a global, free-trading nation. We have one of the world’s most open and

networked societies, which makes us one of the most attractive places for people to
live, work and invest. We have the world’s sixth largest economy and the G20’s most
globalised, with the highest rates of economic participation. We are a global financial
centre and one of the most innovative countries. We also have the third highest inward
and outward foreign direct investment (FDI) stock in the world.

3. Our international approach has entered a new era. We are an open, outward-looking,

tolerant European country that celebrates our history and diversity, confident of our place
in the world, meeting our obligations to our near neighbours and far off friends, and
proud to stand up for our values. As Global Britain, we are reinvesting in our relationships
around the world. We are championing the rules-based system, which has served our
interests as a global trading nation and is of vital importance as geopolitics becomes
more contested. And we are using our soft power to project our values and advance
UK interests.

4. We are the only major western country to invest both 2% of gross domestic product

(GDP) in defence and 0.7% of gross national income (GNI) in international development.
We have world-class diplomatic, information, security and intelligence, law enforcement,
and border security capabilities, plus an innovative private sector, competitive business
environment, reliable legal framework, advantageous geographic position and many of
the world’s most influential institutions, from academia and sport to the BBC. This unique
and balanced portfolio of national capabilities is our key comparative advantage.

5. As the world has become more uncertain and volatile, we are committed to deploying

the full suite of our security, economic and influence capabilities to protect and promote
our security, economic and influence interests, whether by deterring our adversaries,
disrupting terrorists and criminals, strengthening allies, stabilising conflicts, responding
to humanitarian crises, supporting trade and investment or tackling climate change.
We must also protect, promote and project our greatest strength, which is our way of life
and the values that underpin it.

6. The rules-based system we helped to develop has enabled global cooperation to

protect shared fundamental values of respect for human dignity, human rights, freedom,
democracy and equality. As a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council,
a leading contributor to NATO, a European country sharing fundamental values with our
partners and a champion of the Commonwealth, we are committed to upholding and
renewing the rules-based international system.


-----

7. We will always respond robustly to attempts to harm the UK and destabilise the world

order. The use of a military-grade nerve agent in Salisbury was in breach of the Chemical
Weapons Convention and international law. It happened against a backdrop of a wellestablished pattern of Russian State aggression. We will not tolerate the threat to life of
British people and others on British soil from the Russian government. Nor will we tolerate
such a flagrant breach of international obligations.

8. We will harden our defences against all forms of Hostile State Activity and strengthen our

powers to impose sanctions in response to the violation of human rights. We will make
full use of existing powers to enhance our efforts to monitor and track the intentions of
those travelling to the UK who could be engaged in activity that threatens the security
of the UK and our allies. We will develop proposals for powers to stop, question, search
and detain individuals at the UK border to determine whether they have been involved in
matters that threaten our national security, and consider new counter-espionage powers
to clamp down on the full spectrum of hostile activities of foreign agents in the UK.
We will continue to bring all the capabilities of UK law enforcement to bear against serious
criminals and corrupt elites. The expulsion of Russian diplomats will also fundamentally
degrade Russian intelligence capability in the UK for years to come.

9. As Europe’s largest national security contributor, the security partnership we seek with the

EU will complement our leading role in NATO, which is the most durable and successful
defensive alliance in history. At its heart lies the security guarantee contained in Article 5
of the North Atlantic Treaty, that an attack on any one member ‘shall be considered an
attack against them all’. We reaffirm our unconditional commitment to collective defence
and security through NATO.

10. Our decision to leave the EU and bring decision-making and accountability closer to

home does not alter our unconditional commitment to Europe’s security. Europe’s security
is our security. We have been at the forefront of shaping the arrangements that underpin
our security cooperation in Europe. People across Europe are safer as a result and
together we must find ways to protect these capabilities when we leave the EU. We must
do whatever is most practical to keep our citizens safe and our continent secure.

11. Our principal trading partners both now and after we leave the EU are also natural

security partners: our core allies in Europe, North America and Australasia; traditional
partners in the Gulf, South Asia and Africa; and new ones in East Asia and around the
world. Each faces acute threats which the UK is helping to tackle – North Korean nuclear
weapons, Russian and Iranian belligerence, Islamist terrorism, human trafficking, piracy,
serious and organised crime, instability and unresolved regional rivalries.

12. We also champion coalitions of like-minded governments and industry partners,

in particular to strengthen our cyber defences and collective security. As our lives move
increasingly online, we will become increasingly reliant on space technologies which are
also vulnerable to hostile actors. Against such global threats, we need a global response
with industry, like-minded states, the EU and NATO all working together. We continue
to encourage collaboration between the EU and NATO to ensure they are secured and
prepared for the challenges of this century.


-----

### Our approach

13. The framework for national security which we set out in SDSR 2015 continues to

represent the breadth of our national security interests through our three National
Security Objectives:

- National Security Objective 1 is to protect our people – at home, in our Overseas
Territories and abroad, and to protect our territory, economic security, infrastructure and
way of life.

- National Security Objective 2 is to project our global influence – reducing the likelihood
of threats materialising and affecting the UK, our interests, and those of our allies
and partners.

- National Security Objective 3 is to promote our prosperity – seizing opportunities,
working innovatively and supporting UK industry.

14. In the 2015 Spending Review we increased defence and security spending in response

to the more demanding national security context, with real terms growth for defence, the
intelligence agencies, counter-terrorism and cyber. We remain committed to:

- grow defence spending by at least 0.5% above inflation each year to 2020/21, meeting
our NATO commitment to spend at least 2% of GDP on defence;

- spend 0.7% of GNI on Official Development Assistance, meeting the UN target;

- increase counter-terrorism spending by 30% over the Spending Review period; and

- grow the Single Intelligence Account budget by 18% in real terms.

The counter-terrorism policing budget will increase to at least £757 million in 2018/19,
a 7% increase on the previous year. We remain on track to recruit and train over 1,900
additional security and intelligence staff across the agencies to respond to, and deter,
those behind the increasing international terrorist, cyber and global threats.

15. The NSC was created in 2010 to oversee and co-ordinate all aspects of our national

security as part of collective cabinet decision-making. We have now developed a new
national security doctrine, the Fusion Doctrine, to build on the creation and early years
of the NSC, embed the lessons from The Report of the Iraq Inquiry (‘the Chilcot report’)
and support a whole-of-government approach to national security.


-----

### The Fusion Doctrine

1. Eight years on from the creation of the NSC, the Fusion Doctrine will strengthen our


collective approach to national security. The Fusion Doctrine creates a more accountable
system to support collective Cabinet decision-making, with the introduction of senior
officials as senior responsible owners to deliver each of the NSC’s priorities. It introduces
a Chilcot-compliant approach to strategies for NSC priorities and encourages rigorous
consideration of all capabilities to provide the NSC with better choices.


2. The Fusion Doctrine starts with strategy. We must identify the most effective and

efficient combination of ways to achieve the government’s objectives over the long
term, anticipating how adversaries and allies could react to avoid unwanted second and
third order effects. Sometimes the best approach may be weighted towards particular
capabilities or asymmetric to the threat we face. For modern deterrence (see below) we
use the full range of capabilities available to us. To do all this we need robust analysis,
drawing on all sources of information and data from both within government and outside.


3. Many capabilities that can contribute to national security lie outside traditional national

security departments and so we need stronger partnerships across government and
with the private and third sectors. A wide range of government departments contribute
to making the UK a harder target for those who wish to do us harm and the social
reform departments help address the root causes of individual vulnerability to exploitation
by organised crime groups and extremists. Many technological challenges are best
addressed through partnership between the public and private sector. This approach is
also vital internationally where security, trade and development partnerships are often
mutually reinforcing.


**ECONOMIC**


Social
Policy

Soft
Power


Border
Controls

Covert


Principle: “To deploy security, economic and influence

capabilities to protect, promote and project our

national security economic and influence goals ”


-----

4. The NSC will take stock each year of the UK’s positioning on national security in terms

of resilience, threats and opportunities to take decisions about strategic prioritisation.
The annual posture review will also inform departmental business plans and the
government’s annual report to Parliament on SDSR implementation.

5. For each of its priorities, the NSC will consider UK interests and objectives, the situation

we face and the outlook, and then the wider national or international strategy to decide
how to make a catalytic contribution, considering our full range of capabilities. The NSC’s
ambition must match the resources committed so that we pursue realistic objectives and
prioritise scarce resources where they can make most difference as part of our collective
approach. Rigorous implementation is also essential.

6. Building a culture of common purpose across departments requires improved

accountability to shift incentives and behaviours towards a more genuinely wholeof-government approach. For each NSC priority, a senior responsible official will be
accountable for the development of options for the NSC and the implementation of
the government’s strategy. Their role is to coordinate in support of the NSC’s collective
decision-making.

7. Thousands of people contribute to the UK’s national security through their daily work

in the UK and overseas. Their expertise, skills and statutory powers span the full range
of security, influence and economic tools. We need staff with different backgrounds,
perspectives and ways of thinking, including to promote creative thinking and challenge.
‘Mission Critical’ is a manual to encourage inclusion developed by the Defence and
Security Diversity Network in 2017. Training on the Fusion Doctrine will become the
primary focus of the Virtual National Security Academy.


Modern deterrence

SDSR 2015 re-stated that defence and protection start with deterrence, which has
long been, and remains, at the heart of the UK’s national security policy. As the world
has become more uncertain and volatile, our approach to deterrence has become
more comprehensive. Modern deterrence is whole-of-government in nature and
strengthened by the Fusion Doctrine.

We must deter catastrophic threats entirely, using the full range of capabilities available
to us. The worsened security environment has resulted in renewed emphasis in NATO
on deterrence and collective defence. Cyber defence is now part of NATO’s core task
of collective defence. The UK’s independent nuclear deterrent will remain essential
to our security today, and for as long as the global security situation demands. It has
existed for over 60 years to deter the most extreme threats to our national security and
way of life, helping to guarantee our security, and that of our allies.

Many adversaries seek to do us harm or subvert us in less destructive ways,
calculated to avoid provoking an armed response. We will seek to raise the cost of
their malign behaviour, restrict and reduce it using the full range of capabilities available
to us. Some of the many capabilities enhanced as a result of SDSR 2015 include the
new powers in the Criminal Finances Act 2017 to recover criminal assets and our
offensive cyber capabilities to detect trace and retaliate in kind


-----

## Our national security capabilities

1. The NSCR aimed to maximise the impact of our considerable national security

capabilities. The NSCR was conducted through 12 interconnected projects relating to
capabilities that are critical to our national security where we judged that they could
benefit from review.

2. The NSCR was designed to examine the efficiency, effectiveness and alignment with

NSC priorities of each of these capabilities so that they are delivered and deployed to
maximum collective effect against all three of the National Security Objectives. The NSCR
built on work previously commissioned by the NSC on strategy, policy and capability in
specific areas, drawing them together into one over-arching review.

3. The National Security Adviser led the NSCR, with constituent projects led across

government by senior responsible owners in departments and aligned through a common
framework. The NSCR projects were:

**A new doctrine to use our** **National**
**national security capabilities** **Security**
**to maximum collective effect** **Doctrine**

**National** **Cross-**
**Security** **Government**
**Communications** **Funds**

**Reviews initiated as**
**part of the NSCR**

**Economic**

**Global** **Development** **Security,**
**Britain** **Prosperity**

**& Trade**

**Bringing Coherence** **Counter-** **Serious and**
**to reviews underway** **Defence** **Terrorism** **Cyber** **Organised**

**Crime**

**Ports and** **National**
**Borders** **Resilience**

4. The NSCR also looked at cross-cutting issues:

Innovation

5. The SDSR included a number of initiatives to accelerate investment in transformative

ideas and technologies. The NSCR identified that in a resource-constrained environment
we need, where feasible, to make more use of threat-agnostic capabilities that can be
used by different parts of government in response to varied threats and hazards. Our
national border is an example of a threat-agnostic capability providing a range of different


-----

interventions that support various national security priorities. A science, technology,
analysis and research strategy is supporting our work to counter both terrorism and
serious and organised crime. In the longer term, biometric capabilities and forensic
technologies could transform our interactions at the border and across law enforcement.
A cross-government working group will identify how we can further enhance
accountability and joint working on innovation.

Science and technology

6. In an environment where major threats are largely technologically driven, so too must

be our response. The UK is in a strong position. Our scientific output is among the best
in the world across the range of disciplines relevant to security. We must maximise
this strength, particularly in emerging capabilities such as autonomy, robotics and
data analytics. The UK Research and Innovation budget is increasing by £4.7 billion to
2020/21 and has wide-ranging potential national security benefits. The Government Chief
Scientific Adviser will develop a new national security science and technology strategy
through the NSC Officials’ Science and Technology sub-committee.

Data

7. Our ability to use data, at scale and pace, across organisational boundaries is a critical

capability. Data comes in many different forms – public and private, covert and overt,
and created by industry and government. The UK has a strong legal framework for data
protection, which provides confidence to the public and international partners about
our use of data. We are increasing the knowledge and skills base of policy makers,
operational partners and strategists to ensure they are data-literate and able to be
intelligent customers of analytical insight. We are also investing in recruiting, training and
retaining specialist data scientists, systems architects and data analysts.

Strategic assessment

8. Before the NSCR, we completed a review of strategic assessment. The Joint Intelligence

Organisation, based in the Cabinet Office, is implementing the review’s recommendations.
This will lead to closer working practices across the assessment community and, as
a result, a more rigorous approach to producing assessments that inform national
security policy and decision making. A director has been appointed to oversee this work,
supported by a newly established small team.

Diversity and inclusion

9. The National Security Council (Officials) Shadow Board was established in 2017. Board

members are departmental representatives below the Senior Civil Service, who increase
the diversity of thought and challenge brought to issues being considered by the National
Security Council (Officials) sub-committee. The MOD published ‘The Good Operation’
handbook in 2018, which draws in particular on the lessons of the Chilcot report and
encourages reasonable challenge.


-----

### Defence

#### We will further strengthen and modernise Defence and the Armed Forces to deliver better military capability in an enduringly sustainable way, optimise how the MOD is organised and is operating, pursue a more strategic efficiency and business modernisation programme and improve our commercial and industrial approach through the Modernising Defence Programme.

1. The fundamentals of our defence strategy within SDSR 2015 remain sound, including the

development of Joint Force 2025. It was designed to make good key capability gaps and
strengthen the force. It restored the right level of ambition to our planning and proposed
important new policy initiatives. Furthermore, it was underpinned by a strong budget
settlement for defence. We have the fifth largest defence budget in the world, and by
2021 it will be almost £40 billion.

2. As a leading global actor, with an extensive operational footprint overseas, we have a

responsibility to respond decisively to the changing strategic context. We will need to
work ever more closely with our NATO allies. We can expect to remain actively involved
with our partners in the Gulf in tackling shared threats to our security at their source.
The Asia-Pacific region is likely to become more important to us in the years ahead.
The Armed Forces will also continue to make a significant contribution to domestic
security and resilience alongside civil authorities.

3. The Joint Force that we are building will therefore need to be versatile and agile. It will

need to be effective in the full range of environments and across all five domains – land,
sea, air, space and cyber. It will be international by design, routinely exercising and
operating with allies and partners. It will be credible and capable of addressing state and
non-state threats both alongside other nations and on our own. The major elements of
our SDSR plans for Joint Force 2025 enable us to meet these criteria:

- a maritime task group centred on a Queen Elizabeth Class aircraft carrier with F35
Lightning combat aircraft;

- a land division with three brigades including a new Strike force;

- an air group of combat, transport and surveillance aircraft; and

- a Special Forces task group.

But to secure our competitive advantage over potential adversaries, we must be able to
move quickly to strengthen further priority capabilities and ensure a proper balance of
our investment.

4. To achieve this, we have commissioned the Modernising Defence Programme, led

by the MOD, working with Cabinet Office and across government, which will report to
the Prime Minister, Chancellor of the Exchequer and Defence Secretary. It is identifying
how we can deliver better military capability and better value for money to make a full and

d i l t i bl t ib ti t ti l it d it Th


-----

streams. The first three will: optimise how the MOD is organised and is operating; pursue
a more strategic efficiency and business modernisation programme; and improve the
MOD’s commercial and industrial approach. The fourth will address the capabilities
needed to contribute to our three National Security Objectives today and in the future.

5. In line with SDSR 2015, we have spent £14.6 billion of the £178 billion we committed

to spending on defence equipment and equipment support for the period 2016/17 to
2025/26. We continue to develop our two new aircraft carriers. HMS Queen Elizabeth
was commissioned in 2017, aiming for a first deployment in 2021. HMS Prince of Wales
is due to commence trials at sea in 2019. The fourteenth F35 Lightning aircraft was
delivered in 2017, in line with the intent to deliver the two squadron capability for Carrier
Strike by 2023. We have commenced construction of HMS Glasgow in Scotland, the first
of eight new Type 26 frigates. We plan to procure a new family of frigates, the Type 31e
General Purpose Frigates, with the first of this class expected to be in service by 2023.

6. The first of the Army’s new £4.5 billion family of Ajax armoured vehicles are currently

going through their final acceptance process. We are developing a new Mechanised
Infantry Vehicle which will enhance personnel protection. Our £2 billion investment in the
Special Forces will ensure they are best configured for overseas and domestic tasking.
The new Protector armed remotely piloted aircraft will be introduced by mid-2024 and
we are upgrading our Typhoon aircraft to undertake new tasks, in addition to their role
of protecting UK sovereign airspace, as they become the backbone for UK combat air
forces. Preparations continue in Scotland to receive the nine new Boeing P8 Maritime
Patrol Aircraft which will increase our ability to protect the nuclear deterrent and the new
aircraft carriers from submarine threats.

7. Manufacture of the first of four new Dreadnought Class nuclear-armed submarines is

underway. At its peak, several hundred suppliers will be involved in the programme,
supporting thousands of jobs in the UK. We have established the Submarine Delivery
Agency to oversee this highly complex 20-year acquisition programme; it will become
an Executive Agency in 2018. The first submarine will enter service in the early 2030s.


The UK in NATO’s Enhanced Forward Presence

In addition to Royal Navy maritime deployments as part of Standing NATO Maritime
Groups, and the vital RAF role in Air Policing operations in Central Europe and the
Baltic, the Army has a leading role on the ground in NATO’s enhanced Forward
Presence operation in the Baltic States and Poland.

Following commitments made at the 2016 NATO Summit in Warsaw, and at the
request of the Estonian government, soldiers from the 5th Battalion The Rifles
Battlegroup have been based at Tapa airbase in Estonia in 2017 to establish a UK
headquarters in the country. A total of 800 UK troops are in Estonia, working alongside
French and, from 2018, Danish personnel.

The deployment reassures our European partners of the scale and scope of our
commitment to their security. The battlegroup provides a proportionate, but combatcapable, force to deter and if necessary defend the Alliance from hostile activity.
Our battlegroup is one of four deployed to the Baltic States and Poland We also


-----

8. We continue to build on our military co-operation and interoperability with the US, not just

through NATO but through combined operations in the Gulf and elsewhere as well as joint
exercises and future commitments. At the 2018 UK-France Summit, we re-committed to
co-operate with the French on combat air systems technologies and complex weapons.
We have also deepened our relationship with Germany, including on capabilities for our
air and ground forces. We work closely with our eight partners from the Nordic and Baltic
states and the Netherlands through the Joint Expeditionary Force (JEF), which combines
high-readiness forces from the UK and like-minded partners to provide military options
for a rapid response in peacetime or crisis, independently or as part of a larger force
such as NATO.

9. To build on the SDSR Innovation Initiative we have established a new Defence Innovation

Unit, to help maintain the military edge of our Armed Forces into the future. Working
with the Home Office, the Innovation and Research Insight Unit (IRIS) is tracking external
research activity to inform decision-making about addressing future threats. Launched
in December 2016, the Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) is drawing in novel
ideas from innovators and entrepreneurs to help tackle both defence and wider security
challenges, including counter-terrorism. In the first 15 months, DASA has reviewed over
850 proposals and backed over 150 of these, releasing over £19 million of funds.

10. The National Shipbuilding Strategy and Defence Industrial Policy Refresh were both

published in 2017, and the intent to create a Combat Air Strategy was announced in
2018. The Defence Industrial Policy Refresh aims to make it easier to do business with
the MOD, particularly for innovators, small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), and
non-traditional suppliers. It will also help our defence industry to compete internationally,
by making our procurement international by design, while delivering value for money.


Innovative defence technology

Sustained, long-term investment in science and technology underpins defence
modernisation and the delivery of innovative battle-winning capabilities. Cutting
edge science and technology has delivered the unique dual-mode seeker Brimstone
missile, a world-leading, high-precision weapons system which was significant in
the campaign against Daesh; the Paveway 4 guided bomb, capable of accurately
destroying the most heavily protected targets; and the recently-launched Carbonite 2
satellite, which provides imaging and high definition video from low earth orbit and was
delivered from concept to launch in 8 months at a fraction of the cost of international
equivalents. Science and technology is integral throughout the design and delivery of
the Queen Elizabeth class aircraft carriers.

Our current research programme balances critical sovereign capabilities such as
chemical weapons defence, near-term capability enhancements which are critical to
counter evolving threats, and future-focused programmes. Collaborative programmes
with industry and academia include novel and disruptive technologies, such as Laser
Directed Energy Weapons, and experimentation to understand opportunities and
threats from autonomy and Artificial Intelligence.


-----

The MOD and major suppliers are developing the Defence Contracts Online Portal so that
SMEs can compete for sub-contract work. The MOD is leading the strategic export
campaigns for Typhoon (which has resulted in Qatar signing a contract for 24 Typhoon
aircraft and Saudi Arabia agreeing a Memorandum of Intent for a further 48), a variety of
complex weapons, and F35 Lightning support. The MOD is also supporting the Department
for International Trade on export campaigns for the new Type 26 and Type 31e Frigates.

11. The Armed Forces are dependent on having the right people with the right training, and

we remain committed to maintaining the overall size and capabilities of the Armed Forces,
comprising regular and reserve forces. The size of the Armed Forces remains sufficient
to deliver Joint Force 2025 and to meet sovereign and NATO military commitments,
though all three Services are facing recruitment and retention challenges. The MOD is
working to modernise a range of personnel measures, looking at how to make best
and most efficient use of its workforce, military, civilian and contractors alike. We have
reduced civilian headcount in the MOD and more focused measures will be identified
as part of the Modernising Defence Programme. Work also continues on proposals for
better compensation for injured personnel and families of those killed on operations,
building on the public consultation in 2017.

12. A total of 25,557 military apprenticeships have been started in the period up to 2017.

The MOD is one of the major providers of civilian apprenticeships, with over 1,300
civilians starting an apprenticeship since April 2016. The MOD is developing further
workforce initiatives, focused on science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM)
and entrepreneurial skills. The number of cadet units in schools across the country will
expand to 500 by 2020, with 411 cadet units in schools as of November 2017.

13. The MOD continues to invest in key defence sites and is taking forward plans to reduce

the defence estate by 30% by 2040. This will enable the release of land to support the
national target for building 160,000 new homes by 2020. Land for 14,000 homes is in the
delivery pipeline, from a potential total of land for 55,000 homes already identified.

14. As we leave the EU, we want a partnership that offers both the EU and the UK

**the means to combine efforts to the greatest effect, both operationally, and in**
**developing capabilities. Ten years ago, we led in setting up Operation Atalanta, the first**
ever EU maritime operation, to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia, and have hosted
the operational headquarters since then. We also contribute forces and expertise to other
EU operations, including Operation Althea in Bosnia, and Operation Sophia, countering
illegal migration in the Mediterranean.


Operation TEMPERER

In the wake of the Manchester and Parsons Green terrorist attacks in 2017, armed
military personnel from the Navy, Army and Air Force were mobilised as military
support to the police service across Great Britain. Operation Temperer saw service
personnel directly supporting the police to provide additional protective security, aimed at
deterring, disrupting and preventing terrorist activity and providing public reassurance.
Up to 10,000 service personnel remain at staggered readiness for Operation Temperer.
Further forces are available to augment armed police with a large strategic reserve of


-----

### Counter-Terrorism

#### We will publish a new counter-terrorism strategy, which will
 include measures to improve our ability to disrupt terrorist plots
 in their early stages and improve frontline integration of our
 counter-terrorism response.

1. 2017 saw a shift in the nature of the terrorist threat to the UK, with five attacks in London

and Manchester that led to the deaths of 36 innocent people and many more injured.
We responded decisively, rapidly adapting our priorities and capabilities, to break
the momentum of these attacks. Since March 2017, the police and the security and
intelligence agencies successfully foiled a further ten Islamist plots and disrupted four
extreme right-wing plots.

2. We expect the threat from Islamist terrorism to remain at its current heightened level

for at least the next two years and it might increase further. We proscribed an extreme
right-wing group as a terrorist organisation in 2016 and extreme right-wing terrorism
continues to be a growing threat. Northern Ireland related terrorism remains a serious
threat, particularly in Northern Ireland itself where dissident republicans carried out five
attacks in 2017.

3. We assess that most future terrorist plots in the UK will employ simple methods that

can be developed with ease and at speed. Terrorists still have the intent to also mount
complex, potentially more destructive attacks, probably targeting crowded places or the
global aviation system. The general availability and use of encrypted communications
allows terrorists to disguise their plans better.

4. In the SDSR we explained that as the terrorist threat has changed, we have kept our

response updated. We are now doing this again. The NSCR found CONTEST to be
a well-organised and comprehensive response to terrorism with strengths in terms of
powers, resources, reach and resilience. We will publish a new counter-terrorism
**strategy, which will include measures to improve our ability to disrupt terrorist**
**plots in their early stages and improve frontline integration of our counter-**
**terrorism response.**

5. We will continue to use the four ‘P’ work strands, which will coalesce into a single local or

overseas response as we improve frontline integration of our capabilities and people.


CONTEST – the four ‘P’s

CONTEST retains the tried and tested strategic framework of four ‘P’ work strands:

- **Prevent: to stop people becoming terrorists or supporting terrorism.**

- **Pursue: to stop terrorist attacks.**

- **Protect: to strengthen our protection against a terrorist attack.**

- **Prepare: to mitigate the impact of a terrorist attack.**


-----

6. To meet the challenge of an increasingly complex and changing threat picture, we have

established a Counter-Terrorism Accelerator Fund to respond to emerging threats and
risks more quickly and to introduce innovative and transformational approaches to
counter the terrorist threat. The Fund, worth £25 million each year, has been generated
through a reprioritisation of existing counter-terrorism spending.

7. We will continue to work with the private sector both to protect our economic

infrastructure and to scale our ability to tackle terrorism. We will make the internet as
hostile an environment as possible for terrorists to use for propaganda, and ensure
we have the critical access we need to information on their communications. We will
seek more investment in technologies that automatically identify and remove terrorist
content. We will place a renewed emphasis on our engagement with Communications
Service Providers, recognising that the internet has been a key way for radicalisers to
communicate their propaganda, and for terrorists to plot attacks.

8. We will continue to help communities increase their resilience to terrorism since they are

at the forefront of our response. The purpose of the Prevent work strand in CONTEST
is to safeguard and support vulnerable people to stop them from becoming terrorists
or supporting terrorism. Prevent also extends to supporting the rehabilitation and
disengagement of those already involved in terrorism. Prevent works in a similar way
to programmes designed to safeguard people from gangs, drug abuse, and physical
and sexual abuse. Our Counter-Extremism Strategy aims to protect our communities
from the wider social harms beyond terrorism caused by extremism. We are taking a
comprehensive approach to tackling the evil ideology of extremism, whether violent or
non-violent, Islamist or far and extreme right wing.

9. Our support to our citizens affected by terrorism at home and overseas remains a top

priority. We established the cross-government Victims of Terrorism Unit in March 2017 to
ensure support to victims, witnesses and bereaved families is effective, comprehensive
and coordinated. We called on the Unit’s expertise during the 2017 attacks and have
since been working extensively with local partners and national organisations to learn
lessons and make improvements.


Advanced machine learning to detect Daesh propaganda

The Home Office and ASI Data Science have developed a tool that can automatically
detect 94% of Daesh propaganda with 99.995% accuracy. This means that if it
analyses one million randomly selected videos, only 50 would require additional human
review. The tool can be used by any platform and, on the basis of current performance,
is able to screen all of Daesh’s video propaganda within our two hour benchmark
for removal. Research has shown that the majority of links to Daesh propaganda are
disseminated within two hours of release.

Smaller tech platforms are increasingly targeted by Daesh and its supporters.
The Home Office and ASI will share the methodology behind the new tool with them
to help combat the abuse of their platforms by terrorists and their supporters.


-----

10. Overseas we remain committed to the Global Coalition’s campaign against Daesh,

to remove its control of territory, degrade further its media capabilities and disrupt
key senior leaders and networks, and to efforts to degrade Al Qa’ida and its affiliates.
We will take the lead on international efforts to improve counter-terrorism globally through
campaigns on aviation security and preventing terrorist use of the internet.

11. Counter-terrorism is a reserved matter, meaning that powers related to counter-terrorism

are retained by the UK Parliament. However, many of the local delivery mechanisms are
devolved in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales. The UK government and the Devolved
Administrations work together with a shared recognition of the threat posed across the
UK by terrorism, and a shared strategic response.

12. We have been at the forefront of shaping the arrangements that underpin our CT co
operation within the EU. As we leave the EU, we want to find a way to continue
**this essential work. There are three key areas vital for CT. Collectively we need to find a**
means to maintain practical cooperation that facilitates fast and efficient means to bring
terrorist offenders to justice. We need to maintain cooperation between law enforcement
agencies that enables us to share expertise, information and intelligence. And we need to
maintain the fast and efficient exchange of data.


Counter Terrorism Group

We are a leading member of the Counter Terrorism Group (CTG), consisting of 30
European intelligence and security services from EU and non-EU countries. CTG is the
largest and most significant joint operational counter-terrorism group in the world, both
by number of countries and quantities of intelligence involved. The CTG is a non-EU
body, the work of which is vital for European CT. We work with the CTG daily, sharing
data and cooperating closely. As a result, we have stopped attacks and terrorists are in
custody today who might not otherwise have been found in time.


-----

### Cyber

#### We will continue to implement the National Cyber Security Strategy and ensure it keeps pace with the threat, including through the National Cyber Security Centre.

1. Cyber security is vital for the UK. We have the highest levels of internet use in the G7 and

rank third globally in levels of e-commerce. But the cyber threat from criminals and hostile
states continues to rise, with more frequent and more complex attacks. Getting hold
of hacking tools is easier and cheaper than ever. This has lowered the bar to entry for
criminals and others to launch high-volume, low-sophistication attacks. Despite greater
awareness, cyber security in the majority of organisations and households across the
UK has not kept pace with the threat, and attacks continue to target our critical national
infrastructure.

2. In the SDSR we made significant commitments on cyber. We published our current

National Cyber Security Strategy in 2016, supported by a transformational £1.9 billion five
year investment programme, and launched the National Cyber Security Centre. Our cyber
capabilities were reviewed extensively through the development and initial implementation
of the NCSS, and the NSCR cyber project confirmed our overarching strategic objectives
still stand. We will continue to implement the National Cyber Security Strategy
**and ensure it keeps pace with the threat, including through the National Cyber**
**Security Centre.**

3. We will further increase our work on Active Cyber Defence (ACD), to tackle high-volume

cyber attacks that affect people’s everyday lives. Based on successful National Cyber
Security Centre pilots protecting government networks, we encourage industry and
international partners to implement similar measures, collectively making cyber crime less
profitable and more risky globally. ACD blocks tens of millions of attacks every week and
has reduced the average time a phishing site is online from 27 hours to 1 hour.

4. We have bolstered our law enforcement capabilities against cyber crime and these are

covered in the next chapter. Within government, we are developing and delivering a new
secure shared central IT network, which will be resilient to attack, giving users confidence
their information is properly protected, together with flexibility to work in a variety of
environments.

5. We are exploring with industry how to retrain those who have the aptitude to pursue

careers in cyber security to address the current skills shortages. We are also increasing
our efforts to identify and inspire the next generation of cyber security professionals and
entrepreneurs. We have launched Cyber Discovery, our flagship schools programme for
talented 14-18 year olds. Over 23,000 young people tested their skills in the first stage of
the programme. Our Cyber First scheme continues to nurture young talent. In 2017 this
included a series of summer courses attended by over 1,000 young people. Our 2018
Cyber First girls’ competition attracted entries from 4,500 12-13 year old girls from 400
schools, a 52% increase on the number of schools registered in 2017.


-----

6. We continue to support the growth of the cyber security sector. CyberInvest now has

26 industry members investing millions of pounds in cyber security research at UK
universities, and we recognise 14 university Academic Centres of Excellence in Cyber
Security Research and four Research Institutes. Our Academic Startup programme is
selecting teams for its second round. We are also recruiting for a third cohort of the
HutZero programme, which helps entrepreneurs develop their ideas regardless of their
background. The second cohort of participants is now going through the Cheltenham
Innovation Centre’s Cyber Accelerator. The London Cyber Innovation Centre will open in
spring 2018. Bespoke boot camps, aimed at helping established cyber security start-ups
and SMEs become export ready, are also being held across the country.

7. We are helping people understand the simple steps they can take to protect themselves

through the national Cyber Aware campaign. Cyber Aware now has over 550 partners
from the public, private and third sectors supporting and amplifying the campaign through
their own channels. Our Cyber Essentials scheme provides guidance to businesses on
protecting themselves against common cyber threats and on building their resilience to
future threats. We also work in partnership with the retail and recruitment sectors and
with consumer champions and student organisations.

8. We will continue to invest in international partnerships that tackle shared threats and

promote the rules-based international order in cyberspace. As we leave the EU,
**we want to protect our cyber cooperation so that we can continue to share**
**information about cyber threats, work with the European Union Agency for**
**Network and Information Security (ENISA) and Europol, deepen industrial**
**collaboration and work together to develop cyber resilience and response**
**options. Our international cooperation extends our operational reach and reduces**
the attack platform our adversaries can use against us and allies. We will increase
our investment in building the capacity of international partners, including across the
Commonwealth, in cyber defence, law enforcement and policy.


National Cyber Security Centre

The National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) was created in 2016 to make the UK
the safest places to live and work online. It sits alongside GCHQ’s vital capabilities
and brings together expertise into a single, national authority as a cornerstone of our
National Cyber Security Strategy.

In its first 12 months, the NCSC has prevented thousands of attacks, provided vital
support for our Armed Forces and transformed our ability to manage and respond to
significant cyber security incidents. The NCSC has worked with partners to respond
to nearly 800 incidents, coordinating the government’s response and providing
reassurance to the public.

The NCSC is also helping to put us on the front foot: launching the Active Cyber
Defence programme; working to nurture the next generation of cyber experts through
CyberFirst skills initiatives; and playing a leading role internationally with NATO,
European partners and other key allies.


-----

### Serious and organised crime

#### We will take a whole-of-government approach to serious and organised crime, including a new intelligence framework, better community engagement and a National Economic Crime Centre
 in partnership with the private sector.

1. Serious and organised crime (SOC) has grown faster than any country has been able

to respond to it. It is inherently transnational with many of the threats we face within the
UK emanating from overseas. Criminal networks are increasingly resilient and adaptable,
exploiting technology and becoming involved in almost every type of crime.

2. SOC causes significant harm. It leads to more deaths in the UK each year than all other

national security threats combined, with over 2,500 deaths from drugs alone. It makes
the UK a more dangerous place, with firearms offences increasing by over 25% between
2015/16 and 2016/17. And it targets the vulnerable, seen in the continued rise of child
sexual exploitation. Cyber-dependent crimes and cyber-related fraud now make up a
third of all crime in the UK. Economic crime is a growing threat and makes other criminal
activity easier.

3. In the SDSR we made specific commitments to tackle money laundering and sanctions
busting, cyber crime, online child sexual exploitation, modern slavery and the supply
and availability of illegal firearms. While the NSCR confirmed that we have made good
progress on all of these, the overall growth in the threat from SOC means that we need
a more comprehensive approach. We will take a whole-of-government approach
**including with the Devolved Administrations to tackle serious and organised**
**crime and publish an updated Serious and Organised Crime Strategy in 2018.**

4. **We will establish a new intelligence framework by working with all partners to put**

intelligence at the heart of our response to SOC. The National Crime Agency (NCA) will
ensure there is a single authoritative voice on SOC threats and lead a new capability
development strategy. This will ensure that we are making the best use of capabilities
across the whole law enforcement system and identify where future investment would
have most impact.

5. **We will take a whole-of-government approach to disrupting high-harm**

**organised crime groups and corrupt elites. This will involve the coordinated use of all**
available law enforcement, criminal justice, diplomatic and other tools to ensure the UK
is a hostile environment for their activity. This will undermine their business model so that
they are less able to operate effectively.

6. **We will create a National Economic Crime Centre in partnership with the**

**private sector. This will act as the national authority for the UK’s operational response**
to economic crime, maximising the value of intelligence, and prioritising, tasking and
coordinating to ensure the response achieves the greatest impact on the threat. It will
be hosted by the NCA and will be staffed by partners from across the law enforcement,
criminal justice and regulatory community and from the private sector.


-----

7. **We will reform the Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) system. This will support our**

aims of disrupting illicit financial flows by improving intelligence and disruptions whilst also
reducing bureaucracy for the private sector. Coupled with new powers from the Criminal
Finances Act, this will lead to increased asset recovery opportunities.

8. **We will make community engagement a cornerstone of our response to build**

resilience within communities and reduce public tolerance for criminal activity. We will
implement a comprehensive approach to draw facilitators and offenders away from
SOC. We will broaden our focus on resilience to show how communities themselves can
become more resilient to the threat, including by reducing both tolerance of illegal activity
and demand for illicit goods and services.

9. **We will continue to deliver a targeted response overseas to tackle the inherently**

**transnational nature of the threat. This will be supported by improved analysis**
of the nature and drivers of illicit markets, and more activity designed to address the
vulnerabilities that underpin those drivers. This will be a whole-of-government approach,
with an expanded role for the Home Office, FCO and DFID in particular.

10. Despite the increase in the overall threat, we have made progress in delivering the SDSR

commitments on SOC. We have introduced new measures to make the UK a more
hostile place for those seeking to move, hide or use the proceeds of crime and corruption
or to evade sanctions. The Criminal Finances Act in 2017 created new powers, including
Unexplained Wealth Orders, which enable us to recover criminal assets and crack down
further on money laundering and terrorist financing. Over £2.2 billion has been taken off
criminals since the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 was first introduced.

11. The NCA’s cyber teams and police services across the whole country work together with

prosecution services to secure disruptions and convictions. In the ten most serious cyber
incidents investigated by the National Cyber Crime Unit between October 2016 and April
2017, suspects were identified in nine cases and arrests were made in seven. Action
Fraud, the national reporting centre, is operating 24/7 to improve the speed of the response
for victims of cyber crime. The NCA’s Dark Web Intelligence Unit is now fully staffed,
providing a national capability to assist national and regional operations with dark web
research, assessment and evidential collection of data to identify and prosecute perpetrators.

12. Collaborative working between the NCA and the police has resulted in approximately 400

arrests for online child sexual exploitation offences each month, and the safeguarding of
over 500 children each month. A further £20 million over the next three years has been
allocated to help combat the online grooming of children. This has been used to fund
Regional Organised Crime Units in England and Wales, significantly increasing undercover
online capability which is used to identify and disrupt offenders.


Dismantling a human trafficking organised crime group

A UK-Romanian Joint Investigation Team set up in 2016 investigated an organised
crime group trafficking Romanian nationals for sexual exploitation in the UK. It provided
the legal gateway to target the group, disrupt their activities and safeguard vulnerable
victims, many of whom were subject to horrific abuse. This joint approach, coordinated
by Europol and Eurojust, dismantled the organised crime group, with 21 arrests,


-----

13. We are leading the global effort to end child sexual exploitation and abuse through

the WePROTECT Global Alliance initiative. We also support the Fund to End Violence
Against Children (launched by UNICEF in 2016) through a £40 million contribution over
four years. We have strengthened our capability to identify and prioritise the needs of
victims of child sexual exploitation, and created additional intelligence and child protection
advice capabilities. Technological advancements, such as new facial matching and video
capability, will further assist forces in investigations and help uncover new leads.

14. £8.5 million of additional funding is now available to police forces in England and Wales

to transform the policing response to modern slavery, providing over 60 new and
dedicated roles to support the police with improved intelligence, training and specialist
tactical advice alongside a strengthened operational response. We are working closely
with source countries to eradicate modern slavery in the UK, and build partnerships
to wipe out modern slavery globally, through multilateral engagement and international
co-ordination. We have achieved considerable operational success in the UK and
across Europe and Africa, disrupting and prosecuting some of the most serious, highrisk criminals.

15. We continue to choke off the supply and availability of illegal firearms. The Policing and

Crime Act introduced changes to firearms legislation in January 2017, tightening up
controls on the unlawful conversion of imitation firearms and strengthening definitions
on antique firearms. We launched a new multi-agency cell focused on enhancing our
understanding of the CT/SOC threat to the UK from illegal firearms, and we have been
working with European partners, to tackle the illegal possession and trafficking of
firearms, setting more stringent standards for deactivation, and encouraging greater
information sharing.

16. As we leave the EU, we want to continue our co-operation against SOC. The UK

has been at the forefront of shaping the arrangements that underpin our internal security
co-operation with the EU. Practical co-operation, co-operation between law enforcement
agencies and the exchange of data through databases are all areas where there is
mutual benefit in our continued close co-operation. This is why we have proposed a
new treaty on security, law enforcement and criminal justice, which we think is the best
way of ensuring continued collaboration and co-operation on key legislative tools and
instruments as we leave the EU.


Targeting the illicit sale of firearms and ammunition

We formed an international Joint Investigation Team after the discovery in 2015 of a
shipment of Skorpion submachine guns to the UK. It targeted the illicit sale of firearms
and ammunition using the dark web, bitcoin currency and ‘fast parcel’ deliveries.
Using Europol as the platform for rapid exchange of information and coordination, law
enforcement action resulted in the identification of a significant number of ‘customers’
and numerous successful prosecutions throughout Europe.


-----

### Ports and borders

#### We will integrate the knowledge and expertise held by all border organisations to produce comprehensive strategic threat assessments.

1. The border is a vital asset for our national security, prosperity and global image.

It provides a unique intervention point to detect and disrupt a range of security threats,
while enabling the travel and trade that underpins our prosperity as a global hub.
The border also contributes to how we are seen internationally. We must facilitate the
movement of legitimate trade and travellers from overseas, while ensuring the right
measures are in place to deter hostile actors and prevent illicit cross-border movements.

2. The border itself is a complex operating environment that reaches far beyond the physical

controls at specific ports and airports. It includes a wide range of activity overseas and in
the UK, undertaken by at least 25 distinct government organisations. These range from
Border Force, HM Revenue and Customs and Immigration Enforcement whose roles
are relatively well known, to organisations as diverse as the Medicines and Healthcare
Products Regulatory Agency, the Food Standards Agency, the Driver and Vehicle
Standards Agency, and the Animal and Plant Health Agency.

3. We must balance our security and prosperity objectives at the border. In 2016, more than

250 million travellers crossed the UK border, with foreign visitors spending over £23 billion
in the UK. In the same year, 470 million tonnes of freight passed through our major ports,
making up over £300 billion of exports and nearly £440 billion of imports. These figures
are all expected to continue to increase in coming years, placing further demands on our
border. Cheap cross-border travel and immediate communication mean criminals are
increasingly agile, organised and difficult to disrupt. Meanwhile passengers and industry
have increasingly high expectations for a quick and efficient border experience.

4. In the UK we already benefit from some of the world’s most efficient and effective border

systems. We are a world leader in the use of facial recognition technology for passport
control, with approximately 250 automated electronic ePassport Gates now in operation
at our major airports and rail terminals. These include the ‘juxtaposed controls’ we
operate in France and Belgium, where passengers pass through UK passport control
and customs in Paris or Brussels before boarding their train to the UK. We make
extensive use of advance passenger data to help target interventions and keep the UK
safe. We have a world-class radiological detection capability. We are also making further
enhancements which will benefit both our security and prosperity. We intend to replace
the paper visas we stick into passports with electronic ‘e-visas’, which will be more
secure and will enhance the customer experience.

5. In the years preceding and since the publication of the SDSR, border-related law

enforcement has gone through a period of significant organisational change. Through
the NSCR, we looked closely at how our borders operate. We found that successful
operations against terrorists and criminals are increasingly the outcome of collaboration
by multiple organisations, and we are determined to build on this success. We will
**improve our strategic intelligence capability further by integrating the knowledge**
**and expertise held by all border organisations to produce comprehensive**


-----

**strategic threat assessments. Organisations at the border, including law enforcement**
across the UK, will develop smarter ways of working together and coordinating
their activity. This will mean we make better use of our capabilities and increase our
effectiveness in responding to changes in threats.

6. We will work more closely with industry partners operating at the border to ensure that

operations work as smoothly and effectively as possible. Industry operators face many
of the same challenges, including developing and installing the infrastructure required
for physical controls and minimising the effect that these controls have on legitimate
freight and passenger flow. Close cooperation with industry is also crucial to tackle
port corruption, particularly by those with access to secure areas who may abuse their
position to facilitate the illicit entry or exit of people or goods. As a result of the NSCR,
we will introduce a new border security partners group to support this cooperation.

7. As we reported in the first SDSR Annual Report, the Royal Navy is working closely with

law enforcement agencies to maintain the UK’s maritime security and the security of its
territorial waters. The Joint Maritime Operations Centre established in 2016 has now
been expanded into a Joint Maritime Operations Co-ordination Centre (JMOCC) involving
the Home Office, the Royal Navy, UK Border Force, Police and other maritime agencies.
The Royal Navy will obtain five new offshore patrol vessels, with the first one, HMS Forth,
due to enter service in spring 2018.

8. **As we leave the EU, we want to find a practical and pragmatic way to continue**

**to cooperate with the EU on cross-border threats. The UK has driven a pan-**
EU approach to processing passenger data, enabling the identification and tracking
of criminals, victims of trafficking and those individuals vulnerable to radicalisation.
People across Europe are safer as a result. A key border security requirement is advance
information about freight movements. Advance information helps border agencies target
illicit movements and reduces unnecessary disruption of legitimate loads or shipments.

9. When we leave the EU, we will put in place amended legislation on our Territorial Waters

and Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) that ensures our security and prosperity interests
are fully addressed, including for the commercial exploitation of waters around the UK
through fishing, and mineral, oil and gas exploration and production. Our preparation
for enforcement of the new legislation includes a UK-wide review to improve the
coordination, tasking, asset sharing and governance of all marine policing, maritime
security and border enforcement activity in the UK Marine Area.


Operation Halifax

We worked jointly with Bulgaria, Belgium, France and The Netherlands through
Operation Halifax to tackle systematic smuggling of migrants into northern Europe.
The operation resulted in 120 arrests across 10 EU countries.


-----

### National resilience

#### We will improve assurance of resilience and readiness of local and national capabilities, reinforce mutual aid systems during major disasters, and continue to develop a holistic approach to supporting victims of emergencies.

1. Resilience embeds the control of risks, and readiness for and recovery from emergencies

and disruption into everything we do. National resilience involves the effective
coordination of capabilities and approaches across tiers of government and the wider
public and private sector.

2. National resilience is truly collective, depending on all of us – emergency responders,

local and central government, the Armed Forces, businesses, communities and individual
members of the public. We are committed to continually strengthening the UK’s resilience
and we act on lessons after emergencies have happened. The vital importance of this
work was emphasised last year following the appalling attacks in Manchester and London
and the tragedy at Grenfell Tower. This was the focus of the NSCR work on resilience.

3. We will continue to seek further opportunities to understand and assure resilience and

readiness of both local and national capabilities. Emergency response and recovery
is carried out first and foremost at the local level. As part of efforts to improve local
resilience, the Cabinet Office is working with the local multi-agency bodies, Local
Resilience Forums (LRFs), to identify good and leading practice. We will continue to
**build a set of Resilience Standards which set expectations, help Local Resilience**
**Forums assess themselves, and act as a basis for assurance and continuous**
**improvement.**

4. Mutual aid is widely used within and between organisations during emergencies. We will

**identify ways to reinforce local mutual aid systems during major disasters.**
This includes local responders taking steps to ensure the mutual aid is firmly embedded
in local response arrangements, as well as departments taking steps to ensure that the
right support can be delivered quickly to where it is needed on the ground.

5. We are committed to supporting the victims of tragic events, both in the immediate

aftermath of the event and also in the longer term. Events throughout 2017 demonstrated
the importance of coordinated and effective support being available to victims and
their families. The Victims of Terrorism Unit works with numerous organisations to
ensure that victims of terrorist attacks receive the best possible support. We will
**work across services, including with the voluntary sector and charities, to**
**continue to develop a holistic approach to supporting victims of all major and**
**serious incidents.**

6. We committed in the SDSR to having the right regulatory framework to ensure our

critical national infrastructure (CNI) is resilient to future threats. We published a Green
Paper in 2017 setting out proposals to reform and strengthen powers for scrutinising
the national security implications of certain particular types of investments, in particular
sensitive technologies and certain types of CNI The Green Paper sets out the reforms


-----

that we propose to take in both the short and long term. A regulatory framework for cyber
security in critical sectors is due to be implemented by May 2018.

7. We are also enhancing the UK’s ability to prepare for and respond to nationwide power

failure. A taskforce of representatives from across the energy sector is working with the
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) to ensure there is a robust
and effective restoration strategy in the short and long term. This is alongside work led by
Cabinet Office on cross-sector mitigation and response.

8. We have completed the review of infrastructure policing set out in the SDSR, and are now

considering ways to optimise the protection of critical infrastructure, such as our nuclear
sites and railways.

9. We have also reviewed our approach to biological security. The UK Biological Security

Strategy will address key risks such as natural disease outbreaks.

10. Space was designated as a CNI sector in 2015. A cross-government ministerial space

committee was established in December 2016 to set the government’s strategic ambition
for space, promoting growth and enhancing security by driving the development and
implementation of coherent cross-government civil and military space strategies and
policies. The UK Space Agency will publish a Space Strategy in 2018.

11. We are implementing the recommendations of the National Flood Resilience Review 2016

to improve the UK’s preparedness for flooding. The National Flood Response Centre
(NFRC) was established after the Review and exercised in 2016 and 2017.

12. We continue to upgrade our crisis response infrastructure drawing on MOD support as

required. This work ensures that we have resilient and flexible structures which are able
to deal with a wider range of risks. We intend to complete this work by the end of the
current Spending Review period.

13. As we leave the EU, we seek to continue to co-operate with the EU on shared

**threats including terrorism, civil emergencies, resilience, risk reduction and**
**health security. Our ability to prevent, prepare for and respond to risks is enhanced by**
our ability to share data and expertise, exchange information and collaborate closely with
our nearest neighbours.


Civil protection

We are one of the most active countries in civil protection. We work closely with the
EU, NATO and countries around the world in preparing for and responding to major
emergencies, including earthquakes and major disease outbreaks. We are a leading
voice in NATO on the importance of civil resilience as an aspect of collective defence
and modern deterrence. We deployed our first regional resilience adviser to the Baltic
States to share best practice in building national resilience. In emergencies, we are a
steadfast partner. Between 2013 and 2017 we sent thousands of tonnes of assistance
items and more than 1,200 experts through EU mechanisms to support the response
to emergencies.


-----

### Global Britain

#### We will strengthen our overseas network so that we can reinvest in our relationships around the world, champion the rules-based system including free trade, and use our soft power to project our values and advance UK interests.

1. Global Britain means the UK as an open, inclusive and outward facing free-trading global

power playing a leading role on the world stage. We are reinvesting in our relationships
around the world. We are championing free trade and the international rules-based
system. And we are using our soft power to project our values and advance UK interests.

2. In the SDSR we identified that our strong alliances and partnerships worldwide are ever

more important since many of the opportunities and threats are global. Global Britain
builds on this. Economic growth in Asia is moving the global centre of gravity east.
Meanwhile some states are actively destabilising the world order to their own ends,
claiming that the rules and standards we have built, and the values on which they rest,
no longer apply.

3. As a global trading nation, our security and prosperity has always been bound to global

security and prosperity. The fundamental values we hold dear – respect for human
dignity, human rights, freedom, democracy and equality – have created common cause
to act together with partners in our shared interest. Global Britain involves deepening our
partnerships and showing leadership in tackling global challenges, including through our
seat on the United Nations Security Council. We will establish a Global Britain Board
**to coordinate Global Britain activity across departments, agencies and our**
**overseas network.**

4. Our overseas network underpins our international engagement. We have 15,000 staff

from 31 departments and public bodies across 169 countries and territories. The UK
model is a powerful combination of skills and expertise that provides influence and senior
access and deploys specialist knowledge in areas such as counter-terrorism, migration,
financial regulation, trade policy, defence, development, climate change and law
enforcement as well as consular support to British nationals.

5. **We will strengthen our overseas network to support our ambitions for Global**

**Britain. Additional staff will build and strengthen bilateral engagement around the world,**
project our influence and underline our commitment to allies and partners, including in
Europe, and deliver in areas where the EU has led to date. In 2018, we appointed the first
of nine of Her Britannic Majesty’s Trade Commissioners, who will lead our co-ordinated
trade and investment effort overseas. We will increase our efforts to place UK experts in
key positions in multilateral institutions, such as the WTO, UN, NATO and the international
financial institutions. We remain firmly committed to ensuring that these organisations
remain fit for purpose and we support reform programmes to achieve this.

6. We will also continue to strengthen the platform that the network provides for

government departments to operate overseas. We have already largely consolidated
most departments’ presence onto one single platform with the FCO as the main


-----

corporate services provider. The cross-government Network Board will set out a
**detailed implementation plan that identifies measures to further strengthen the**
**overseas platform.**

7. Expertise underpins our capability to deliver Global Britain. We will make more use of

best practice training provision, including the FCO Diplomatic Academy’s 12 faculties
and the Defence Academy. We will continue to improve the use of expertise, including in
languages. We already have better language skills being used in key roles. We will also
track skills across departments better.

8. Defence Engagement was established as a funded MOD task as a result of the

SDSR, and the defence staffs established in the Gulf (Dubai), Asia-Pacific (Singapore)
and West Africa (Abuja) became fully operational in 2017. We also met our SDSR
commitment to double the number of our military personnel supporting UN peacekeeping
missions in 2017.

9. We are investing £291 million to 2020 in the BBC World Service to increase access

to trusted news and information. We continue to invest in the British Council as a
world leader in promoting cultural relations and educational opportunities. Their
major programme this year ‘Active Citizens’ builds understanding and trust between
communities locally and globally and has trained 55,000 people in 2016/17.

10. The Chevening, Marshall and Commonwealth Scholarship schemes continue to attract

high-quality applicants from around the world with almost 2,500 new students studying in
the UK in 2017 under these schemes. We have also increased the number of international
places being offered on our most prestigious International Defence Training courses from
1221 places in 2015/16 to 2,240 in 2016/17.

Our overseas network


-----

11. How the UK is perceived matters. Building on these investments, we will create a

**cross-government soft power strategy, while respecting the independence of the**
BBC World Service, British Council and the many British institutions and brands that
contribute to our soft power. We will use the GREAT campaign to support the UK’s
future relationship with European countries and to continue to promote the UK and be a
powerful outreach tool worldwide. We will develop options to improve visa service
**delivery through the FCO and Home Office.**

12. We will continue to demonstrate global leadership through a rolling calendar of

**international summits and conferences. The Commonwealth Heads of Government**
Meeting in London in April 2018 will have a strong youth focus since the future of the
Commonwealth depends on its one billion young people. They benefit from a common
language, legal systems and values, making it easier for them to communicate, trade and
cooperate with one another. The London 2018 Illegal Wildlife Trade Conference will build
global consensus on tackling this lucrative transnational crime.

13. As we leave the EU, we seek a deep and special partnership between the UK and

**EU. We want to work together globally, defending the international order and**
**our shared values. We seek a partnership on external security that goes beyond any**
existing third country arrangements and offers us the means to combine efforts where it is
in our mutual interest. The future partnership must respect the decision-making autonomy
of the EU and the sovereignty of the UK. Since the EU’s common foreign policy is distinct
within the EU Treaties and our foreign policies will keep evolving, we should be ready to
bring into effect key aspects of our future partnership on external security from 2019.


Sanctions on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North Korea)

The UK has played a prominent role as a permanent member of the United Nations
Security Council to put pressure on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(DPRK), including through sanctions, to stop its illegal pursuit of nuclear weapons and
ballistic missiles. We have also pursued additional autonomous EU sanctions, including
a full ban on investment in the DPRK and oil exports.

In January 2018, the UK was instrumental in securing agreement to list 17 DPRK
nationals involved in illegal trade activities and sanctions evasion. The UK, with EU
partners, has actively encouraged the comprehensive enforcement of UN Security
Council sanctions by the international community.


-----

Partners, allies and global engagement

In SDSR 2015, we highlighted the vital importance of our strong alliances and
partnerships worldwide. The strength of our global approach is reinforced by the range
and breadth of our bilateral and regional relationships, as well as our influence in global
and regional institutions. The three primary centres of the global economy and political
influence are now in North America, in Europe and its neighbourhood, and in the
Indo-Pacific region, and we must maintain and build on our strong relationships across
these regions. At the same time, Global Britain will remain active and engaged around
the whole world, on key global issues, and in the major institutions of the rules-based
international order.

**The United States continues to be our single most important international partner.**

**NATO remains the cornerstone of our security posture.**

Many of our closest and most like-minded partners are members of the European
**Union, and we remain unconditionally committed to Europe’s security. We will maintain**
particularly comprehensive bilateral relationships with France, Germany and Ireland.
We will continue to engage closely with the EU as an organisation and with all our
European friends and partners both in the EU and outside it.

We are uniquely privileged to share close security and cultural links with Five Eyes
partners in Australia, Canada and New Zealand as well as the US.

We maintain strong relationships with our key partners in the Gulf and around the
**Middle East and North Africa, reflecting our mutual security and prosperity interests,**
and helping to tackle the many security challenges which emanate from the region.

We have established a global comprehensive strategic partnership with China.

Our enduring close relationship with India offers much scope to build mutual
prosperity and security. Across South Asia we have deep relationships flowing from
our shared history. We remain committed to Afghanistan’s future.

**Japan and South Korea are strong partners for us in security, prosperity, and in**
tackling many global issues.

In South East Asia we continue to work with our key partners on economic,
educational and security issues, including the Five Power Defence Arrangements with
Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia, and Singapore.

We are building partnerships with small island states to enhance their sustainability.

Our focus on Africa will change and expand to match challenges and opportunities
faced by rapidly growing, young populations across the continent.

**Latin America offers us increasing opportunities for close cooperation with influential**
and like-minded liberal free-trading nations.

Our commitment to the United Nations, including our role as a permanent member
of the Security Council, remains central to our global engagement. We work closely
with the other permanent members to tackle global challenges. We will also continue
to strengthen the Commonwealth and we will maintain our active membership of the
wide range of multilateral bodies and groupings to which we belong, including the G7,
**G20, counter-proliferation regimes and international financial institutions.**


-----

### National security communications

#### We will significantly expand the National Security Communications Team to make communications an integral part of our approach to national security.

1. The UK is considered a world leader in communications but we have taken a more

consistent approach to delivering domestic communications campaigns, such as on
road safety and stopping smoking, than in national security. Nevertheless, there are clear
examples of success. The UK leads international efforts to counter Daesh’s propaganda
and damage its brand. The GREAT campaign is an international campaign to generate
jobs and growth for Britain that has already secured confirmed economic returns of
£2.7 billion.

2. Strategic communications was considered in the SDSR as a part of our approach to

some capabilities, but not as a cross-government capability. As a result of the NSCR,
**we will significantly expand the National Security Communications Team.**
This enhanced capability will mean that the senior officials for NSC priorities will have
access to a broad cross-government group of communications professionals who can
work centrally or alongside them to achieve communications objectives as an integrated
part of the government’s approach to national security.

3. The enhanced National Security Communications Team will continue to be staffed by

the Government Communication Service, the professional body for people working in
communication roles across government. The expansion will enable communications
professionals to specialise in national security communications, with training, support and
a career pathway to strengthen and retain talent.

4. The communications landscape is continually evolving. Communications are increasingly

being used by our partners and adversaries alike for strategic real-world advantage.
Traditional channels have been largely discarded in favour of digital and social media
platforms. This is combined with a decline of trust in traditional sources of information
and the era of so-called ‘fake news’. In parallel, the rules of the game have changed.
The democratisation of information, and the means to exploit it, has allowed hostile actors
to exert disproportionate influence in competition with the public interest.

5. We will continue to use communications to tackle these interconnected, complex

challenges to our national security. They must be part of the frontline of our defences,
helping prevent threats to British lives at source. We need to be able to communicate
more effectively about our policies and what we stand for across our core national
security interests. One way we do this to highlight the international campaigns we lead in
order to protect and project our fundamental values and build a greater global community
on issues of national and international security.

6. The UK launched the Counter-Daesh Communications Cell in 2015 as part of the Global

Coalition of 74 international partners dedicated to degrading and defeating Daesh.
Through our leadership, the Cell changed the international narrative around Daesh – from
one that highlights their atrocities to one which emphasises their failures. This has been


-----

vital in damaging the perception of Daesh, and reducing their ability to recruit. We provide
daily information packs to Coalition partners, containing facts and figures on Daesh’s
[increasing failures. We also launched a Global Coalition website (www.theglobalcoalition.](http://www.theglobalcoalition.org)
[org) that houses up-to-date information on Coalition progress. All of this helped Coalition](http://www.theglobalcoalition.org)
governments highlight Daesh’s lies and expose their inadequacies. As a result of our
combined efforts, Daesh’s propaganda output dropped by 75% in 2017.


-----

### Economic security, prosperity and trade

#### We will use the Fusion Doctrine to integrate economic goals and capabilities throughout national security.

1. In the SDSR we emphasised that our economic and national security go hand in hand.

Economic security is a core part of the UK’s national security agenda. We are the sixth
largest economy in the world, the fifth largest exporter and the top destination for inward
investment in Europe. Our partners around the world want British businesses as partners
for the long term, and the legal services, accountancy services and finance that make
the UK a global financial centre. The UK’s position and influence in the growing global
economy are of even greater importance as we face a growing range of challenges to free
trade and globalisation.

2. Despite the linkage we made in the SDSR between security and economic goals,

we have not fully integrated our approaches. We will use the Fusion Doctrine to
**integrate economic goals and capabilities throughout national security.**

3. Our Industrial Strategy, published in 2017, sets out our vision for the future economy and

our strategy to boost the productivity, earning power and quality of life of people across
the country. Our aim is that by 2030 we will have transformed productivity and earning
power across the UK to become the world’s most innovative economy and the best place
to start and grow a business, with upgraded infrastructure and prosperous communities
across the country. We are building on the UK’s many strengths and reinforcing the
foundations of productivity: ideas, people, infrastructure, our business environment and
places. We have announced sector deals, involving strategic long-term partnerships
between industry and government backed by sizeable private sector co-investment,
in construction, life sciences, artificial intelligence and automotive industries, and will
announce more in the future.


Industrial Strategy

Our commitments include:

- raising investment in R&D to 2.4% of GDP by 2027 and announcing £725 million in
new Industrial Strategy programmes to drive innovation;

- investing £406 million in maths, digital and technical education as well as creating
a new National Retraining Scheme that helps people to re-skill;

- boosting spending on the infrastructure of the future, delivering clean energy and
spreading 5G digital connectivity right across the country and £400 million for
electric vehicle charging points;

- creating a £1.7 billion Transforming Cities Fund for projects that drive productivity
by improving connections within city regions; and

- creating an Independent Industrial Strategy Council to develop measures of
success and evaluate our performance.


-----

4. The Industrial Strategy sets out ‘Grand Challenges’ to put the UK at the forefront of

the industries of the future, ensuring that we take advantage of major global changes,
improving people’s lives and the country’s productivity. The four initial challenges are:

- putting the UK at the forefront of the Artificial Intelligence and data revolution, which could
add £232 billion to the UK economy (around 10% to GDP) if widely adopted;

- making the UK a world leader in the development, manufacture and use of low carbon
technologies, systems and services since the global shift to clean growth will transform
many sectors;

- becoming a world leader in shaping the future of mobility, since we are on the cusp of a
profound change in how people, goods and services move, driven by engineering and
technology innovations; and

- harnessing the power of innovation to meet the needs of an ageing society, with the
world’s centenarian population projected to grow eightfold by 2050.

5. To promote the UK’s economic growth and prosperity, we seek to maximise UK trade

opportunities, including exports and investment (outward direct investment and foreign
direct investment). We will build on the UK’s competitive strengths identified in the
Industrial Strategy. We promote and protect innovation, technological development and
skills growth in the UK and globally. We also market the UK as the best place to visit,
study and do business.

6. We champion the rules-based international financial and economic architecture and

support greater inclusivity in the membership and decision-making of the International
Financial Institutions including the World Bank and the IMF. In the G20, we have led
international work on tax capacity-building in developing countries. In the G7, we have
led work to counter money laundering and terrorist financing. We will work to reduce
the barriers to bilateral trade (tariff and non-tariff) and market access, ensuring a
comprehensive network of trading agreements, and reinforcing the multilateral rulesbased system which governs trade and the stimulation of demand, especially in
emerging and innovation-focused sectors. We are deepening our bilateral economic
relationships with emerging global economic powers, including through our Economic
and Financial Dialogues.

7. We remain a leading player in developing and applying economic sanctions.

The Policing and Crime Act 2017 has increased penalties for evading financial sanctions.
The Sanctions and Anti-Money Laundering Bill is intended to help us continue using
sanctions smartly to deliver national security outcomes after we have left the EU.

8. We will continue to promote greater resilience in the global economy and global financial

system through monitoring and mitigation of endemic and emerging economic and
financial risks, including by the multilateral institutions, and removing bottlenecks to
financial, trade and economic flows. And we support action within and across borders to
secure financial systems against cyber crime and from any criminal activity that aims to
defraud or abuse those systems.


-----

9. We predict, analyse and mitigate external economic threats to the UK and the wider

global system to protect economic security. We respond to punitive or hostile policies
developed by other states which harm the UK’s economic prospects as well as
international threats to critical national infrastructure (CNI). We reduce risks from serious
and organised crime, including by engaging with other global financial centres to tackle
illicit financial flows. We work bilaterally and multilaterally to ensure UK energy security.
We seek to mitigate threats arising from major global issues and wider market failures.
These include climate change, energy policy and health issues, such as global pandemics
and antimicrobial resistance. We also monitor and, where possible, mitigate the threats to
UK economic benefit from major global geo-political events.

10. We enhance our economic security and prosperity at home through our development

work which supports strong, inclusive and sustainable growth overseas. This work
demonstrates the UK’s commitment to eradicating poverty and meeting the Sustainable
Development Goals whilst also enhancing mutual prosperity by building the foundations
for UK trade and commercial opportunities in horizon markets. We believe the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change represents the right global framework for protecting the
prosperity and security of future generations.


UK-Japan partnership

Japan is one of our global strategic partners and, during the Prime Minister’s visit
to Japan in 2017, we committed to elevating our security and defence partnership
to a new level, including agreeing a Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation. The
Declaration confirmed that we are each other’s closest security partners in Asia and
Europe respectively and is a clear demonstration of the importance of aligning our
complementary agendas.

Security and defence is a cornerstone of our relationship with Japan. We are
enhancing our coordinated response to challenges to the rules-based international
system, through increased security and defence cooperation in areas such as joint
exercises, defence equipment and technology, cooperation in third countries, counterterrorism and violent extremism, cyber security, and combating serious and organised
crime, including modern slavery.

Japan and the UK are among the strongest global champions of free trade. The UK
has been one of the strongest advocates of the EU-Japan Economic Partnership
Agreement (EPA). As the Prime Minister agreed during her visit to Japan, we will work
quickly to establish a new economic partnership between Japan and the UK based on
the final terms of the EPA.


-----

11. As we leave the EU, we seek a deep and special partnership that spans a new

**economic relationship and a new relationship on security. We start from the unique**
position of regulatory alignment, trust in one another’s institutions and a shared spirit of
cooperation. We want the broadest and deepest possible partnership – covering more
sectors and co-operating more fully than any Free Trade Agreement anywhere in the
world today. We both want good access to each other’s markets; we want competition
between us to be fair and open; and we want reliable, transparent means of verifying that
we are meeting our commitments and resolving disputes. This partnership, together with
the new trade deals we strike with allies across the world, will support new jobs for our
people, new markets for our exporters, and new growth for our economy.


Putting the UK at the forefront of the Artificial Intelligence and data revolution

Artificial intelligence and machine learning are starting to transform the global
economy and could add £232 billion to the UK economy by 2030. Through our Grand
Challenge, we are encouraging greater uptake of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and data
analytic technologies and are championing research and innovation. The UK will take
an international leadership role by investing £9 million in a new Centre for Data Ethics
and Innovation. This world-first advisory body will review the existing governance
landscape and advise the government on how we can enable and ensure ethical, safe
and innovative uses of data, including AI. We have also agreed an AI sector deal with
industry to boost the UK’s global position as leader in developing AI technology.

Our investment in AI is supported by a £10 million Regulators’ Pioneer Fund, helping
regulators to take new approaches to new and emerging technologies. We will invest
£45 million to fund new additional doctoral studentships in AI and related disciplines,
increasing numbers by at least 200 extra places a year by 2020/21. Through our
Industrial Strategy Challenge Fund, we are funding programmes to develop robots to
work in extreme environments (£93 million), to improve data use for early diagnosis
and precision medicine (£196 million), for AI and control systems needed to enable
driverless cars (£38 million) and to bring about the next generation of services
(£20 million).


-----

Our prosperity is founded on being an open liberal free trading economy in which


-----

### Development

#### We will ensure our development capability responds to changes in global poverty and national security challenges.

1. Development helps create the foundations for global security and prosperity. As a result,

development assistance is an essential part of the UK’s approach to national security.
Our assistance helps countries become self-sufficient, reduce transnational threats like
terrorism and serious and organised crime, and tackle challenges like climate change and
high levels of population growth. Development also builds economies to help create the
UK’s trading partners of the future.

2. While global poverty is falling, conflict and insecurity are becoming the main drivers

of extreme poverty. In the SDSR, we committed to spend over 50% of DFID’s budget
on fragile states and regions. We have consistently met this target and will continue to
do so for the rest of the SDSR period. As a result of the NSCR, we will ensure our
**development capability responds to changes in the drivers of global poverty**
**and works in more innovative ways. We can deliver our development assistance**
most effectively through a whole-of-government approach. The cross-government funds,
described in the next chapter, contribute to this joined-up way of working.

3. By 2030, around 80% of the extreme poor will live in poorly governed, fragile states,

particularly in Africa. Weakness in governance also creates space for serious and
organised crime and terrorism, and contributes to irregular migration, while our support
helps countries improve their governance and reduce these drivers of conflict. Following
the NSCR, DFID will focus on ensuring that its programmes are targeted more acutely
on the underlying drivers of fragility, conflict and instability. We will increase our efforts
**on security and justice, which will further help reduce insecurity, serious and organised**
crime, and grievances that can lead to violent extremism.

4. Aid can help create self-sufficient economies. But as countries transition out of poverty,

what they need from the UK is changing. Looking to the future, we will be innovative
in developing new tools and partnerships that can better meet the needs of emerging
lower middle income countries and deepen the UK’s economic relationships with growing
markets. We will share knowledge and technical expertise to support partner
**governments to develop and deliver strategies for inclusive economic growth.**
This includes a strong focus on stimulating major private sector investment, helping
countries export and harness the power of trade with the UK and globally, and addressing
the acute need for mass numbers of jobs for rising youth populations. In conflict-affected
countries, supporting inclusive economic growth helps build the foundations for stability
and economic opportunity.

5. We will also deepen our relationships with emerging powers to shape global rules,

financial systems and capital flows, and improve the provision of global public goods.
We want to partner with emerging powers as they develop their institutions and
encourage them to contribute to the international aid architecture. We will increase our
cross-government work with global hubs that handle finance into and from the developing
world. We will explore the possibility of new financial instruments or institutions to support


-----

This includes scoping a new toolkit to provide the right financing on the right terms as
countries develop, which while contributing to poverty reduction could offer new markets
for British businesses.

6. Science, technology and innovation play a critical role in providing solutions to the

world’s major development challenges. Some examples of the impact of our use of
technology for development include: the rapid development and trialling of a new Ebola
vaccine in response to the 2014/15 Ebola outbreak; investing in bio-fortification to tackle
malnutrition with vitamin-enriched varieties of staple crops; and innovation in mobile
apps, such as ‘pay as you go’ water and sanitation service delivery, and an app that
streamlines efforts to trace the families of missing children during crises. We also spent
over £1.1 billion in 2016/17 on climate change resilience and low carbon development in
support of developing countries’ response to climate change. We will continue to harness
technological innovation to deliver development outcomes through partnership across
government, with international donors and the private sector.

7. Official Development Assistance (ODA), often referred to as aid, is government funding

meeting the internationally agreed criteria to promote economic development and welfare
in eligible countries. Since the SDSR, more government departments are spending ODA.
We work across government to ensure that the principles of good aid management
including transparency and value for money are maintained. UK leadership has secured
significant and important progress in changing the international aid rules at the OECD
Development Assistance Committee (DAC) so that they better reflect the rapidly changing
world we live in. This has included doubling the proportion of our multilateral peacekeeping
costs that can be counted as aid, and securing agreement on the need to create a new
mechanism to re-admit countries that had graduated from ODA eligibility back to the list
of ODA-eligible countries if their GNI per capita falls low enough, for example as a result
of a catastrophic natural disaster or other crisis. We will continue our efforts to reform the
international aid rules so that they keep pace with the complex, global challenges of the
twenty first century such as reducing poverty, instability and conflict.


UK Emergency Medical Team

The SDSR established the UK Public Health Rapid Support Team to provide fast
and substantial assistance to countries affected by large-scale outbreaks. In Sierra
Leone it established water-borne disease surveillance, particularly for cholera, in the
wake of flooding and landslides in Freetown. Alongside this, we have established the
UK Emergency Medical Team (EMT) to provide rapid healthcare responses during a
humanitarian crisis.

The EMT deployed for the first time in December 2017 to the refugee camps of
Cox’s Bazar in Bangladesh following a diphtheria outbreak. 40 medical professionals,
including doctors, nurses and paramedics, spent six weeks helping more than 3,000
people, bringing the diphtheria outbreak under control and saving countless lives.

The EMT also enables UK NHS workers to gain unique training opportunities.
Following the Manchester terror attacks in 2017, many NHS staff who had received
training were involved in the response, and subsequently fed back how valuable their


-----

8. **As we leave the EU, we want to continue working with the EU and European**

**partners on development, on a case by case basis, when it is in our mutual**
**interest, represents best value for money and we can play an appropriate role**
**in shaping our collective actions. We share a commitment with the EU to eradicate**
extreme poverty and help build prosperity, peace, stability and resilience in developing
countries. Through our partnership, we could collaborate and align in support of the UN’s
Sustainable Development Goals, as well as continuing to work together on early warning,
conflict prevention and stabilisation.

**UK’s ODA: GNI ratio (%) Current methodology in given year**

**Of UK GNI (ESA2010)**

**0.7%** **was spent on ODA to**

**developing countries** **2016: 0.70%**

**1970 UN target 0.7%**

**Of UK ODA was spent**
**bilaterally (going to**

**64%** **specific countries,**

**regions or programmes)** **2012:**

0.57%

**Of UK ODA was spent**

**36%** **as core contributions to**

**1970: 0.36%**

**multilaterals**

**Top 5 sectors: Proportion of UK bilateral** **Proportion of Total UK Net ODA:**
**ODA, 2016** **by contributor, 2016**

**Department for**

**Humanitarian** **86.6%** **International Development**
**15%**

**73.8%**

**Multisector**
**13%**

**2012** **2016**

**Government & Civil Society**

**Other Government** **18.3%**

**13%** **11.0%** **Departments**

**Health** **7.9%**

**2.4%** **Other Contributors of UK**

**12%** **ODA**

**Education** **Five years ago DFID accounted for 86.6% of UK**
**11%** **ODA, however in recent years the amount of ODA**

**spent by non-DFID contributors has increased**

UK Official Development Assistance 2016

|2016: 0.70%|Col2|
|---|---|
|2016: 0.70% 1970 UN target 0.7%||
|2012: 0.57% 1970: 0.36%||


-----

### Cross-government funds

#### We will enhance the cross-government funds by improving strategic direction through the Fusion Doctrine, governance through a new Ministerial committee, and efficient administration by merging the secretariats into a single Funds Unit.

1. The major cross-government funds supporting our National Security Strategy are a

unique and flexible instrument of government policy overseas. The Conflict, Stability
and Security Fund (CSSF) enables us to use the optimum combination of development,
diplomacy, defence and security assistance rapidly and flexibly in countries at risk
of conflict and instability. The Prosperity Fund helps countries grow and develop by
providing capacity building, technical assistance and research in areas where we have
particular strengths, including economic policy, trade, business environment, anticorruption and green growth. Both Funds use a combination of Official Development
Assistance (ODA) to promote the economic development and welfare of developing
countries, and a smaller amount of funding which does not qualify as ODA.

2. We launched the cross-government Prosperity Fund and significantly expanded the CSSF

in the SDSR, recognising the potential for these innovations to make a major impact on
delivery of our national security objectives. As a result of the NSCR, we will enhance
**the cross-government funds by improving strategic direction through the**
**Fusion Doctrine, governance through a new Ministerial committee, and efficient**
**administration by merging the secretariats into a single Funds Unit. The Ministerial**
committee will be chaired by the Minister for the Cabinet Office. The Funds Unit will drive
greater consistency in standards and improve the quality of delivery including by building
capability and expertise to improve poverty reduction, security and prosperity impacts.
The first annual reports for both cross-government funds were produced in 2017 and
more detailed programme information is available on gov.uk.

3. The CSSF enables and incentivises the joined-up use of capabilities, which is essential

to make a difference in countries at risk of conflict and instability. The CSSF has been
allocated £1.2 billion for 2017 to 2018, which includes over £300 million of mandatory
contributions to peacekeeping operations. In Lebanon, CSSF programming responds
to the instability caused by the conflict in Syria. DFID expertise is used to deliver CSSF
programmes to relieve pressure on the education systems, basic municipal services
and the local economy and job market, caused by the influx of around 1.5 million Syrian
refugees. The FCO and MOD deliver programmes to help the Lebanese Armed Forces
secure its border with Syria and build police capability.

4. The CSSF enables the UK to be agile. It supported our response to Hurricane Irma in the

Caribbean in 2017. The CSSF’s Rapid Response Mechanism (RRM) provided non-ODA
funding to support the immediate response and rebuilding of critical infrastructure. The
first £12 million of support was pre-approved as the hurricane was hitting and then further
funding was rapidly agreed.

5. The CSSF also funds our assessed contributions to multilateral organisations for


-----

6. The SDSR highlighted the Good Governance Fund (GGF), which is funded from CSSF

to support economic and governance reforms in the eastern European neighbourhood.
The GGF will expand its coverage in 2018 to support reforms in Macedonia and Armenia,
in addition to Ukraine, Georgia, Moldova, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The GGF
will also support work connected with the 2018 Western Balkans Summit in London.

7. The Prosperity Fund promotes inclusive economic growth, particularly in middle-income

countries, whilst strengthening economic opportunities for the UK. The Prosperity Fund
currently has a multi-year allocation of £1.2 billion. In India, support on green bonds
contributed to an Indian public sector company committing $4 billion to finance clean
energy infrastructure, with a first tranche of $300 million worth of green ‘masala’ bonds
issued on the London Stock Exchange. In Thailand, we supported the development of
the country’s first Public Procurement Act, which has standardised the system of public
procurement and is providing greater transparency and integrity. We expect international
firms, including from the UK, to compete for £1 billion of business using the new system.
We also supported the testing of UK energy grid management technology in South Africa,
leading to opportunities for UK companies.

8. In the first SDSR Annual Report, we reported that we were developing a new cross
government Governance, Education and Culture Fund (subsequently renamed as the
Empowerment Fund). As a result of the NSCR, we have decided to amend the scope of
the CSSF and the Prosperity Fund to include these objectives.

      - High CSSF Spend

     - Medium CSSF Spend

     - Low CSSF Spend

Geographical spread of CSSF funding spent or allocated 2015-2017


-----

## Annex: Principal commitments from the Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015

**Green – In progress or ongoing**
**Blue – Complete**


-----

-----

We will work to build the inclusivity of International Financial Institutions’ membership and decision-making, so they
63
continue to command credibility and legitimacy in the eyes of their members.

64 We will review sanctions governance to ensure the best coordination of policy, implementation and enforcement.

65 We will campaign to increase the number of countries that have ratified the Arms Trade Treaty.

66 We will spend at least 50% of DFID’s budget in fragile states and regions in every year of this Parliament.

67 We will increase the Conflict, Stability and Security Fund from £1 billion in 2015/16 to £1.3 billion by 2019/20.

We will double the existing Good Governance Fund to support economic and governance reforms in the eastern European
68
neighbourhood to £40 million per year by the end of this Parliament.

69 We will increase UK climate finance for developing countries by at least 50%, rising to £5.8 billion over five years.


70


We will establish a new rapid response team of technical experts to deploy to help countries investigate and control
disease outbreaks; and expand our Emergency Medical Team to provide medical assistance to help contain outbreaks
when needed.


71 We are creating a Prosperity Fund of £1.3 billion over the next five years.


-----

-----

-----

