## The Future of the United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent


### Presented to Parliament by The Secretary of State for Defence and The Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs By Command of Her Majesty

###### December 2006

##### Cm 6994 £13.50


-----

© Crown Copyright 2006

The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and departmental logos) may be reproduced

free of charge in any format or medium providing that it is reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading

context. The material must be acknowledged as Crown copyright and the title of the document specified.

Any enquiries relating to the copyright in this document should be addressed to

The Licensing Division, HMSO, St Clements House, 2-16 Colegate, Norwich, NR3 1BQ.


-----

###### Contents

 Foreword 5

 Executive Summary 6

 Section 1: Maintaining our Nuclear Deterrent 9

 Section 2: The Policy Context 12

 Section 3: Nuclear Deterrence in the 21st Century 17

 Section 4: Ensuring Effective Deterrence 22

 Section 5: Deterrent Options, Solutions and Costs 24

 Section 6: Industrial Aspects 28

 Section 7: Future Decisions 30

 Annex A: The UK’s Non-Proliferation Efforts 32

 Annex B: Options Assessment Process 34


-----

-----

# Foreword to the White Paper by the Prime Minister

The primary responsibility of any government is to ensure
the safety and security of its citizens. For 50 years our
independent nuclear deterrent has provided the ultimate
assurance of our national security. For most of that time,
during the Cold War, its purpose was clear, though never
without controversy.

Today’s world is different. Many of the old certainties

and divisions of the Cold War are gone. We cannot predict
the way the world will look in 30 or 50 years time. For now,
some of the old realities remain. Major countries, which
pose no threat to the UK today, retain large arsenals some
of which are being modernised or increased. None of
the present recognised nuclear weapons States intends
to renounce nuclear weapons, in the absence of an
agreement to disarm multilaterally, and we cannot be sure
that a major nuclear threat to our vital interests will not
emerge over the longer term.

We also have to face new threats, particularly of

regional powers developing nuclear weapons for the first
time which present a threat to us. Despite our best efforts,
the number of states with nuclear weapons continues to
grow, and may grow further. We are already trying to
counter the threat posed by a nuclear North Korea and by
the nuclear ambitions of Iran. And we need to factor in the
requirement to deter countries which might in the future
seek to sponsor nuclear terrorism from their soil. We must
assume that the global struggle in which we are engaged
today between moderation and extremism will continue
for a generation or more.

Those who question this decision need to explain why

disarmament by the UK would help our security. They would
need to prove that such a gesture would change the minds
of hardliners and extremists in countries which are developing
these nuclear capabilities. They would need to show that
terrorists would be less likely to conspire against us with
hostile governments because we had given up our nuclear
weapons. They would need to argue that the UK would be
safer by giving up the deterrent and that our capacity to act
would not be constrained by nuclear blackmail by others.

The Government believes that now, as in the Cold War, such

an argument is misguided. We believe that an independent British
nuclear deterrent is an essential part of our insurance against the
uncertainties and risks of the future. We have therefore decided
to maintain our deterrent system beyond the life of the Vanguards
with a new generation of ballistic missile-carrying submarines. We
will also extend the life of the Trident D5 missile.


I believe it is crucial that, for the foreseeable future, British
Prime Ministers have the necessary assurance that no
aggressor can escalate a crisis beyond UK control. An
independent deterrent ensures our vital interests will
be safeguarded. But as before, it will be the minimum
necessary. We already have the smallest stockpile
of nuclear warheads among the recognised nuclear
weapons States, and are the only one to have reduced
to a single deterrent system. In this White Paper we are
announcing a further 20 per cent cut in our operationally
available warheads. This leaves the deterrent fully
functioning, with fewer than 160 warheads, but it means
Britain continues to set an example for others to follow
in our commitment to work towards a peaceful, fairer
and safer world without nuclear weapons. Our decision
to maintain the deterrent is fully compatible with all our
international legal obligations.

Our nuclear deterrent is of course only one part of our

overall military capability. We are, as before, committed to
ensuring that the investment required to maintain it will not
come at the expense of the conventional capabilities our
armed forces need.

Some argue that we should put off this decision. But

one is necessary because the present submarines will start
to leave service in the early 2020s, and we have to decide
now whether we want to replace them. Delaying a decision
would risk a future break in our deterrent protection.

These are not decisions a government takes lightly. The

financial costs are substantial. We would not want to have
available the terrifying power of these weapons unless we
believed that to be necessary to deter a future aggressor.

The Government’s decision followed a careful review

of all the issues and options, which are set out in full in the
White Paper. We now look forward to a substantial period
of public and parliamentary debate in which the issues
can be aired freely. But I am confident that that debate
will only confirm that maintaining our nuclear deterrent is in
the best interests of the country’s future security.

**5**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent

# Executive Summary


The UK is committed to helping to secure
international peace and security.
Since 1956, the nuclear deterrent has
underpinned our ability to do so even in the
most challenging circumstances. Over the
last 50 years, it has been used only to deter
acts of aggression against our vital interests,
never to coerce others.

###### Why do we need to take decisions now?

At the 2005 General Election our manifesto
made a commitment to retain the UK’s
independent nuclear deterrent. Even with
an extension to their lives, the Vanguard
class submarines are likely to start
leaving service from the early 2020s. We
estimate that it will take around 17 years
to design, manufacture and commission
a replacement submarine. So we need to
take decisions now on whether to retain this
capability in the longer term.

###### Why should we retain our nuclear deterrent?

The Government’s primary responsibility
is for the security of current and future
UK citizens. The UK’s security position
has changed from the Cold War, and
this change was reflected in the sharp
reductions in the scale and readiness of our
nuclear forces that were set out in the 1998
Strategic Defence Review.


The threat has now changed – but the
global context does not justify complete UK
nuclear disarmament:

- significant nuclear arsenals remain,
some of which are being modernised
and expanded;

- the number of states possessing nuclear
weapons has continued to grow, as
demonstrated most recently by North
Korea’s attempted nuclear test in
October this year.

Ballistic missile technology has also
continued to proliferate and most
industrialised countries have the capability
to develop chemical and biological
weapons.

It is not possible accurately to predict the
global security environment over the next
20 to 50 years. On our current analysis,
we cannot rule out the risk either that a
major direct nuclear threat to the UK’s vital
interests will re-emerge or that new states
will emerge that possess a more limited
nuclear capability, but one that could pose
a grave threat to our vital interests. Equally
there is a risk that some countries might in
future seek to sponsor nuclear terrorism from
their soil. We must not allow such states to
threaten our national security, or to deter
us and the international community from
taking the action required to maintain
regional and global security.


****


-----

We can only deter such threats in future
through the continued possession
of nuclear weapons. Conventional
capabilities cannot have the same
deterrent effect. We therefore see an
enduring role for the UK’s nuclear forces
as an essential part of our capability
for deterring blackmail and acts of
aggression against our vital interests
by nuclear-armed opponents.

We have thus decided to take the steps
necessary to sustain a credible deterrent
capability in the 2020s and beyond.

###### How should we maintain our nuclear deterrent?

Our review of the available options has
demonstrated that retaining a submarinebased system provides the most effective
deterrent; and that no credible alternative
is cheaper. Submarines are far more
difficult to detect and track and so are less
vulnerable to attack than the other options.
Ballistic missiles are more effective than
cruise missiles because they have much
greater range and payload, and are far
harder to intercept.

We have therefore decided to maintain
our nuclear deterrent by building a new
class of submarines. Currently we require
a fleet of four submarines to maintain
one continuously on patrol and retaining
this posture is essential to assure the
invulnerability of the deterrent. We will
investigate fully whether there is scope to
make sufficiently radical changes to the
design of the new submarines, and their
operating, manning, training and support
arrangements, to enable us to maintain
these continuous deterrent patrols with
a fleet of only three submarines. A final
decision on whether we require three or four
submarines will be taken when we know
more about their detailed design.


We have also decided to participate in
the US life extension programme for the
Trident D5 missile, which will enable us to
retain that missile in-service until the early
2040s. Our existing nuclear warhead design
will last into the 2020s. We do not yet have
sufficient information to know whether it
can, with some refurbishment, be extended
beyond that point or whether we will need
to develop a replacement warhead: a
decision is likely to be necessary in the next
Parliament.

###### What will this cost?

The costs of this programme will be refined
as we engage in detailed discussion
with industry. Our current estimate is
that the procurement costs of the new
submarines and associated equipment
and infrastructure will be in the region
of £15-20 billion (at 2006/07 prices) for a
four-boat fleet. The costs will fall principally
in the period between 2012 and 2027.
The investment required to maintain our
deterrent will not come at the expense
of the conventional capabilities our
armed forces need. Decisions on the
level of investments in nuclear and
conventional capability will be taken in the
Comprehensive Spending Review, the results
of which will be announced next year.
In-service costs for the deterrent over the
period between 2020 and 2050 will remain
broadly similar to the current position.

###### What are our international obligations?

Renewing our minimum nuclear deterrent
capability is fully consistent with all our
international obligations. It is also consistent
with our continuing commitment to work
towards a safer world in which there is no
requirement for nuclear weapons. We
have taken a leading role in a wide range
of multilateral initiatives in support of the


**7**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent


objectives of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT). We have also taken significant
steps to reduce our nuclear capabilities.
We have the smallest stockpile of nuclear
warheads amongst the nuclear weapon
States recognised under the NPT and are
the only one to have reduced to a single
deterrent system.

We have now decided that we can reduce
our stockpile of operationally available
warheads to fewer than 160. This will
represent a 20% reduction on the figure set
out in the 1998 Strategic Defence Review,
and is almost a 50% reduction compared to
the plans of the previous Government.


###### Summary

We are commited to retaining the minimum
nuclear deterrent capability necessary to
provide effective deterrence, whilst setting
an example where possible by reducing
our nuclear capabilities, and working
multilaterally for nuclear disarmament
and to counter nuclear proliferation. We
believe this is the right balance between
our commitment to a world in which there
is no place for nuclear weapons and our
responsibilities to protect the current and
future citizens of the UK.


**8**


-----

# Section 1: Maintaining our Nuclear Deterrent

1-1. The United Kingdom is committed

to helping to secure international peace
and security. Since 1956, the UK’s nuclear
deterrent has underpinned our ability
so to do, even in the most challenging
circumstances. Throughout, the UK
has proved itself a responsible steward
of nuclear weapons, reducing our
capability as circumstances have allowed.
Consistently we have employed our nuclear
forces strictly as a means to deter acts of
aggression against our vital interests and
have never sought to use them to coerce
others.


1-2. Our manifesto at the 2005 General

Election made a commitment to retain
the UK’s existing nuclear deterrent. We
have already said this means retaining this
capability at least until the current system
reaches the end of its life. We have now
reached the point at which procurement
decisions are necessary on sustaining
this capability in the longer term. The
timetable for decision-making is driven by
our assessment of the life of elements of the
existing Trident deterrent system and the
time it might take to replace them.


**_HMS Vanguard_**

###### The Vanguard Class Submarines

1-3. The first of four Royal Navy

Vanguard-class ballistic missile submarines
(or SSBNs), which carry the Trident D5
missile, was launched in 1992 and the class
had an original design life of 25 years. We
have undertaken detailed work to assess
the scope for extending the life of those
submarines. Our ability to achieve this is
limited because some major components
on the submarines – including the steam
generators, other elements of the nuclear
propulsion system and some non-nuclear
support systems – were only designed for
a 25-year life. The submarines have been,
and will continue to be, subjected to a
rigorous through-life maintenance regime
and we believe that, by revalidating those


****


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent


components, it should be possible to extend
the life of the submarines by around five
years. Accordingly, the first submarine
would be going out of service around 2022
and the second around 2024. Continuous
deterrent patrols could no longer be
assured from around this latter point if no
replacement were in place by then.

1-4. Any further extension of the life

of the submarines would mean that the
key components described previously
would need to be replaced or refurbished,
and this would require a major refit of the
submarines. This would not extend the lives
of the submarines much further and would
not therefore be cost effective. There have
been some suggestions that we should
replicate US plans to extend the lives of
their Ohio-class SSBNs from 30 to over 40
years. A substantial life extension of this kind
would need to have been built into the
original design of the Vanguard-class, and
into the subsequent manufacture, refit and
maintenance of the boats. Unlike with the
Ohio-class, this was not the case. There are
also some radical differences between the
two classes – such as the propulsion systems
– which mean that their potential lives are
different.

1-5. Past experience with UK submarine

programmes suggests that even a 5-year life
extension will involve some risk. The lives of
the previous Resolution-class SSBNs ranged
between 25 and 28 years, but there was a
significant loss of availability and increase
in support costs towards the end of their
lives. The longest life extension for any UK
nuclear powered submarine was to 33 years
for one of the Swiftsure-class conventional
role submarines but again availability was
significantly reduced during its later years.
Therefore, while it should be possible to
extend the life of the Vanguard-class into
the 2020s, we believe that it would be highly
imprudent now to plan on the basis that it


will be possible to extend them further.

1-6. We have considered carefully how

long it might take to design, manufacture
and deploy replacement submarines. It took
some 14 years from the decision to purchase
Trident in 1980 to the system first being
deployed operationally in 1994. However,
in the preceding decade a good deal of
initial concept and design work had already
taken place. Much has changed since 1980.
Safety and regulatory standards have been
raised over the last 25 years. The capacity
and experience within the UK submarine
industry is less now than it was in 1980.
There are also risks that, in the event of a
significant gap between the end of design
work on the Astute-class conventional
role nuclear submarines and the start of
detailed design work on new SSBNs, some
of the difficulties experienced on the Astute
programme would be repeated because of
the loss of key design skills.

1-7. Detailed assessment of the duration

of a programme to build new SSBNs will
need to await contractual negotiations
with industry. A reasonable estimate is
that it might take around 17 years from
the initiation of detailed concept work to
achieve the first operational patrol. This
estimate reflects the judgement of industry
and is consistent with US and French
experiences. Given this estimate, the fact
that non-submarine options are likely to
take at least as long to develop and that
our current SSBNs will reach the end of their
(extended) lives during the 2020s, detailed
concept work on renewal of our deterrent
system needs to start in 2007 if we are to
avoid a gap in deterrence at the end of the
life of the Vanguard-class submarines.


**10**


-----

**_HMS VANGUARD test fires a Trident D5 missile_**
**_in October 2005_**

###### The Trident D5 Missile

1-8. The US Government plans to

extend the life of the Trident D5 missile
to around 2042 to match the life of their
Ohio-class submarines. That will involve
the manufacture of a number of new
missiles and the modernisation of the
existing missiles. Work will focus entirely on
replacing components of the system to
minimise the risk of obsolescence, especially
of the electronics in the flight control
systems. There will be no enhancement of
the capability of the missile in terms of its
payload, range or accuracy.


1-9. Unless we participate in that life

extension programme, it will not be possible
to retain our existing Trident D5 missiles in
service much beyond 2020, except at much
greater cost and technical risk. Decisions on
whether or not we should participate are
required by 2007.

###### The Warhead

1-10. Our existing Trident warhead

design is expected to last into the 2020s
and no decisions on any refurbishment
or replacement are required currently.
The longer term position is described in
Section 7.

###### Conclusions

1-11. We have concluded that, if we are

to maintain unbroken deterrent capability
at the end of the life of the Vanguard-class
submarines, we need to take decisions now
on whether to replace those submarines
and whether to participate in the Trident D5
life extension programme.


**11**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent

# Section 2: The Policy Context


2-1. Section 1 set out why decisions

on the future of the UK’s nuclear deterrent
are needed now. Given the implications of
those decisions, we considered that it was
appropriate also to reassess our policy in this
area.

2-2. Our over-arching policy on

nuclear weapons remains as set out in the
December 2003 Defence White Paper
(Command 6041-1 Paragraph 3.11):

_We are committed to working towards_
_a safer world in which there is no_
_requirement for nuclear weapons_
_and continue to play a full role in_
_international efforts to strengthen arms_
_control and prevent the proliferation_
_of chemical, biological and nuclear_
_weapons. However, the continuing_
_risk from the proliferation of nuclear_
_weapons, and the certainty that a_
_number of other countries will retain_
_substantial nuclear arsenals, mean_
_that our minimum nuclear deterrent_
_capability, currently represented by_
_Trident, is likely to remain a necessary_
_element of our security._

###### Disarmament

2-3. We have taken a series of

measures (see Box 2-1) to reduce the scale
and readiness of our nuclear forces to
ensure they are the minimum necessary
to achieve our deterrent objectives. We


have now decided to make a further
reduction in the number of operationally
available warheads. This will be reduced
from the present position of fewer than
200 to fewer than 160. Also, we will make
a corresponding 20% reduction in the size
of our overall warhead stockpile, which
includes a small margin to sustain the
operationally available warheads.

2-4. These further reductions will mean

that, since coming to power in 1997, we
will have reduced the upper limit on the
number of operationally available UK
nuclear warheads by nearly half. Since
the end of the Cold War, the UK will have
reduced the overall explosive power of its
nuclear arsenal by around 75%. The UK’s
nuclear deterrent now accounts for less
than 1% of the global inventory of nuclear
weapons, and our stockpile is the smallest
of those owned by the five nuclear weapon
States recognised under the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty (NPT).

2-5. In the 1998 Strategic Defence

Review we announced that we had by
then purchased 58 Trident D5 missiles.
Subsequently, we decided not to take up
an option to purchase an additional seven
missiles. As a result of a number of test firings,
our current holding has reduced to 50. We
believe that no further procurement of
Trident D5 missiles will be necessary through
its planned in-service life.


**12**


-----

###### Box 2-1: UK Progress on Nuclear Disarmament

- We stand by our unequivocal
undertaking to accomplish the total
elimination of nuclear weapons.

- We are the only nuclear weapon
State recognised under the NPT which
has reduced its deterrent capability to
a single nuclear weapon system. We
have dismantled our maritime tactical
nuclear capability and the RAF’s
WE177 free-fall bombs.

- We will reduce the upper limit
on the number of operationally
available warheads to less than 160,
a reduction since 1997 of nearly one
half, compared to the previously
declared maximum.

- We have reduced significantly the
operational status of our nuclear
weapons system. Normally, only one
Trident submarine is on deterrent patrol
at any one time, with up to 48 warheads


on board. That submarine is normally at
several days ‘notice to fire’. Its missiles
are not targeted at any country.

- We have not conducted a nuclear
test explosion since 1991 and we
ratified the Comprehensive Nuclear
Test Ban Treaty in 1998.

- We have increased our transparency
with regard to our fissile material
holdings. We have produced
historical records of our defence
holdings of both plutonium and
highly enriched uranium.

- We have ceased production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons and other
nuclear explosive devices. We support
the proposal for a Fissile Material CutOff Treaty and call for the immediate
start of negotiations in the Conference
on Disarmament in Geneva.

- We continue to make progress on the
“13 practical steps” towards nuclear
disarmament agreed by consensus
at the 2000 NPT Review Conference.


2-6. Through the NPT and a wide

range of fora, including the Conference
on Disarmament and the UN Disarmament
Commission, we continue to work
multilaterally to help and encourage others
to reduce their nuclear stockpiles. In 1998
we ratified the Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty. We call on other states to do likewise.
Repeatedly, we have called for negotiations
to begin immediately and without
preconditions on a Fissile Material Cut-off
Treaty. Such a treaty would put a global cap
on the amount of fissile material available to
be turned into nuclear weapons. We have
supported the significant reductions in the
numbers of nuclear weapons achieved
by the bilateral arms control initiatives


between the United States and Russia, and
are encouraging both sides to make further
reductions.

###### Counter-Proliferation

2-7. We have made further efforts

to counter proliferation of nuclear,
chemical, biological and radiological
weapons (see Annex A). We have put
in place a comprehensive multilateral
strategy to strengthen legally-binding
obligations on states to strengthen export
controls, to combat supply chains,
and to prevent old or unused materials
from falling into the wrong hands.


**13**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent


2-8. But proliferation risks remain. Most

countries around the world with industrialised
economies have the capability rapidly
to develop and manufacture large scale
chemical and biological weapons. Also, we
are concerned at the continuing proliferation
of ballistic missile technology. Fewer states
have acquired nuclear weapons capabilities
than some foresaw when the NPT entered into
force in 1970. For example, South Africa and
Libya have both renounced former nuclear
weapons programmes. However, the number
of states with nuclear weapons has continued
to increase. Most of the 40 members of the
Nuclear Suppliers Group, an organisation
of suppliers of nuclear equipment and
material who act together to reduce the risks
of nuclear weapons proliferation through
the implementation of suitable export
controls, have the technical ability and
means to initiate a viable nuclear weapons
programme. Whilst the size and readiness
of global nuclear capabilities has reduced
markedly since the end of the Cold War, large
nuclear arsenals remain and some are being
modernised (details are set out in Box 2-2).

**_Dismantling the Libyan nuclear programme_**


###### Our International Legal Obligations

2-9. The UK’s retention of a nuclear

deterrent is fully consistent with our
international legal obligations. The NPT
recognises the UK’s status (along with that
of the US, France, Russia and China) as a
nuclear weapon State. The NPT remains
the principal source of international legal
obligation relating to the possession of
nuclear weapons. We are fully compliant
with all our NPT obligations, including
those under Article I (prevention of
further proliferation of nuclear weapon
technology) and Article VI (disarmament).

2-10. Article VI of the NPT does not

establish any timetable for nuclear
disarmament, nor for the general and
complete disarmament which provides the
context for total nuclear disarmament. Nor
does it prohibit maintenance or updating
of existing capabilities. Nevertheless,
we will continue to press for multilateral
negotiations towards mutual, balanced and
verifiable reductions in nuclear weapons.

2-11. In 1996 the International Court of

Justice delivered an Advisory Opinion which
confirmed that the use, or threat of use, of
nuclear weapons is subject to the laws of
armed conflict, and rejected the argument
that such use would necessarily be unlawful.
The threshold for the legitimate use of
nuclear weapons is clearly a high one. We
would only consider using nuclear weapons
in self-defence (including the defence of our
NATO allies), and even then only in extreme
circumstances. The legality of any such use
would depend upon the circumstances
and the application of the general rules of
international law, including those regulating
the use of force and the conduct of
hostilities.


**14**


-----

###### Conclusions

2-12. We see no reason to change the

judgement reached in the 2003 Defence
White Paper that the conditions for
complete UK nuclear disarmament do not
yet exist. For this judgement to change,


there would need to be much greater
progress, first towards reductions in existing
nuclear stockpiles, and second in securing
global adherence to obligations not to
proliferate nuclear weapons or related
technology, under the NPT and other
treaties and export control regimes.


###### Box 2-2: Current Global Nuclear Capabilities

 The Nuclear Weapons States Recognised Under the NPT

The US nuclear deterrent consists of
systems launched from submarines, silos
and aircraft. The US Navy retains a force
of 14 Ohio-class SSBNs, each carrying
up to 24 Trident D5 missiles. US silo-based
systems currently comprise 500 Minuteman
inter-continental ballistic missiles (ICBMs),
following withdrawal of the Peacekeeper
system. This has reduced from over 1000 in
1990 and is planned to reduce to 450 from
2007. A modernisation programme will
sustain the Minuteman force until the 2020s.
The US has air-delivered cruise missiles and
free-fall bombs delivered by a range of
aircraft. By 2012, under the terms of the
Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty,
total US operationally deployed strategic
nuclear warhead numbers will reduce to a
maximum of 2,200.

**Russia deploys strategic nuclear**
weapons in a triad of land, sea and air
based systems and, in addition, retains
a very large stockpile of non-strategic
nuclear weapons. Its strategic arsenal
comprises some 520 inter-continental
ballistic missiles, more than 250
submarine-launched ballistic missiles
and about 700 air-launched cruise
missiles. Under the terms of the Strategic
Offensive Reductions Treaty, Russia will


reduce the number of its operationally
deployed strategic nuclear warheads to
a maximum of 2,200 by the end of 2012.
Russia continues to modernise its nuclear
arsenal. Currently it is deploying the new
SS-27 (Topol-M) inter-continental ballistic
missile and has recently been testing a
new submarine-launched ballistic missile.

Since the end of the Cold War,
**France has scaled back its nuclear**
arsenal, with the withdrawal of four
complete weapons systems, as well
as a general reduction of its nuclear
holdings. The French nuclear deterrent is
now based on two systems: submarinelaunched ballistic missiles and airlaunched cruise missiles. A new French
ballistic missile, the M51, is in development
and recently has been flight tested. It
will be carried on board a new class of
four SSBNs, the last of which is due to
come into service in 2010. France is also
developing a new air-launched cruise
missile for deployment on the Rafale
aircraft around 2009. Total warhead
numbers are around 350.

**China is modernising its nuclear forces. Its**
strategic capability currently comprises
a silo-based ICBM force of around 20
missiles. It also deploys a larger number
of nuclear-armed intermediate and
medium range ballistic missiles, all
of which are believed to carry single
warheads. New projects include mobile
ICBMs, an ICBM equipped with multiple
warheads, a submarine-launched


**15**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent


strategic ballistic missile and, potentially
nuclear-capable, cruise missiles.

###### Other States

**India conducted its first nuclear test in**
1974 and in 1998 both India and Pakistan
conducted tests. They are now capable
of delivering nuclear weapons by fixedwing aircraft and land-based ballistic
missiles. Development work on warheads
and delivery systems continues in both
countries. Both countries are working on
cruise missiles and India is developing
a submarine-launched ballistic missile
capability, which could eventually be
nuclear-armed.

**North Korea attempted a nuclear**
test in October 2006 and is assessed to
have enough fissile material for a small


number of nuclear weapons. North Korea
has short and medium range ballistic
missiles in service and, with the launch of
the Taepo Dong-1 as a satellite launch
vehicle in August 1998, demonstrated
some of the key technologies required
for long range multi-stage missiles. The
much larger Taepo Dong-2, which
could be configured either as a satellite
launch vehicle or as a ballistic missile,
was launched in July 2006 but suffered
an early in-flight failure. If developed
successfully, the Taepo Dong-2 would
have the capability to reach Europe.

**Israel is not a signatory of the NPT and**
is believed to have a nuclear weapons
capability. Israel possesses short and
intermediate range missiles which are
believed to be capable of delivering
nuclear warheads.


**16**


-----

# Section 3: Nuclear Deterrence in the 21[st] Century


3-1. Section 2 concluded that, despite

our best efforts, the conditions have not yet
been met to enable the UK to give up its
nuclear deterrent. This section sets out in more
detail the reasons for retaining a deterrent.

###### The Original Rationale for the UK’s Nuclear Deterrent

3-2. During the Cold War, the UK’s

nuclear deterrent was intended to address on
the threat to the UK’s vital interests from the
Soviet Union. NATO did not possess sufficient
conventional military forces to be confident
of defeating an attack by the Warsaw Pact,
and there were significant concerns that
the Soviet Union might have considered that
the potential advantages of a conventional
and chemical attack on Western Europe
outweighed the military risks. Furthermore,
this threat from the Warsaw Pact was backed
up by a large arsenal of nuclear weapons,
against which conventional military forces
could not have hoped to prevail. Since then,
successive governments have felt it important
to retain an independent deterrent as an
essential contribution to our security.

###### The UK Approach to Nuclear Deterrence

3-3. The fundamental principles relevant

to nuclear deterrence have not changed
since the end of the Cold War, and are
unlikely to change in future. In terms of their
destructive power, nuclear weapons pose


a uniquely terrible threat and consequently
have a capability to deter acts of
aggression that is of a completely different
scale to any other form of deterrence.
Nuclear weapons remain a necessary
element of the capability we need to deter
threats from others possessing nuclear
weapons.

3-4. Five enduring principles underpin

the UK’s approach to nuclear deterrence:

- _our focus is on preventing nuclear attack._
The UK’s nuclear weapons are not
designed for military use during conflict
but instead to deter and prevent nuclear
blackmail and acts of aggression
against our vital interests that cannot be
countered by other means.

- _the UK will retain only the minimum_
_amount of destructive power required_
_to achieve our deterrence objectives._
Since 1997, the Government has made
a series of reductions in the scale and
readiness of our nuclear forces in line
with changes in the global security
environment. We are now taking further
measures to reduce the scale of our
deterrent. We are reducing the number
of operationally available warheads
from fewer than 200 to fewer than 160,
and making a corresponding reduction
in the size of our overall stockpile.


**17**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent



- _we deliberately maintain ambiguity_
_about precisely when, how and at_
_what scale we would contemplate_
_use of our nuclear deterrent. We will_
not simplify the calculations of a
potential aggressor by defining more
precisely the circumstances in which we
might consider the use of our nuclear
capabilities. Hence, we will not rule in or
out the first use of nuclear weapons.

- _the UK’s nuclear deterrent supports_
_collective security through NATO for the_
_Euro-Atlantic area. Nuclear deterrence_
plays an important part in NATO’s
overall defensive strategy, and the
UK’s nuclear forces make a substantial
contribution.

- _an independent centre of nuclear_
_decision-making enhances the overall_
_deterrent effect of allied nuclear forces._
Potential adversaries could gamble
that the US or France might not put
themselves at risk of a nuclear attack in
order to deter an attack on the UK or our
allies. Our retention of an independent
centre of nuclear decision-making
makes clear to any adversary that the
costs of an attack on UK vital interests
will outweigh any benefits. Separately
controlled but mutually supporting
nuclear forces therefore create an
enhanced overall deterrent effect.

###### Insuring against an Uncertain Future

3-5. It is a key responsibility of

government to be sure that the UK is
properly protected should the future turn
out to be less secure than we hope. There
are limits to the extent to which intelligence
can inform us about medium to long-term
changes in the nuclear capabilities of
others, or give prior warning of a possible
change in intent by an existing nuclear


weapon State. We must therefore be
realistic about our ability precisely to
predict the nature of any future threats
to our vital interests over the extended
timescales associated with decisions about
the renewal of our nuclear deterrent.

3-6. Our assessment of the potential

security environment between 2020 and
2050, the period relevant to the decisions
set out in this White Paper, highlights some
trends that give rise to significant causes for
concern. In spite of the successes of arms
control activities in slowing the proliferation
of nuclear weapons, the number of states
with nuclear capabilities has continued
to grow. We do not assume that this trend
will endure and we will continue to do all
we can to slow or reverse it. But we cannot
discount the possibility that the number of
states armed with nuclear weapons may
have increased by 2050.

3-7 In addition, there are a range

of other risks and challenges to future
global stability. Weak and failing states
will continue to offer safe havens for
international terrorists and potentially
create wider instability. Increasing pressure
on key resources such as energy and water
(which could be driven by a range of
factors, potentially including population
growth, increasing global economic
development and climate change) may
increase interstate tension. The rapid
and uncontrollable development of
militarily-relevant technology by the civil
sector will make potential adversaries
increasingly capable. These factors
potentially could lead to increasing
levels of international instability and risk
of interstate conflict. We are concerned
that, over the period from 2020 to 2050,
this potential prospect, combined with
possible further nuclear proliferation,
could lead to an increased risk of conflict
involving a nuclear-armed state.


**18**


-----

3-8. Currently no state has both the

intent to threaten our vital interests and the
capability to do so with nuclear weapons.
However, the fact that such a conjunction
does not exist today is not a reliable guide
to the future. The risks set out above raise
the possibility that, at some stage in the
future, nuclear capabilities and hostile intent
will become dangerously aligned. We can
foresee nuclear risks in three specific areas:

###### Re-emergence of a Major Nuclear Threat

3-9. There are risks that, over the next 20

to 50 years, a major direct nuclear threat to
the UK or our NATO Allies might re-emerge.
A state’s intent in relation to the use or threat
of use of existing capabilities could change
relatively quickly: for example, there was
little prior warning of the collapse of the
Soviet Union. We will continue to work
actively with all our friends and partners
to enhance mutual trust and security, but
we cannot rule out, over the 2020-2050
timescale, a major shift in the international
security situation which puts us under threat.

###### Emerging Nuclear States

3-10. Over the next 20 to 50 years, one

or more states could also emerge that
possess a more limited nuclear capability,
but one that poses a grave threat to our
vital interests. We must not allow such states
to threaten our national security or to deter
us and the international community from
taking the action required to maintain
regional and global security. The UK’s
continued possession of a nuclear deterrent
provides an assurance that we cannot be
subjected in future to nuclear blackmail or
a level of threat which would put at risk our
vital interests or fundamentally constrain our
foreign and security policy options.


###### State-Sponsored Terrorism

3-11. We know that international terrorists

are trying to acquire radiological weapons.
In future, there are risks that they may try
to aquire nuclear weapons. While our
nuclear deterrent is not designed to deter
non-state actors, it should influence the
decision-making of any state that might
consider transferring nuclear weapons or
nuclear technology to terrorists. We make
no distinction between the means by which
a state might choose to deliver a nuclear
warhead, whether, for example, by missile
or sponsored terrorists. Any state that we
can hold responsible for assisting a nuclear
attack on our vital interests can expect that
this would lead to a proportionate response.

3-12. A key element of our ability to

exercise effective deterrence in such
circumstances is our capability precisely
to determine the source of material
employed in any nuclear device. We will
retain and strengthen the world-leading
forensic capability at the Atomic Weapons
Establishment, Aldermaston in this area.
We will also continue to work to strengthen
international expertise in this field.

###### Conclusions

3-13. In view of the continued existence

of large nuclear arsenals, the possibility of
further proliferation of nuclear weapons
in combination with the risk of increased
international instability and tension, we
believe that a nuclear deterrent is likely
to remain an important element of our
national security in the 2020s and beyond.
We have therefore decided to make the
minimum investment required to sustain this
capability over that period. We judge that
this continues to be a price worth paying.


**19**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent


###### Box 3-1: Responses to Counter-Arguments

A number of arguments have been
made in recent years to the effect that
the UK unilaterally should give up its
nuclear deterrent. Some of these are set
out below, along with the reasons that we
do not accept them:

1. _The main threat to the UK is from_
_terrorism, against which nuclear_
_weapons are useless. Nuclear_
weapons were designed to deter
a specific range of threats. We still
need to insure against those threats,
even though new threats such as
terrorism have emerged. The UK has
an intensive strategy for managing
the risks from terrorism and we
maintain a range of capabilities to
deal with them. As noted in Section
3, we believe that retention of an
effective nuclear deterrent by the
UK has a role to play in reducing the
potential threat from state-sponsored
nuclear-armed terrorists.

2. _It is hypocritical for the UK to maintain_
_its deterrent while arguing that_
_countries such as Iran and North_
_Korea cannot develop one. The_
NPT recognised the UK, the US,
France, Russia and China as nuclear
weapon States and established other
signatories as non-nuclear weapon
States. We have an excellent track
record in meeting our NPT obligations.
Iran and North Korea signed the
NPT, so pursuit of nuclear weapons
programmes is in breach of the Treaty.

3. _If the UK unilaterally gave up_
_its nuclear deterrent, this would_
_encourage others to follow suit._


There is no evidence or likelihood
that others would follow the UK down
a unilateralist route. There would
need to be compelling evidence
that a nuclear threat to the UK’s vital
interests would not re-emerge in
future before we could responsibly
contemplate such a move. It would
be highly imprudent to mortgage our
long term national security against
any such assumptions.

4. _The money required to maintain a_
_nuclear deterrent should instead_
_be invested in our conventional_
_capabilities. Nuclear weapons remain_
a necessary element of the capability
we need to deter threats from
others possessing nuclear weapons.
Conventional forces cannot deliver
the same deterrent effect. Since 1997,
the Government has made significant
additional resources available to
Defence, providing many new
capabilities to enable us to undertake
those military tasks that cannot be
achieved by nuclear deterrence. The
investment required to maintain our
deterrent will not come at the expense
of the conventional capabilities our
armed forces need.

5. _The UK retains nuclear weapons_
_because of the international status_
_that this might bring, in particular_
_the UK’s permanent seat on the_
_United Nations Security Council._
We maintain our nuclear forces
as a means of deterring acts of
aggression against our vital interests
and not for reasons of status.

6. _The UK does not require a nuclear_
_deterrent as we are already_
_protected by the US nuclear_
_deterrent. A potential adversary_


**20**


-----

might miscalculate the degree of
US commitment to the defence and
security of Europe. An independent
deterrent provides the assurance that
it can be used to deter attacks on our
vital interests. An independent centre
of nuclear decision-making in the UK
also reinforces the overall deterrent
effect of allied nuclear forces and
thus enhances our security and that
of NATO allies.

7. _Replacing Trident is illegal._
Maintaining a minimum nuclear
deterrent is fully consistent with all
our international legal obligations,
including those under the NPT (as set
out in paragraphs 2-9 to 2-11).

8. _Ballistic missile defence could_
_take the place of the UK’s nuclear_
_deterrent. Ballistic missile defences_
are only designed to be able to
defend against limited missile
attacks. They do not, on their own,
provide a complete defence
against the full range of risks set out


in this White Paper. They should be
regarded as complementary to
other forms of defence or response,
potentially reinforcing nuclear
deterrence rather than superseding it.

9. _All the UK needs is a dormant_
_nuclear weapons capability,_
_from which we could re-establish_
_a deterrent if and when specific_
_threats emerge. Any UK decision to_
give up an active credible nuclear
deterrent system would, for political
and cost reasons, be extremely
difficult to reverse. In practice, the
timeframe for re-establishing a
credible minimum deterrent would
probably be longer than the likely
warning of any change in intent of
an established nuclear power or any
covert programme elsewhere to
develop nuclear weapons. Also, any
move from a dormant programme
towards an active one could be seen
as escalatory, and thus potentially
destabilising, in a crisis.


**21**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent

# Section 4: Ensuring Effective Deterrence


4-1. If they are to have the required

deterrent effect, our nuclear forces need to
continue to be credible against the range of
risks and threats described in Section 3. This
section describes the key characteristics that
are necessary to establish this credibility.

###### Invulnerability and Readiness

4-2. A deterrent system must be able

to function irrespective of any pre-emptive
action that might be taken by a potential
aggressor. Also, it is important for safety
and security reasons that our nuclear
forces are protected properly at all times
against actions ranging from a full scale
strategic nuclear strike to a terrorist attack.
There are a number of ways in which
this might be achieved: by making the
system invulnerable to attack; by having a
sufficiently large capability that even a full
scale attack would not prevent the launch
of an effective counter strike; by making the
system difficult to target, most obviously by
making it undetectable; and by holding the
system continuously at a sufficiently high
level of readiness that it could be launched
before any pre-emptive strike takes effect.

4-3. Our preference is for an

invulnerable and undetectable system,
which allows us to maintain it at a minimum
level of scale and readiness, but we believe
that it should also be capable of being
held at high readiness for extended periods
of time. It should be possible, both overtly


and covertly, to increase or decrease its
readiness thereby giving the Government
maximum flexibility in terms of setting and
adjusting our nuclear deterrent posture: this
is especially important during a crisis.

###### Range

4-4. There is increasing uncertainty

about the nature of future risks and
challenges to UK security. Whereas
during the Cold War the likely source of
threats was well established, the position
is more uncertain now and may be
even less clear by the 2020s. Therefore
we believe that our nuclear deterrent
should retain our existing capability to
deter threats anywhere in the world.

4-5. Closely linked to the range of our

nuclear capability is the question of whether
we should plan on simultaneously or near
simultaneously having to deter more than
one threat against our vital interests. While
it is theoretically possible to envisage some
eventualities where this question might arise,
we do not believe that this factor should
determine either the nature or scale of our
deterrent system.

###### Independence

4-6. The UK’s nuclear forces must remain

fully operationally independent if they are
to be a credible deterrent. It is essential that
we have the necessary degree of assurance


**22**


-----

that we can employ our deterrent to defend
our vital interests. The UK’s current nuclear
deterrent is fully operationally independent
of the US:

- decision-making and use of the system
remains entirely sovereign to the UK;

- only the Prime Minister can authorise
the use of the UK’s nuclear deterrent,
even if the missiles are to be fired as part
of a NATO response;

- the instruction to fire would be
transmitted to the submarine using only
UK codes and UK equipment;

- all the command and control
procedures are fully independent; and

- the Vanguard-class submarines can
operate readily without the Global
Positioning by Satellite (GPS) system and
the Trident D5 missile does not use GPS
at all: it has an inertial guidance system.
There is nothing in the planned Trident
D5 life extension programme that will
change this position.

4-7. We continue to believe that the

costs of developing a nuclear deterrent
relying solely on UK sources outweigh
the benefits. We do not see a good case
for making what would be a substantial
additional investment in our nuclear
deterrent purely to insure against a, highly
unlikely, deep and enduring breakdown in
relations with the US. We therefore believe
that it makes sense to continue to procure
elements of the system from the US.

4-8. The US has never sought to

exploit our procurement relationship
in this area as a means to influence
UK foreign policy nor does this
relationship compromise the operational
independence of our nuclear deterrent.


###### Scale

4-9. We need to make a judgement

on the minimum destructive capability
necessary to provide an effective
deterrent posture. This judgement requires
an assessment of the decision-making
processes of future potential aggressors,
and an analysis of the effectiveness of the
defensive measures that they might employ.
Retaining some degree of uncertainty over
the nature and scale of our response to
any particular set of circumstances is an
important part of our overall deterrence
posture. However, we believe that our
existing capability to deploy up to 48
warheads on the submarine on deterrent
patrol is sufficient. As with our current
deterrent, the ability to vary the numbers
of missiles and warheads which might be
employed, coupled with the continued
availability of a lower yield from our
warhead, can make our nuclear forces a
more credible deterrent against smaller
nuclear threats.


**23**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent

# Section 5: Deterrent Options, Solutions and Costs


5-1. The previous two sections have

described why we wish to retain a nuclear
deterrent, and the key attributes we believe
that it should continue to have. This section
sets out the various options that we have
considered and the extent to which each
option meets our requirements. It also sets
out our proposed solution and how much
this will cost.

###### The Options

5-2. Four generic options were

subjected to detailed assessment and
comparative costing: a large aircraft
equipped with cruise missiles; silo-based
ballistic missiles; and both surface and
sub-surface maritime platforms equipped


with ballistic missiles. Table 5-1 shows their
relative through-life costs.

5-3. The process by which these options

were identified, and the details of our
assessment of them, is set out in Annex B. We
rejected the large aircraft option primarily
because of vulnerability to pre-emptive
attacks and because of the costs involved
in procuring new large aircraft and the
supporting refuelling tankers, providing new
infrastructure, and designing and procuring
a new cruise missile. Silo-based systems
in the UK could be a credible deterrent
only against states with a limited nuclear
capability, and even then there would be
significant additional costs compared to
a submarine-based system capable of


**24**


-----

deterring all credible threats. A deterrent
based on surface ships would be less
capable, more vulnerable and no less
expensive than a submarine-based solution.

5-4. We considered the relative merits

of deploying cruise or ballistic missiles on
a submarine. Any programme to develop
and manufacture a new cruise missile
would cost far more than retaining the
Trident D5 missile. In capability terms,
cruise missiles are much less effective than
a ballistic missile (see Box 5-1). Therefore
it was clear that, in terms of both cost
and capability, retaining the Trident D5
missile is by far the best approach.

###### Next Steps

5-5. We have decided to maintain our

existing nuclear deterrent capability by
replacing the Vanguard-class submarines
with a new class of submarines and we plan


shortly to commence detailed concept work.
We believe this programme will be sufficiently
mature for us to place a contract for their
detailed design by around 2012 to 2014.

5-6. We have started to consider some

of the fundamental design issues. We
believe that the new submarines will need
to be nuclear powered, as conventional
propulsion systems cannot currently
generate sufficient power and endurance
to meet our requirements. We envisage that
the design of the new SSBNs will maximise
the degree of commonality with other
in-service submarines where this can be
done in a cost-effective manner. The scope
for this will be determined during the next
phase of work. However, some changes to
the design of the Vanguard-class will be
required, to take account of equipment
obsolescence, the need to continue to
meet modern safety standards and to
maximise the scope to make the new SSBNs


###### Box 5-1: Comparison of Cruise and Ballistic Missiles

**_Tomahawk Land Attack Missile_**

Ballistic missiles, such as the Trident
D5 missile, have a number of design
advantages over cruise missiles:

**Payload: Ballistic missiles can carry**
multiple warheads, compared to the
single warhead that can be carried by a
cruise missile.


**Range: Ballistic missiles have a range**
typically up to around 12,000 kilometres,
compared to a maximum of 2,000 to
3,000 kilometres for a cruise missile.

**Speed: Ballistic missiles can travel**
at speeds in excess of ten times the
speed of sound whilst cruise missiles are
currently sub-sonic.

**Vulnerability: Compared to ballistic**
missiles, cruise missiles are more prone
to interception, largely because of their
slower speed and lower trajectory. Ballistic
missile defences are being developed by
a number of countries, but we believe that
it is highly unlikely that the effectiveness
of the UK Trident D5 missile force will be
jeopardized, even over the planned
extended in-service life of that missile. A less
vulnerable delivery system also enables us
to maintain a lower stockpile of warheads.


**25**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent


capable of adapting to any changes in our
requirements and to any new technological
developments.

5-7. A critical feature of the credibility

of a deterrent is its invulnerability to preemptive action. At present, we achieve this
invulnerability by maintaining a submarine
permanently on patrol (see Box 5-2). That
requires a fleet of four Vanguard-class
submarines. At any one time, one of the
Vanguard-class submarines is normally
undergoing an extensive refit that takes
it out of the operational cycle for around
four years. Three submarines normally are
required to be operationally available in
order to sustain continuous deterrent patrols,
although continuous deterrence can be
maintained for limited periods when only
two are available.

5-8. We have reviewed once again the

operational posture of our submarines and
have confirmed that, for the foreseeable
future, we should continue to retain a
submarine continuously on deterrent patrol.

5-9. We are not yet in a position to

make a firm judgement about how many
submarines we require in future because
we do not yet understand comprehensively
the likely operational availability of the
replacement SSBNs. We will investigate fully
whether there is scope to make sufficiently
radical changes to the design of the new
SSBNs, and their operating, manning, training
and support arrangements, to enable us
to maintain continuous deterrent patrols
with a fleet of only three submarines. A final
decision on the number of submarines that
will be procured will be made when we
know more about their detailed design.

5-10. We have decided to participate

in the Trident D5 life extension programme,
at a cost of some £250 million, which
is very significantly less than it would


cost to acquire an alternative delivery
system. This will enable us to keep this
missile in service until the early 2040s.
We will continue to participate in the
joint UK/US support arrangements for the
D5 missile at the facilities at Kings Bay,
Georgia. This arrangement represents
excellent value for money. We anticipate
that the first life-extended D5 missiles
will enter service with the Royal Navy
towards the end of the next decade.

###### Costs and Funding

5-11. The procurement costs involved in
sustaining our independent deterrent
capability will need to be refined as work on
the concept and assessment phases is taken
forward with industry. More accurate cost
estimates will be available by the time we
come to place a contract for the detailed
design of the submarines in the period
2012 to 2014. Our initial estimate is that the
procurement costs will be in the range of
£15-20 billion (at 2006/07 prices) for a four-boat
solution: some £11-14 billion for the submarines;
£2-3 billion for the possible future refurbishment
or replacement of the warhead; and £2-3
billion for infrastructure over the life of the
submarines. There would be savings from a
three-boat solution but these would not be
in proportion to the reduction in the number
of submarines. These costs will fall principally
in the period 2012 to 2027. The comparable
cost for the Trident system was some £14.5
billion at today’s prices. These costs are also
comparable to the procurement costs of
major weapons systems such as Typhoon
aircraft. Depending on future decisions, there
could also be the cost of starting to replace
the D5 missile from the 2030s. At this range, any
estimate of cost would be highly speculative:
the equivalent cost for the Trident D5 missile
was some £1.5 billion at today’s prices.

5-12. It is not possible to be sure what

the size of the defence budget will be


**26**


-----

over the timescales involved but the
procurement costs are likely on average
to be the equivalent of around 3% of the
current defence budget over the main
period of expenditure. This is around
the same as for the Trident programme.
In meeting our public spending
commitments, the MOD continues to
pursue a high level of efficiency savings

5-13. We will continue the programme

of investment in sustaining capabilities
at the Atomic Weapons Establishment
(AWE), both to ensure we can maintain
the existing warhead for as long as
necessary and to enable us to develop a
replacement warhead if that is required.
Additional investment averaging £350
million per annum over the years 2005/06 to
2007/08 was announced last year. Further
investment will be necessary, and early in


the next decade the costs of AWE are likely
– at their peak – to be the equivalent of
about 3% of the current defence budget
(compared to about 2.5% today).

5-14. Once the new fleet of SSBNs comes

into service, we expect that the in-service
costs of the UK’s nuclear deterrent, which
will include AWE’s costs, will be similar to
today (around 5-6% of the defence budget).

5-15. The investment required to

maintain our deterrent will not come at the
expense of the conventional capabilities
our armed forces need. Decisions on the
level of our investments in nuclear and
conventional capability will be taken in the
Comprehensive Spending Review, the results
of which will be announced next year.


###### Box 5-2: SSBN Operations

The rationale for continuous deterrent
patrolling (which the UK has maintained
since 1969, and mirrors how the US and
France operate their SSBNs) is that:

- the submarine on patrol is invulnerable
to an attack. For example, we are
confident that our SSBNs on deterrent
patrol have remained completely
undetected by a hostile or potentially
hostile state. This means we have an
assured nuclear deterrent available at
all times;

- unlike any other nuclear weapon State
recognised under the NPT, the UK has
reduced to a single deterrent system:
a single platform, delivery system
and warhead design. If we ceased
continuous deterrent patrols, a single
deterrent force in a single location
would be unacceptably vulnerable
when a submarine was not on patrol;

- invulnerability and assuredness of


capability are key components
of the credibility of our deterrent,
and also enable us to keep only
a minimum deterrent. Greater
vulnerability could necessitate
increases in the scale of our nuclear
deterrent;

- our deterrent’s invulnerability and
assuredness contribute to stability,
as this removes any incentive preemptively to attack our nuclear forces;

- if we ceased continuous deterrent
patrols, we could be deterred or
prevented from deploying an SSBN in
a crisis; and

- the Royal Navy has a clear and
demanding operational target,
which it has met since 1969. This is
good for motivation and morale. If
the requirement was for less than
constant readiness, it would be
harder to motivate the crews, and
others who support the deterrent,
on whom the effectiveness of the
capability ultimately depends.


**27**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent

# Section 6: Industrial Aspects


6.1 Designing and building new SSBNs,

and integrating them with other elements
of the overall system, will be a significant
technical challenge for the Ministry of
Defence and for industry. Nuclear powered
submarines carrying ballistic missiles
represent, in engineering terms, one of the
most complex and technically demanding
systems in existence.

**_HMS Astute under construction at BAE_**
**_Systems Submarines, Barrow-in-Furness_**
**_(picture courtesy of BAE Systems)_**


6.2 In our Defence Industrial Strategy,

published in December 2005, we explained
that the UK’s fleet of nuclear powered
submarines requires a specialist subset
of skills within the maritime industry.
Over many years the UK has developed
a high level of expertise in the design,
manufacture and maintenance of nuclear
powered submarines. The early stages of
the programme to build the new Astuteclass conventional role submarines were,
however, difficult, in part due to less than
optimal industrial and design arrangements,
resulting in a submarine design that could
not initially be built at planned cost. Lessons
have been learnt from that programme.
Nevertheless, more change is needed
for industry to be able to deliver a new
programme on time and at an acceptable
cost. We believe that the imperative for
change is well recognised.

6.3 It would be our intention to build the

new SSBNs in the UK, for reasons of national
sovereignty, nuclear regulation, operational
effectiveness and safety, and maintenance
of key skills. But this is dependent on
proposals from industry that provide the right
capability at the right time and offer value
for money. For the reasons set out in the
Defence Industrial Strategy, progress towards
industrial consolidation and a sustainable
industrial base, will be an important
ingredient. Final decisions will be taken in the
lead up to the placing of a contract for the
detailed design of the submarines.


**28**


-----

6.4 For the replacement SSBN

programme we expect that there will be a
much greater collaborative effort between
the MOD and industry than has been the
case in the recent past.

6.5 The current industrial structure limits

the scope for system-level competition
in the UK. Therefore a key to successful
procurement in the UK would be to work
closely with industry right down the
supply chain to put in place sustainable
collaborative arrangements that run
through the life of the platform. This is
important for driving down the whole-life
costs of the programme. We will also seek
to bear down on the costs by sourcing
some sub-system elements from overseas in
line with the policy set out in the Defence
Industrial Strategy.

###### Safety and Regulation

6.6 Safety will be a key element

of the design and operation of the
replacement SSBNs. The operation of our
nuclear-powered submarines is regulated
by independent safety authorities within
the MOD, whilst the Nuclear Installations
Inspectorate license facilities for reactor
construction and deep maintenance. A
fundamental principle applied by those
authorities is that successful safety risk
management is founded in a proper
understanding of nuclear technologies.


###### Disposal Policy

6.7 The disposal of the Vanguard
class submarines is still some way off, and
it is therefore too early to estimate the
possible decommissioning costs. When the
Vanguard submarines leave naval service,
they will be subject to a process known as
Defuel, De-equip and Lay-up Preparation,
which will involve spent nuclear fuel and
other materials being removed for storage
at Sellafield, and any remaining irradiated
material being secured within the reactor
compartment. In line with current practice
for other submarines now leaving service,
the submarines themselves with then be
stored afloat at Devonport, pending final
disposal. Afloat storage has proved to be a
safe arrangement for over 20 years.

6.8 We are examining options for the

disposal of defuelled nuclear powered
submarines, including future storage of the
resulting intermediate level radioactive
material. This work is linked closely to the
work of the Committee on Radioactive
Waste Management, which has recently
reported on the wider question of the
storage of UK nuclear waste. We are also
working with industry to ensure that any
future nuclear submarine is designed to
facilitate the safe decommissioning and
storage of nuclear materials.


**29**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent

# Section 7: Future Decisions


7-1. The plans set out in this White Paper

will enable the UK to maintain an effective
and operationally independent nuclear
deterrent until the early 2040s, when the
Trident D5 missile is due to be withdrawn from
service. A number of additional decisions
will need to be taken over the coming years:
these are illustrated in Table 7-1.

###### Submarines

7-2. As described in Section 5 and 6,

we need in future to take further decisions
on the new class of SSBNs, including on
their detailed design and on the number of
submarines to be procured.


###### Warheads

7-3. The UK produced a new nuclear

warhead to coincide with the introduction
into service of the Trident system. This
warhead was designed and manufactured
in the UK by AWE, although it was decided
that it would be more cost effective to
procure certain non-nuclear components of
the warhead from the United States.

7-4. The current warhead design is

likely to last into the 2020s, although we
do not yet have sufficient information to
judge precisely how long we can retain it
in-service. Decisions on whether and how


###### Future UK Deterrent Plans Table 7-1

Vanguard Class New submarines

**Submarine**


**Submarine**


Trident
D5 Missile


Life Extension Possible D5 Successor


**Missile**

**Warhead**

|e|Life Extension|Po|ssible D5 Succes|
|---|---|---|---|


Current Warhead Extend or replace

**2005** **2015** **2025** **2035** **2045** **2055**

Current System Confirmed future plans Possible future plans


**30**


-----

we may need to refurbish or replace this
warhead are likely to be necessary in the
next Parliament. In order to inform these
decisions, we will undertake a detailed
review of the optimum life of the existing
warhead stockpile and analyse the range
of replacement options that might be
available. This will include a number of
activities to be undertaken with the United
States under the 1958 UK-US Agreement for
Cooperation on the Uses of Atomic Energy
for Mutual Defence Purposes.

###### The Delivery System

7-5. We expect that the new class of

SSBNs will have a design life of at least 25
years. On this basis, the new SSBNs would be
unlikely to start going out of service until the
2050s, which will go beyond the planned life
of the Trident D5 missile, even when its life
is extended out to the early 2040s. Further
investment will be necessary if we wish to
sustain an effective nuclear delivery system
throughout the life of the new submarines.
Decisions on whether we wish to acquire


a successor to the life extended D5 missile,
and what form any successor might take,
are unlikely to be necessary until the 2020s.

7-6. We have sought, and received,

assurances from the US Government that,
in the event they decide to develop a
successor to the D5 missile, the UK will
have the option of participating in such
a programme. We have also received an
assurance that any successor to the D5
should be compatible, or can be made
compatible, with the launch system to be
installed in our new SSBNs. These and other
assurances will be set out in an exchange of
letters between the Prime Minister and the
President of the United States, the texts of
which will be published.

7-7. These agreements will ensure that,

if future UK Governments wish, they will have
the option of retaining a nuclear deterrent
capability throughout the lives of the new
class of SSBNs.


**31**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent

# Annex A: The UK’s Non-Proliferation Efforts


**International Atomic Energy Agency**
**(IAEA): The UK is working closely with the**
IAEA to develop assurances of supply
for nuclear fuel, which provide energy
security without the need for proliferation
of sensitive enrichment technology.
Our latest “enrichment bond” proposal,
involving advance consent for exports of
low enriched uranium, has been very well
received. We also continue to press for
agreement to the IAEA’s Additional Protocol
to be made a condition of supply before
a state can receive any sensitive nuclear
technology. We have agreed an Additional
Protocol to our Safeguards Agreements
with the IAEA, and all UK enrichment and
reprocessing facilities are now liable to
international safeguards inspections.

**Iran/IAEA: Since 2003, the UK, France and**
Germany have been leading international
diplomatic efforts to convince Iran fully to
co-operate with the IAEA over international
concerns about its nuclear programme.
Latterly, this has involved working closely
with the US, Russia and China in the UN
Security Council. This led, in July this year, to
the adoption of UNSCR 1696.

**Middle East WMD Free Zone: The UK**
continues to support the creation of
an effective and verifiable chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear-free
zone in the Middle East, in keeping with the
resolution on the Middle East at the 1995 NPT
Review and Extension Conference.


**UNSCR 1540: The UK was one of the**
leading proponents of UN Security Council
Resolution 1540, which established legallybinding obligations on all UN Member
States to take steps to combat proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction through
national legislation, co-operative action,
development of effective export controls
and physical protection of WMD related
materials. In September 2004, the UK
was one of the first states to comply with
the national implementation reporting
requirements of UNSCR 1540.

**Libya/AQ Khan: The UK played a key role in**
the process that led to Libya’s announcement,
in December 2003, that it would eliminate
its chemical, biological and nuclear
programmes and limit its missile projects. This
process contributed to the discovery and
dismantling of the proliferation activities being
pursued by the AQ Khan network.

**Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI):**
The UK has been involved actively in driving
forward the PSI, which aims to prevent the
acquisition and development of chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear
weapons by states of concern and non-state
actors, together with those who supply such
programmes through trafficking in sensitive
materials, equipment and technology.

**Export Control Regimes: The UK is a**
leading and active member of the Nuclear
Suppliers Group, the Australia Group, the


**32**


-----

Missile Technology Control Regime and
the Zangger Committee - arrangements
which aim to minimise the risk of assisting
Chemical, Biological, Radiological and
Nuclear weapons and ballistic missile
proliferation through more effective national
level export licensing measures.

**G8 Global Partnership Co-operative**
**Threat Reduction: The UK has committed up**
to $750 million over ten years to this work and
currently supports projects to help dismantle
old Russian nuclear submarines, dispose of 34
tonnes of plutonium in Russia, destroy Russia’s
stocks of chemical weapons (a total of 40,000
tonnes) and create new employment for
former Soviet weapons scientists. Such efforts
prevent the materials used to make chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear
weapons, and the weapons themselves, from
falling into the wrong hands.

**Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear**
**Terrorism (GICNT): The UK is an Initial**
Partner Nation of the GICNT, unveiled by


the Presidents of the United States and
Russia in July this year. The initiative calls for
co-operation in efforts directed at, among
other things, improving control of nuclear
materials, and detecting and suppressing
illicit trafficking of such materials.

**Norwegian 7 Country Initiative: The**
UK is an active member of the 7 Country
Initiative, which aims to foster fresh
thinking on how we can take forward
the three pillars of the NPT – access
to nuclear technology for exclusively
peaceful purposes, non-proliferation and
disarmament.

**Chemical Weapons Convention**
**(CWC)/Biological and Toxin Weapons**
**Convention: We are working with the**
European Union to encourage and help all
countries accede to both treaties and to
implement fully their obligations. In the last
5 years over 20 additional countries have
joined the CWC.


**33**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent

# Annex B: Options Assessment Process


B-1. Before arriving at decisions, we

undertook a thorough review of the widest
possible range of options to replace the
Vanguard-class submarines. We then used
a detailed assessment process to narrow
the range of options under consideration
to four generic options: a large aircraft
equipped with cruise missiles; silo-based
ballistic missiles; and both surface and
sub-surface maritime platforms equipped
with ballistic missiles. Some flexibility was
included within these options to enable
trade-offs to be made between potential
costs and capability. There was also
scope to consider variants between the
four options: for example, although cruise
missiles were considered as part of the airlaunched option, the analysis also enabled
consideration of the possibility of delivering
cruise missiles from a submarine or surface
ship.

B-2. We discarded some of the other

possible options for the following reasons.
We rejected the possibilities of employing
short- and medium-range aircraft operating
from the UK or overseas, or short- or
medium-range land-based missiles, on the
grounds that these options lacked sufficient
range. Even aircraft launched from aircraftcarriers would not meet our range criteria.
Furthermore, these options would be
vulnerable to pre-emptive attacks whilst on
the ground or at sea, or to interception by
air defence systems whilst in the air.


B-3. We rejected mobile land-based

systems because of the serious concerns
at the technological risks involved with
developing such systems, given that
no such capability is currently readily
available from reliable sources. We also
perceived major vulnerability and security
difficulties in operating any such system
within a relatively small and densely
populated island such as the UK.

B-4. The only ballistic missile which we

considered in any detail in the analysis was
the Trident D5 missile. In capability terms, this
missile meets all our likely future operational
requirements. And the costs of retaining
this missile in service out to the early 2040s
are greatly exceeded by the potential
costs and technical risks associated with
any programme to acquire an alternative
ballistic missile system. There would be some
costs and risks associated with adapting
the Trident D5 missile for use in a surface
ship or silo because of the likely need for an
extensive engineering and test programme.
But adapting the Trident D5 missile would still
be likely to represent, by some way, the most
cost-effective delivery system for any UK siloor surface ship-based deterrent.


**34**


-----

###### The Four Generic Options

B-5 We undertook a cost and

capability-based assessment of the
four generic options against the basic
requirements for our nuclear deterrent
described in Section 4. The conclusions of
this analysis are as follows:

###### Option 1: A long-range aircraft equipped with cruise missiles

**_Airbus A350_**

**Platform:**

- 20 large converted civil aircraft plus 20
refuelling aircraft

- Range (with refuelling) in excess of
20,000km

- Capacity to carry four large cruise
missiles

**Delivery system:**

- Subsonic cruise missile (new
development or off-the-shelf purchase)

- Range up to 3,000 km

- New nuclear warhead

**Infrastructure and Support:**

- Two large main operating bases (one
new, one a modified existing base)

- New nuclear storage facilities and
command and control system

- Extensive new training burden


**Operational Posture:**

- Impracticable to sustain continuous
airborne deterrent patrols

- Aircraft normally retained at high alert
on the ground

B-6 **Assessment: The combination**

of a long-range aircraft armed with
cruise missiles suffers from several major
drawbacks. The whole system would
be vulnerable particularly to preemptive attacks: whilst on the ground, to
conventional and nuclear missile threats,
and to terrorist attacks, and once airborne,
to surface-to-air and air-to-air missiles.
Similar concerns would also apply to the
airborne refuelling tankers, which would
be essential if the aircraft were to be
able to meet the requirement to be able
to deter threats anywhere in the world.
Cruise missiles are also significantly more
vulnerable to being intercepted than
ballistic missiles because they fly at much
lower speed and altitude.

B-7 Even with a fleet of 20 large aircraft,

we would also face a major challenge in
terms of guaranteeing a sufficient capability
to establish an effective deterrence
posture. Also we had concerns about
meeting readiness requirements: measures
to increase the readiness of aircraft on
the ground would be visible and therefore
potentially escalatory in a crisis.

B-8 Finally, in terms of costs, assuming a

fleet of 20 aircraft, this option was the most
expensive of the four generic options, with
through-life costs more than double those
of a submarine option, the main cost drivers
being procurement of the new aircraft
and delivery system and the extensive new
infrastructure requirements. Overall, this was
the most expensive and by some distance
the least capable option.


**35**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent


###### Option 2: A large surface ship, equipped with Trident ballistic missiles

**_An artist’s impression of a ballistic missile_**
**_surface ship (picture courtesy of the US_**
**_Department of Defense)_**

**Platform:**

- Three large conventionally-powered
ships, each approximately 30,000 tonnes

- Additional air defence and antisubmarine warfare destroyers/frigates
plus support from a conventional role
submarine

**Delivery System:**

- Adapted Trident D5 missile

**Infrastructure and Support:**

- Minor modification and upgrading of
existing infrastructure

- At least three additional Royal Fleet
Auxiliary ships to provide at-sea support

**Operational Posture:**

- Continuous at sea deterrent patrols

B-9 **Assessment: We concluded that**

the option of developing large surface ships
able to launch ballistic missiles suffered
from serious drawbacks, primarily relating
to vulnerability and security. Compared
to a submarine, a large surface ship is
easier to detect and track, including from
space-based systems, and also is rather
easier to attack, whether from the air or
by a submarine. Continuous at sea patrols
probably could be sustained with a fleet of
only three ships (compared to four for the


Vanguard-class SSBNs), because of the more
limited refit requirements and the ability
to provide stores replenishment and crew
rotation whilst deployed on deterrent patrol.
But the requirement to procure and maintain
three large new ships, as well as a significant
number of other supporting assets makes this
option at least as expensive as a submarine
option. Overall, we concluded that this
option would provide less capability with
greater vulnerability, and at a broadly similar
whole life cost, to a submarine option.

###### Option 3: A land-based (silo) system equipped with Trident ballistic missiles

**_Test firing a Minuteman III missile (picture_**
**_courtesy of the US Department of Defense)_**

**Platform:**

- Two silo fields, each with 16 widely
dispersed silos

**Delivery system:**

- adapted Trident D5 missile

**Infrastructure and Support:**

- Acquisition of new land: each silo
field covering several hundred square
kilometres


**36**


-----

- Construction of the silos plus associated
command and control bunkers

- Hardened communications link to
political decision-makers to enable very
high readiness

- New infrastructure to transport the
missiles from the manufacturer to the silos

**Operational Posture:**

- Continuous deterrent capability, with
the ability to hold very high readiness
levels for extended periods of time

Area of Warren Air Force Base
= 12,600 [2] miles

Area of Great Britain
= 80,800 [2] miles

200 Miles

**_The area of Frances E Warren Air Base_**
**_superimposed on Great Britain_**

B-10 **Assessment: Silo-based systems**

suffer from vulnerability to pre-emptive
attacks in that they are immobile and
impossible to conceal. Whilst it is possible
to design and construct silos that have a
large degree of self-protection, they remain
vulnerable to a well-targeted nuclear
strike. The US has overcome this difficulty by
retaining land, sea and air-based deterrent
systems and by dispersing a relatively large
number of ground-based missiles over large
areas, so that any one nuclear detonation
cannot destroy more than one silo. For
example, the 90th Space Wing at Frances


E Warren Air Base in Wyoming, with a total
of 150 silos, is dispersed across an area of
12,600 square miles, one and a half times
the size of Wales. Such an approach is
entirely impractical in the UK. Clustering silos
together in a small area, for example within
the existing boundaries of an RAF base
in the UK, would leave them vulnerable
to being destroyed by a single incoming
nuclear-armed missile.

B-11 The option was considered of

holding ground-based missiles at sufficiently
high readiness to be launched before
any incoming missile reached the target.
However, this would not be an effective
deterrent posture, as it is possible that there
would only be a few minutes warning of a
ballistic missile attack on the UK, leaving
very little time to make decisions, and it
would require an extremely expensive and
complex command and control system
to retain political control over the launch
procedure in such circumstances. Holding
our nuclear forces at such high readiness
could be highly destabilising in a crisis.

B-12 Overall, this option presented

some major practical difficulties, especially
in terms of vulnerability, and the through
life costs were around twice those for a
submarine option.


**37**


-----

###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent


###### Option 4: A submarine equipped with Trident ballistic missiles

**_HMS VANGUARD_**

**Platform:**

- A fleet of three or four new SSBNs

**Delivery System:**

- The Trident D5 missile

**Infrastructure:**

- Some modernisation of submarine
infrastructure at Faslane and Coulport

**Operational Posture:**

- Continuous at sea deterrent patrols

B-13 **Assessment: A submarine-based**

system meets all of our key requirements.
The option of a conventionally-powered
submarine was rejected because of the
impracticality of developing a non-nuclear
propulsion system that could generate
the necessary power and endurance.


Currently, once deployed, the submarine is
by far the least vulnerable of the platform
options considered. For example, we are
confident that, since July 1968, when the
first Polaris patrol took place, our SSBN on
deterrent patrol has remained completely
undetected by a hostile or potentially
hostile state.

B-14 We have assessed carefully the

potential for future developments in antisubmarine warfare to compromise this
position. We believe it is unlikely there will
be any radical technological breakthrough
which might diminish materially the current
advantages of the submarine over potential
anti-submarine systems. Over the life of a
new class of SSBNs, it is conceivable that
unforeseen new technologies could emerge
that could enhance the ability of a potential
adversary to use air-, sea- or space-based
systems to monitor submarine movements.
However, even in this eventuality, provided
we continue to invest in suitable research and
development on effective counter-measures,
we believe that it is likely to be possible
to use a combination of new technology
and new tactics to ensure that the risks to
the SSBN on patrol remain manageable.
In any event, we judge that a submarine
will remain by far the least vulnerable
of all the platform options considered.

**_A Russian II-38 May Maritime Patrol Aircraft_**
**_(picture courtesy of the US Department of_**
**_Defense)_**


**38**


-----

B-15 A submarine-based solution

equipped with ballistic missiles also meets
our other key requirements. It can be
deployed covertly and achieve deterrent
effect anywhere in the world. We can also
change its readiness state either covertly
or, if required as a demonstration of intent,
overtly, for example by announcing the
deployment of a second SSBN.

###### Conclusion

B-16 From a capability perspective, we

concluded that a submarine-based system
offers the most practical and effective
means of meeting our future nuclear
deterrence requirements. In terms of cost,
maintaining a submarine-based deterrent
has a significant advantage over the large
aircraft and silo-based approaches and is
broadly similar to the surface ship option.


**39**


-----

**40**


###### United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent

Printed in the UK for The Stationery Office Limited

on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office

ID 5476717 11/06

Printed on Paper containing 75% fibre content minimum.


-----

