-----

-----

## Defence in a
 competitive
 age

###### Presented to Parliament
 by the Secretary of State for Defence
 by Command of Her Majesty

 March 2021


###### CP 411


-----

© Crown copyright 2021
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0
except where otherwise stated. To view this licence,
[visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3.](http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3)
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to
obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
[This publication is available at www.gov.uk/official-documents.](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications)
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at: SPOStrategyIntegratedReview@mod.gov.uk

ISBN 978-1-5286-2462-6
CCS0221109268. 03/21

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum

Printed in the UK by the APS Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s
Stationery Office


-----

###### DEFENCE IN A COMPETITIVE AGE


-----

#### Defence in a competitive age

###### Foreword from the Secretary of State for Defence


As a young officer, thirty years ago almost to the day, I was summoned to the
drill square to have read aloud key decisions from the government’s defence
review, Options for Change. We did not know it then, but the world was set for a
massive change. Not the fall of the Soviet Union, but other geopolitical changes
such as the rise of China, terrorist threat from Al Qaeda and global impact of the
internet, which were all some way off but no one was really prepared for what
happened when they did.

That is why we have put at the heart of this Defence Command Paper a mission
to seek out and to understand future threats, and to invest in the capabilities to
defeat them.

In Defence it is always tempting to use the shield of sentimentality to protect previously battle-winning
but now outdated capabilities. Such sentimentality, when coupled with over-ambition and underresourcing, leads to even harder consequences down the line. It risks the lives of our people, who are
truly our finest asset.

It would similarly endanger our people if we simply wielded a sword of cuts, slicing away the battleproven on the promise of novelty, without regard for what is left behind. Old capabilities are not
necessarily redundant, just as new technologies are not always relevant. Those of us in government
charged to protect and defend have a duty to enter new domains, as well as continuing investment in the
traditional ones, but always adapting to the threat.

History shows us, time and time again, that failing to do so risks irrelevance and defeat. As the threat
changes we must change with it, remaining clear-eyed about what capabilities we retire, why we are
doing so, and how they will be replaced.

That is why the process for this Defence Command Paper began with assessing the threats we are
encountering and anticipating, before considering how we should address them, and only then with
which equipment, and what resources are required to field them. The Integrated Review gave us the
framework to do just that and it is with good reason the next decade will see unprecedented levels of
investment in our Defence.

The Prime Minister’s vision for the UK in 2030 sees a stronger, more secure, prosperous and resilient
Union, better equipped for a more competitive age, as a problem-solving and burden-sharing nation with
a global perspective. To become so requires Britain’s soft and hard power to be better integrated. In this

**1**


-----

more competitive age, a ‘Global Britain’ has no choice but to step up, ready to take on the challenges and
shape the opportunities of the years ahead, alongside our allies and friends. Let us be clear, the benefits
and institutions of multilateralism, to which we became so accustomed, are an extension not an
alternative for our shared leadership and our hard power.

We must actively champion those shared values of liberty, justice and tolerance that have given billions of
souls the world over the chance of a better life, and do so through our actions, not just our words. UK
diplomacy is underwritten by the credibility of the UK armed forces and they will be more integrated,
active and agile, capable of both deterring threats and defeating enemies.

The Prime Minister’s commitment to spending £188bn on Defence over the coming four years – an
increase of £24bn or fourteen per cent – is an investment in that vision of security and prosperity in 2030.
Previous reviews have been over-ambitious and under-funded, leaving forces that were overstretched
and under-equipped. But the Integrated Review’s refreshed strategy and increased funding offers
Defence an exciting opportunity to turn hollow forces into credible ones, modernising for the threats of
the 2020s and beyond, and contributing to national prosperity in the process.

The Royal Navy will have new ships and missiles, the RAF new fighters and sensors, and the Army will be
more deployed and better protected. Most importantly our armed forces will be integrated across all
domains, joining up our people, equipment and information to increase their outputs and effectiveness.
This marks a shift from mass mobilisation to information age speed, readiness and relevance for
confronting the threats of the future.

These principles will guide our doctrine and force development. The Integrated Operating Concept,
published last year, recognises that changes in the information and political environments now impact
not just the context but conduct of military operations. The notion of war and peace as binary states has
given way to a continuum of conflict, requiring us to prepare our forces for more persistent global
engagement and constant campaigning, moving seamlessly from operating to war fighting.

The armed forces, working with the rest of government, must think and act differently. They will no
longer be held as a force of last resort, but become more present and active around the world, operating
below the threshold of open conflict to uphold our values and secure our interests, partner our friends
and enable our allies, whether they are in the Euro-Atlantic, the Indo-Pacific, or beyond.

Just as we are seeing constant competition stretch out across the globe, so must we be constant in our
self-criticism and challenge. The establishment of a net assessment and challenge function within the
MOD will increase the rigour and candour of comparison with our adversaries, introduce a more

**2**


-----

collaborative approach to lesson learning and strategy making, and drive a more coherent approach to
force development.

The steps to sustaining UK leadership in Defence must start with ensuring we are a credible and truly
threat-oriented organisation, but we must do so in conjunction with our allies and friends. As the second
biggest spender in NATO and a major contributor across all five domains and the nuclear deterrent, we
have a responsibility to support the Alliance’s own transformation for this more competitive age.

The MOD will prioritise more than £6.6bn of research, development, and experimentation over the next
four years so the armed forces can adapt to the threat with advanced technologies. These investments in
our future battle-winning capabilities will be guided by the Science and Technology Strategy 2020 and a
new Defence and Security Industrial Strategy. Together they will build the partnerships, flexibility and
pace of our capability development and procurement. Which, in turn, will not only sustain our strategic
advantage as a science power, but energise innovation, stimulate the economy, and generate high-skilled
jobs right across the United Kingdom.

If this Defence Command Paper is anything, it is an honest assessment of what we can do and what we
will do. We will ensure Defence is threat-focused, modernised, and financially sustainable, ready to
confront future challenges, seize new opportunities for Global Britain and lay the foundations of a more
secure and prosperous Union. We will, for the first time in decades, match genuine money to credible
ambitions. We will retire platforms to make way for new systems and approaches. And we will invest in
that most precious commodity of all – the people of our armed forces.

To serve my country as a soldier was one of the greatest privileges of my life; contributing to keeping this
country safe, upholding our values, and defending those who could not defend themselves. Putting
yourself in harm’s way in the service of your country is something that fortunately few of us are ever
required to do. But we all have a duty to ensure that those who do so on our behalves are as well
prepared and equipped as possible.

So, the success of this Defence Command Paper should not be judged on the sophistication of all the
words that follow but our implementation of its reforms. And, ultimately, on the delivery of its capabilities
into the hands of the men and women of our armed forces. It is they who keep us safe and will continue
to do so in the years ahead. It is to them, their families, and all those in Defence that we owe it to make
this policy into reality. The work to do so has only just begun.

###### The Rt Hon. Ben Wallace MP

**3**


-----

-----

#### Changing strategic context

###### Chapter 1


**1.1.** The Integrated Review set out the

Government’s current assessment of the major
trends that will shape the national security and
international environment to 2030. It is a context
in which the nature and distribution of global
power is changing as we move towards a more
competitive and multipolar world. Over the
coming decade, we judge that four overarching
trends will be of particular importance to the UK
and the changing international order:

- Geopolitical and geo-economic shifts, such as
the growing importance of the Indo-Pacific,
China’s increasing international assertiveness
and the influence of middle powers.

- Systemic competition, including between
states, and between democratic and
authoritarian values and systems of
government.

- Rapid technological change, that will reshape
our economies and societies, bringing
enormous benefits but also becoming an
arena of intensifying geopolitical competition.

- Transnational challenges that require
collective action, such as climate change,
biosecurity risks, terrorism and serious and
organised crime.

**1.2.** These trends will overlap and interact,

and the long-term effects of Covid-19 will
influence their trajectory in ways that are
currently difficult to predict.

**1.3.** The Integrated Review also describes a

deteriorating global security environment, in
which the whole of the UK, its people and
interests face a wider range of state and non

state threats enabled by technology. It also
makes clear how important every part of the
United Kingdom is to our defence and security.
In an era of systemic competition, the
distinctions between peace and war; home and
away; state and non-state; and virtual and real
become increasingly blurred. Long established
techniques of influence and leverage such as
economic coercion, propaganda, intellectual
property theft and espionage, have been
supercharged by ubiquitous information and
technological transformation. Our adversaries are
undermining the international norms and values
that have underpinned our security and our
prosperity, and are seeking to fracture the
cohesion and resolve of our alliances and
international institutions. As we become
increasingly challenged below the threshold of
open warfare, the battle of the narratives and use
of non-lethal means to influence and secure
objectives will characterise the future operating
environment.

**1.4.** Russia continues to pose the greatest

nuclear, conventional military and sub-threshold
threat to European security. Modernisation of the
Russian armed forces, the ability to integrate
whole of state activity and a greater appetite for
risk, makes Russia both a capable and
unpredictable actor.

**1.5.** The rising power of China is by far the

most significant geopolitical factor in the world
today. China poses a complex, systemic
challenge. As the Integrated Review makes clear,
we need to be prepared to push back to protect
our values and global interests, while maintaining
our ability to cooperate in tackling global
challenges such as climate change and the
mutual benefits of our economic relationship.

**5**


-----

##### The threat```


###### based
 threats``


###### groups

 Chemical,


###### threats``


###### Global


###### drones


###### State
 based
 threats``


###### groups

 Chemical,


###### areas`


###### proxies`


###### areas`

 Commercially


-----

The significant impact of China’s military
modernisation (which is proceeding faster than
any other nation) and growing international
assertiveness within the Indo-Pacific region will
pose an increasing challenge.

**1.6.** Iran and North Korea will continue to

pose regional challenges and their nuclear
programmes threaten global stability.

**1.7.** Additionally, the UK will continue to need

to counter a range of disruptive states and nonstate threats through a concerted crossgovernment effort. Terrorism will continue to
pose a dynamic and evolving threat to the UK
and its interests. Terror threats will be expanded
through access to cyberspace capabilities and
other advanced weapons, and the impact of such
attacks will be exploited by our adversaries for
their own interests. The proliferation of Chemical,
Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN)
weapons and advanced conventional weapons,
combined with new technologies, will increase
the risk of conflict and will serve to increase their
ferocity. While international agreements have
long sought to limit the development of these
capabilities, our adversaries are increasingly
breaching their terms or altogether withdrawing
from these commitments.

**1.8.** Climate change and biodiversity loss

represents a global challenge. As a threat
multiplier, climate change will drive instability,
migration, desertification, competition for natural
resources and conflict. For instance, it is likely
that as a result of climate change the Northern
Sea Route will open up within the next decade,
which could pose significant geopolitical and
security implications. Health emergencies will
also shape the future operating environment and


provide opportunity for malign states to increase
their influence and create dependency.

**1.9.** The newer domains of cyberspace and

space pose significant challenges. Advanced
technologies are already being developed for
adoption in these arenas but with limited
international agreement on norms and
conventions to regulate them and a lack of
ethical or moral standards to encourage their
responsible use. States will increasingly seek to
integrate these capabilities with the traditional
military domains of maritime, land and air. Multidomain integration will become the norm.
Adversaries will seek to avoid our areas of
strength and seek to test us where they perceive
us to be weak. Such an approach is not new, but
it will reach well beyond the traditional
battlefield.

**1.10.** Our historic technological advantage is

being increasingly challenged by targeted
investment in capabilities designed to counter
our strengths and challenge strategic stability,
such as hypersonic missiles to defeat missile
defences, and nuclear-powered cruise missiles.
These advanced conventional weapons are
increasingly available to a wider range of state
actors. Some countries are also adopting a
military-civil fusion approach towards the
development of new technologies, harnessing
civilian innovation for the benefit of their
Defence capabilities. Conversely, the imaginative
employment of relatively low-cost capabilities is
challenging highly capable air defence and
electronic warfare systems or heavily armoured
forces, as we have seen in Libya and NagornoKarabakh respectively.


-----

##### Defence’s contribution to the IR

###### Defence will contribute to the four overarching objectives set by the Integrated Review to 2025 as follows:

 • Sustaining strategic advantage through science and technology – which we will support through: our contribution to UK cyber power through the National Cyber Force; investment of at least £6.6bn in Research and Development (R&D) over the next four years, guided in part by the Defence Science and Technology Strategy 2020; a network of innovation hubs and Defence and Security Accelerator challenges; supported by the Defence and Security Industrial Strategy in creating a more certain environment for industry.

 • Shaping the open international order of the future – which we will support through: our adherence to International Humanitarian Law in our own operations; freedom of navigation operations in support of international maritime law efforts to shape responsible behaviour in cyberspace and space, and the ethical development and deployment of technology based on democratic values; and by embedding international laws, rules and norms in partners’ approach to security through capacity building.

 • Strengthening security and defence at home and overseas – which we will support through: defence of the UK, the Overseas Territories and Crown Dependencies, our ability to conduct non-combatant evacuation operations when needed, and our CBRN expertise, which was called upon in response to the 2018 Salisbury attack; our contribution to deterrence through collective security with our Allies in NATO, and building the capacity and resilience of like-minded partners to evolving security threats; support for UN peacekeeping operations as part of the Government’s effort to reduce the frequency and incidence of conflict; and by providing high-end PURSUE counter-terrorism capabilities, maintaining our contribution to the Global Coalition against Daesh in Iraq and Syria, to coalition efforts in Afghanistan and to French operations in the Sahel, as well as further integrating our counter-terrorism activity through the new Counter Terrorism Operations Centre (CTOC).

 • Building resilience at home and overseas – which we will support through: Military Aid to the Civilian Authorities, most recently in support of the Covid-19 response; support to local authorities in responding to extreme weather events, and to law enforcement following terror attacks, as in 2017; our readiness to provide humanitarian relief overseas at speed; and our ability to provide specialist and rapid support in responding to global health risks, such as during the 2014 Ebola outbreak.


-----

#### The future battlefield

###### Chapter 2

**2.1.** The future operating environment will

not be limited by lines on maps or by geography.
We will be confronted by complex and
integrated challenges below, and potentially
above, the threshold of armed conflict. These
challenges will be complex, test our approach
and target our most vulnerable areas. We will
likely be confronted by state and non-state
actors who will employ brinkmanship, malign
activity below the threshold of armed conflict,
terrorism, proxies, coercion and the deliberate
use of economic tools to undermine our
economic and security interests.

**2.2.** The technical advantage of the UK and

its allies has diminished over the past two
decades, challenged by targeted investment in
capabilities designed to counter our strengths
and target our weaknesses. Some states will seek
to acquire, overtly and covertly, technologies and
knowledge from the West, including the UK, to
advance their military programmes. Research and
development conducted by state governments
will be further enhanced by the increased
availability of off-the-shelf equipment making
the upgrading of legacy systems more accurate
and more lethal. Conventional military
capabilities are advancing. Several states are
developing land systems including anti-armour
missiles and artillery, that can exceed the
capabilities of many NATO nations in range and
lethality. The development of Hypersonic Glide
Vehicles, capable of delivering a conventional or
nuclear warhead and with an unpredictable flight
path, will allow very little warning time and pose
significant challenges for defensive missile
systems to counter.


**2.3.** Growing maritime capabilities will

enable the projection of power further afield and
to conduct operations from increased range.

- The growth of China’s navy, already the
largest in the world, is outpacing all
competitors. China is set to have as many as
five aircraft carriers by 2030 as well as up to
four light helicopter carriers, and are
supported by the growing fleet of destroyers.

- Russia is investing in and developing
significant underwater capabilities, including
deep-sea capabilities which can threaten
undersea cables, as well as a torpedo capable
of delivering a nuclear payload to coastal
targets.

**2.4.** The development of long-range

precision strike capabilities, combined with
increasingly capable early warning radar and
integrated air defence systems, will enable states
to contest and even dominate airspace in many
areas where the UK will need to operate.

- China is developing a full spectrum of air
capabilities including fourth and fifth
generation fighters, multiple Intelligence
Surveillance Targeting Acquisition and
Reconnaissance (ISTAR) aircraft, the Y-20
heavy transport aircraft, armed stealth
Uncrewed Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and a
capable Integrated Air Defence System with
the world’s most modern surface to air
missiles.

**9**


-----

- Russia has the capability to conduct precision
strikes at range and to deny freedom of
action to the UK and our allies through a
highly capable integrated air defence system.
Russia can therefore present a significant
threat to the UK’s ability to support our forces
and protect our interests in Europe, the
eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East.

**2.5.** The rapid development and large-scale

deployment of high-end military capabilities will
inevitably be a concern to our allies and partners
in the regions in which they are fielded. But
equally challenging is the de-stabilising effect
that comes from the proliferation of these
technologies to other states, often those whose
malign behaviour is already a threat to their
neighbours. Proliferation will make access to
more advanced weapons systems ever more
available for less technologically advanced
countries and non-state actors. An adversary will
no longer need to rely solely on its own research
capabilities to field a credible threat to even the
most technologically advanced nations. The most
potent recent example is the use of Iranian
supplied ballistic missiles by the Houthis. Also of
significant concern, is an increasing readiness to
use chemical or biological weapons, including on
British soil and outside of conflict settings; both
North Korea and Russia have used chemical
agents in the last four years.

**2.6.** Our space assets, both military and

civilian, can be held at risk due to the
development of anti-satellite weapons. Several
states have already been investing in and testing
these capabilities. Similarly, our potential
adversaries are aware of how reliant space is on


cyberspace. These technologies are growing in
capability, type and number and now present a
full spectrum of threats that modern space and
space-enabled operations will need to counter.
Space will be an increasingly contested domain
and emerging technologies and applications will
become ever more dependent upon the unique
services it provides.

**2.7.** As Defence relies on information held on

connected networks and systems, opportunities
to attack us via cyberspace will almost certainly
increase. For Defence, the cyberspace threat
surface is broad with information networks,
weapon systems and platforms relying on
cyberspace capabilities. Cyberspace threats will
emanate from state, state-sponsored and
criminal groups with personnel and capabilities
moving seamlessly between them. As with other
domains, cyberspace activity is often leveraged
as part of a wider, coordinated and integrated
attack. Cyberspace espionage can and will be
used as part of wider influence and propaganda
campaigns, as well as in support of wider hostile
activity up to and including conventional warfare.

**2.8.** These threats will continue to develop

over the next few years. The application of
increased automation and the power of artificial
intelligence will transform many of these
capabilities. We must be vigilant; understand the
threats we face and be prepared to continue to
adapt.

**10**


-----

#### Our strategic approach

###### Chapter 3

**3.1.** As the strategic context and operating

environment changes, so must Defence. This will
be essential in keeping British citizens safe from
future threats and in achieving the ambition and
cross-government objectives established in the
Integrated Review. This Chapter sets out how
Defence will change its operating approach to
meet the ambition for Global Britain set out in
the Integrated Review and to protect the UK, its
citizens and its interests in light of the strategic
context presented in Chapter 1.

**3.2.** As one of the principal instruments

available to government, Defence plays a unique
role in protecting and promoting the three
fundamental national interests identified by the
Integrated Review: sovereignty, security and
prosperity. Our fundamental purpose is to
protect our people, territory, critical national
infrastructure and way of life. Our operations
ensure that the UK maintains freedom of action
and that its citizens are free from coercion or
manipulation. Defence also makes a significant
contribution to local communities and the UK
economy alike, with our armed forces drawn
from across the Union, our UK-wide footprint
providing local jobs, our investment in cuttingedge R&D and British industry, and through
defence exports.

**3.3.** The values that bind together citizens in

all parts of the UK are also our abiding strength
and will remain core to our effort. We will seek to
uphold the international laws, rules and
behaviours that are founded on them – from
International Humanitarian Law to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS). And we will ensure that the


frameworks that govern our operations keep
pace with technological change, embedding an
ethical approach consistent with our core values
and principles in the design and deployment of
new technologies.

**3.4.** Our approach to warfare has evolved

relatively slowly in recent years, while our
adversaries have invested in equipment and
forces that expose our vulnerabilities. They are
committed to understanding our capabilities and
activities, adapting their approach to enable
them to win without warfighting. They have
increased their focus on speed and readiness.
They are prepared to use hard military force to
confront us, if they deem it necessary, either
directly or through proxies. Failure to adapt our
armed forces’s posture, skills and capabilities to
the changing environment and threat will hand
the advantage to our adversaries. Our armed
forces must have the tools and capabilities they
need to lead, influence, partner, deter and when
necessary to fight to ensure the whole of the UK
and its interests are protected. We cannot afford
to stand still while the world changes around us.
We must change how we deter our adversaries,
defend our nation and our nation's interests.

**3.5.** We are making a decisive shift in our

approach. The Integrated Operating Concept,
published in 2020, set out how we intend to
adapt. Our spending review settlement of over
£24bn over the next four years, which raised
defence spending, has given us the resources
needed to deliver on it. This is in addition to our
planned investments to defence over the same
period.

**11**


-----

**3.6.** The Integrated Operating Concept sets

out the continuum between 'operate' and
'warfight,' which will allow our forces to be more
versatile and flexible in delivering a range of
tasks. Our response will be founded on
modernisation and integration. We will play to
our traditional strengths whilst acknowledging
that we will need to adapt to be ready for the
threats of the future. The core elements of our
approach are as follows:

- **Our allies and partners give us strategic**
advantage, sharing the responsibilities of
security and providing a force multiplication
effect. NATO, and our ability to contribute to
it a high end warfighting force useable against
a peer opponent, will remain central to our
policy. Along with our enduring relationship
with the US, it will continue to be the bedrock
of our security. Our collective Article V
commitment, that an armed attack against
one state shall be considered an attack on all,
underpins the security of the UK and our
Allies. We will also look to other alliances and
partnerships – including in the Indo-Pacific to increase further our interoperability and
burden sharing across the world. We will need
to live up to the concept of allied by design
both in how we build capability and how we
operate. Ensuring we work alongside our allies
to reinforce their resilience from shared
threats will be key.

- **Our people, from all four corners of the UK,**
the Commonwealth and beyond, are our most
important resource. They give us our edge.
We will need to attract a more diverse
workforce with the skills and experience
required to operate in the information age
and invest in and exploit rapid technology
development.



- **Innovation and experimentation will be the**
drivers of modernisation, with access to
cutting-edge technology. As much of
technology development currently sits outside
of government, we will develop new ways of
partnering with industry to ensure that
pioneering research and development is
pulled through to capability delivery.

- **Understanding and assessment will be**
increasingly important to effective decisionmaking and action. We will need to integrate
physically, virtually and cognitively.

- Evolving from a force that is primarily
designed for the contingency of a major
conflict and warfighting, to one that is also
designed for permanent and persistent
**global engagement. To succeed in the era of**
systemic competition we will need to be
front-footed. We and our allies and partners
must drive the tempo of strategic activity
rather than responding to others. That
requires a different way of thinking. It requires
as much focus on how the force is postured
and used as on its structure. It requires a
mindset that is based on continuous
campaigning, seeing all activity as part of an
overall operational design.

**3.7.** To deliver this we will need to be:

- **Integrated across all 5 domains – space,**
cyberspace, maritime, land and air. We will go
beyond the traditional concept of 'joint' to a
depth of multi-domain integration that adds
up to far more than the sum of the parts.

**12**


-----

- **Integrated nationally. As set out by the**
Integrated Review, we need a step change in
integration across government, where we
share responsibilities, to create a truly national
enterprise that can harness all elements of our
society to secure national advantage. Led by
the direction set in the Integrated Review, we
will build on the progress we have made in
recent years through the ‘comprehensive
approach’ and ‘fusion doctrine’. But we must
be bolder in our ambition.

- **Engaged internationally. It is only through**
persistent and proactive engagement that we
will increase our understanding, pre-empt
threats and build the partnerships and
capability we will need to stay safe. Through a
more engaged posture we will increase our
influence, promote our values and create the
unity which our adversaries fear.

- **More assertive. We will need to**
demonstrate the will and capability – lethal
and non-lethal - to confront threats early.
Only by being more confident will we enhance
deterrence and be ready to seize
opportunities when they arise. This will
require a force that is more agile, resilient and
responsive to events.

- **Information led. Information is the**
foundation of integration. We will need to
invest in the capabilities that enable us to
obtain and exploit information at speed to
give us advantage over our rivals. We must
carefully consider the impact of the messages
we send.


**3.8.** We will continue to invest in the hard

power capabilities and in the global reach that
sets the UK apart from other countries, with
modernised platforms and weapon systems
across all domains. As set out in the 2020
Defence Science and Technology Strategy, we
will prioritise higher-risk research to support the
modernisation of our armed forces. Our renewed
focus on R&D sets a new approach to ensure we
use our investment strategically. It is vital that we
seize the opportunities for innovation – focusing
on game-changing technologies - and protect
those technologies that will provide us with a
decisive edge. This will enable us to ensure that
the UK continues to have competitive, innovative
and world-class defence to accelerate the
transformation of our armed forces and sustain
our strategic advantage.

**3.9.** We will invest in the agile,

interconnected, and data-driven capabilities of
the future, targeting generational leaps in
capability development to outpace our
adversaries. The pace of technological change
will require us to constantly adapt, experiment
and take risks, to preserve strategic advantage.
Through this approach, Defence will support the
wider government ambition to build and
leverage strategic advantage through Science
and Technology to deliver national aims. Our
investment will support other parts of
government and industry to the benefit of
security and resilience of the whole of the UK
economy.


-----

##### Carrier Strike Group

###### The arrival of Britain’s fifth generation Carrier Strike Group (CSG) marks a step change in capability. A symbol of Global Britain in action, both of our Carriers (HMS QUEEN ELIZABETH and HMS PRINCE OF WALES) were assembled in Scotland from sections built across the Union. The CSG provides a platform to deliver the Government’s defence, foreign policy and trade priorities and to project the UK’s global reach and influence. The ability to deploy a sovereign CSG underlines the UK’s global ambition and leadership as an inclusive, outward- facing and free-trading nation, assertive in defending our values and interests, and a champion of international rules.

 The CSG comprises cutting-edge frigates, destroyers, a nuclear-powered submarine, support ships, and a carrier air wing of Royal Air Force and Royal Navy F-35B jets and helicopters. International and interchangeable by design, the CSG offers unique strategic flexibility, from countering state threats and non-state threats, through to humanitarian and disaster relief. A UK CSG will be permanently available to NATO, an embodiment of our unwavering commitment to the defence and deterrence of the Euro-Atlantic area. The strategic utility of the CSG will be demonstrated by its inaugural deployment in 2021 to the Indo-Pacific region. Integrated with United States Navy and United States Marine Corps it will showcase the UK’s ability to project global influence and send a powerful message about our ability, and our willingness, to act globally.


-----

#### Evolving for the future

###### Chapter 4


**4.1.** Implementing the Integrated Operating

Concept will see Defence continuing to fulfil
many of the tasks we have traditionally
undertaken. But we also need to take on new
tasks and adapt the way we do traditional tasks
given the changing strategic context and the
emerging threats we observe. We will develop
new doctrine, new operating methods, new
capabilities and new partners to deter and
constrain our adversaries in the grey-zone
between peace and conflict. Our model of
Persistent Engagement is at the heart of our new
approach to tasks overseas, but our ability to
protect the UK, our Overseas Territories (OTs)
and the Crown Dependencies will remain
paramount.

Persistent Engagement OverseasPersistent engagement overseas


**4.2.** In the current threat landscape, and in an

era of constant competition, we must have an
increased forward presence to compete with and
campaign against our adversaries below the
threshold of armed conflict, and to understand,
shape and influence the global landscape to the
UK’s advantage. To pursue our foreign policy
objectives and shape conditions for stability, we
will rebalance our force to provide a more
proactive, forward deployed, persistent presence.
This will ensure our armed forces are more in use
whilst maintaining the deterrent effect that
comes from being ready for managing crises at
scale.

**4.3.** As set out in the Integrated Review, the

UK will continue to play a leading international
role in conflict resolution and prevention. Our
persistent engagement will increase the UK’s
ability to pre-empt and manage crises before
they escalate and minimise the opportunities for


state and non-state actors to undermine
international security. We will engage in the
places where we judge we will have best impact
against the global challenges we face. We will
integrate our efforts with those of other
government departments, agencies, the police
and our allies, including through collaborative
work funded by the Conflict, Stability and
Security Fund (CSSF).

**4.4.** This approach will demonstrate a much

greater commitment to our allies and partners
than our current model of intermittent, ad hoc
visits, exercises and training packages. It will also
provide us with accurate, real-time
understanding to inform decision-making to help
us maintain strategic advantage.

**4.5.** Overall, our engagement overseas will

bring us influence and understanding, strengthen
our partnerships, prosperity and trade, and deter
our adversaries. More specifically, we will:

- Have a larger, professionalised cadre of
**permanently deployed personnel, delivering**
defence diplomacy around the globe. We will
increase our global network by a third,
expanding our Defence Attaché network and
our British Defence Staffs to co-ordinate
activity across regions.

- Integrate our activities into a scalable global
**foundation, comprising sovereign or**
partnered bases and facilities. We will invest in
facilities and infrastructure across our
network. In Cyprus, our investment will allow
forward based troops and aircraft to be more
quickly available in the Eastern Mediterranean,
the Middle East and North Africa.

**15**


-----

- Our continued commitment in Gibraltar will
enable our ships to be persistently engaged
from the Gulf of Guinea to the Eastern
Mediterranean. An enhanced presence in
Kenya will facilitate a greater commitment to
East Africa, including through our Overseas
Training and Exercises Programme. Further
investment in Oman and increased
deployments to the country and the region
will demonstrate our long-term commitment
to the Gulf’s stability and prosperity, in
addition to our presence in the British Indian
Ocean Territory. And in Germany, we will
invest in our existing storage facilities to
increase the readiness of land forces for
deployment in Europe.

- Use this foundation to maintain a persistent
**forward presence to assert our influence,**
support our friends and deter our adversaries.
We will contribute to NATO’s forward posture
in support of deterrence and defence, aligned
with NATO’s own deterrence and defence
concept. We will do this through persistent
operations in peacetime, including through
our Enhanced Forward Presence battlegroup
in Estonia and our presence in Poland, air
policing missions and contributions to NATO
naval groups in the Euro-Atlantic area and an
increase in our exercise presence with Allies in
support of Supreme Allied Commander in
Europe (SACEUR’s) objectives. And we will
increase our presence and engagement in the
Indo-Pacific and Africa, committed for the
long-term, with closer and deeper regional
partnerships. Our Offshore Patrol Vessels, and
later our Type 31 frigates, will be key to our
forward presence in the South Atlantic, the
Caribbean, the Mediterranean and the Gulf of


Guinea, as well as the Indian and Pacific
Oceans.

- Take a campaigning approach to building
**partners’ capacity, with a capability**
optimised to work alongside other nations’
forces. We will train, advise, assist and, when
necessary, accompany them. We will be
prepared to operate with them in hostile
environments. Such activities contribute to
Euro-Atlantic security, in the Western Balkans
and Ukraine; and more widely, in West and
East Africa, the Gulf, Iraq, Afghanistan and the
Indo-Pacific region. Defence’s contribution to
our relationships in these regions will be part
of the wider government approach to conflict
and instability, as set out under the Integrated
Review.

- Enhance the defence contribution to the
Government’s counter-terrorism strategy,
campaigning to counter terrorism overseas.
We will develop our intelligence, surveillance,
reconnaissance and stand-off strike
capabilities so we can respond quickly as the
threat develops. Our Special Forces will be
ready to intervene decisively when our
interests are threatened.

- **Counter and deny state threats, making a**
sustained, dynamic and calibrated effort to
ensure that the UK’s potential adversaries are
not able to manipulate the security
environment. To do this, we will use a mixture
of operational activity, strategic
communication and engagement. We will
work closely with other departments and the
intelligence community to maximise our
national impact.


-----

##### Our global foundation

###### British Defence Staffs

 Defence Attaché network*

 Hubs / bases

 Large training areas


-----

###### All locations are indicative

 *Defence Attaché network is illustrative


-----

**Crisis responseCrisis response** **WarfightingINTENSITY OF INFORMATION OPERATIONSINTENSITY OF UKIC AND DEFENCEINTEGRATED CAMPAIGNINGWarfighting**


**4.6.** Our approach will be based on seizing

the initiative, seeking to prevent and manage
crises before they escalate and minimising the
opportunity for our adversaries to exploit conflict
and instability. But it will be underpinned by the
will and the capability to reconfigure, surge and
apply hard power when the threat demands it.
These higher risk interventions will range from
targeted counter-terrorism missions to larger
and more complex operations. We will be
smarter about where and how we can have a
catalytic effect, playing to our strengths, making
greater use of partnering and retaining the
flexibility to reallocate our forces as the situation
changes. As part of the UK's force for good
agenda, Defence will continue to play a role in
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief,
including in the Atlantic and Caribbean during
the annual hurricane season.


**4.7.** The UK has an unwavering commitment

to NATO and remains bound to the requirement
for collective self-defence under Article V of the
Washington Treaty: that an attack on one NATO
Ally shall be considered an attack on all. To
underpin the credibility of our deterrence
posture, we will maintain well-supported and
equipped nuclear and conventional forces at high
readiness, across all domains, capable of highintensity warfighting. We will design our
warfighting forces to be integrated with allies,
first and foremost through NATO, acting as a
framework nation (providing the lead command
and enabling function to NATO) to command
and cohere Alliance warfighting activity.

**Capacity BuildingInt Co-opVisiting ExercisesForward PresenceForward PostureInt SharingVisiting ExercisesCapacity BuildingForward PresenceForward PostureDefence AttachéInt IntegrationVisiting ExercisesWarfighting at ScaleCapacity BuildingForward PresenceCT StrikeForward PostureSCALEHMG OBJECTIVES**

**19**


###### CONSTANT COMPETITION

 EMERGING CRISIS

 CONFLICT


-----

We will invest in readiness and lethality, ensuring
UK forces can make a decisive difference in the
early stages of any conflict. Rapidly deployable
land forces will reinforce our forward presence,
with the Carrier Strike Group offering a flexible
basing option to respond in a warfighting
scenario. The UK will be able to bring key
capabilities to bear from land, air, sea,
cyberspace and space along with our Special
Forces, ensuring we can manage escalation
against an adversary. The Army will deliver a
modernised, adaptable and expeditionary
fighting force, centred around HQ Allied Rapid
Reaction Corps as a NATO corps HQ, and 3 (UK)
Division as a warfighting division, optimised to
fight a peer adversary in a NATO context.
Smarter employment of our Reserves will make
better use of expertise to backfill key defence
roles in a crisis and provide follow-on forces in a
major conflict. Our precision strike capabilities
will continue to contribute to maintaining
NATO’s defence and deterrence, as well as being
an important component of our globally
deployable force.

**4.8.** Major investments in a new generation

of Anti-Submarine Warfare frigates and a focus
on deep inter-operability with allies such as the
US, France, Norway, and the Netherlands will
ensure that the UK retains its historic role as the
heart of NATO’s ability to ensure our freedom to
operate in the North Atlantic and reinforce
European allies. These investments will ensure we
can also be able to project UK forces into NATO’s
flanks, in particular the High North and Arctic, the
Baltic Sea, the Balkans, and the Mediterranean
and the Black Sea. The High North and
maintaining security in the defence of the North
Atlantic remains of great importance, underlining
the value of our strong relationship with Iceland
and our Joint Expeditionary Force (JEF) partners,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, the
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and from spring
2021, Iceland.


###### Defending the UK and our territoryDefending the UK and our territory


**4.9.** Some tasks remain constant and our

priority will always be to defend the UK, its
people and its territory. We will provide high
readiness air and maritime assets to deter and
respond to threats to the UK. Working with the
intelligence and security community, our
cyberspace and intelligence networks will protect
the UK against espionage and threats to our
critical national infrastructure. We will continue to
defend the Overseas Territories and the Crown
Dependencies, protect their people and ensure
their right of self-determination. The armed
forces will retain a deterrent posture in the
Falkland Islands, protect Gibraltar’s territorial
waters and continue to contribute to the security
of the Sovereign Base Areas in Cyprus. The British
Antarctic Survey provides the UK’s permanent
presence in the British Antarctic Territory and
South Georgia & the South Sandwich Islands.
Annual seasonal Antarctic patrols by our Ice
Patrol ship, HMS PROTECTOR, will maintain and
assure compliance of other state parties in the
prohibition of military activity, weapons testing
and observance of environmental protocols
under the Antarctic Treaty System.

**4.10.** We will continue to make an important

contribution to the wider security and resilience
of the UK in support of civil authorities, providing
specialist skills. We will hold forces at high levels
of readiness to respond to a wide range of
national events and crises from environmental
hazards such as severe flooding through to
malicious attacks by terrorists or states. The
armed forces and defence scientists will continue
to support domestic authorities with explosive
and CBRN threats and provide high-readiness
explosive ordnance disposal teams to render safe
bombs and other unexploded devices.

**20**


-----

##### Protecting our homeland


###### Ensuring Regional hubs
 our
 connectivity

 Defensive

 cyber
 Defending our

 seas and sky


-----

We will also provide support to UK security and
intelligence agencies and other partners in
countering the threat posed by smuggling, illegal
migration and illegal access to UK fisheries. We
will develop our approach to national resilience
in line with the Comprehensive National
Resilience Strategy.

Nuclear deterrent

###### Nuclear deterrent


**4.11.** A minimum, credible, independent

nuclear deterrent, based on a continuous at sea
posture and assigned to the defence of NATO,
remains essential as the ultimate guarantee to
our security, and that of our allies. Since April
1969, there has always been a Royal Navy
ballistic missile submarine at sea on deterrent
patrol. Armed with strategic nuclear missiles,
these submarines have acted as the nation’s
continuous nuclear deterrent against the most
extreme threats to the UK and our allies, by
sending a clear message to would-be aggressors.
Extreme threats to the UK and our allies have not
gone away.

**4.12.** Some nuclear-armed states are

increasing and diversifying their arsenals, while
increases in global competition, challenges to the
multilateral order, and proliferation of potentially
disruptive technologies all pose a threat to
strategic stability. The UK must ensure potential
adversaries can never use their capabilities to
threaten us or our NATO allies, to constrain our
decision making in a crisis, or to sponsor nuclear
terrorism. More detail on the UK’s nuclear


deterrence policy is included in the Integrated
Review.

**4.13.** In this context, we have committed to a

once-in-two-generations programme to
modernise our nuclear forces. This will include
replacing the current Vanguard Class submarines
with four new Dreadnought Class submarines.
Designed and built in the UK, these new
submarines will be some of the most advanced
machines ever built, employing world-leading
and cutting-edge technology to deliver an
extremely capable and intensely formidable
capability. We will also replace the UK’s nuclear
warheads to ensure we maintain an effective
deterrent throughout the commission of the
Dreadnought Class, working closely with the US
so that our new sovereign warhead remains
compatible with the Mk7 aeroshell and Trident
Strategic Weapon System. We will continue to
cooperate with France under the Teutates Treaty,
working together on the technology associated
with nuclear stockpile stewardship in support of
our respective independent nuclear deterrent
capabilities. We will work collaboratively across
the nuclear sector to optimise the Defence
Nuclear Enterprise for the future, ensuring that
the UK retains and develops its world leading
skills through a wide range of companies. We
remain committed to the long-term goal of a
world without nuclear weapons and continue to
work for the preservation and strengthening of
effective arms control, disarmament, and nonproliferation measures, taking into account the
prevailing security environment.


-----

##### Countering the threat of CBRN

###### Chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) weapon use remains an enduring and growing threat to the UK, deployed forces and international stability. To counter this threat, we will have capabilities in place that allow us to maintain our political and military freedom of action despite the presence, threat or use of CBRN materials. Defence must also be prepared to provide counter-CBRN forces to support a UK homeland resilience response to multiple threats and maintain our contingent capability to operate overseas. We should support NATO’s efforts to improve its preparedness to deter and defend against a CBRN incident and to ensure that its forces are best equipped to fight and prevail in a CBRN threat environment, both today and in the future. Defence’s world leading CBRN science and technology capability will continue to play a vital part in maintaining our counter-CBRN operational advantage and in countering current and emerging CBRN threats.


-----

-----

##### Defence’s contribution to COVID-19

###### From the renowned success of building field hospitals around the country, such as the Nightingale hospitals, to delivering vital Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and supporting ambulance drivers, NHS hospital staff and care homes, Defence has been supporting on the front line and the complex planning effort behind it. We deployed military assessment teams to each of the NHS regions and to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland: assessing the situation on the ground and formulating and coordinating effective responses. This has included support with vaccine deployment, community testing, haulier testing in Kent, support to NHS and Ambulance Services, and airlifting patients from the Scottish Islands, on top of crisis planning support. Working in partnership with the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, we supported our overseas territories’s Covid-19 response, delivering support to Gibraltar, the Falklands, and the Caribbean, and supported the Department for Transport by testing hauliers crossing the English Channel. Defence’s Covid-19 response has demonstrated the ability of our armed forces to adapt to new crises, surging and tailoring contributions to best assist the national pandemic response. Answering nearly 400 requests for Military Aid to the Civil Authorities, supporting fourteen other government departments, Defence’s contribution to the Covid-19 response has been a truly whole of force and whole of the UK response.


-----

-----

#### Defence’s contribution to Global Britain

###### Chapter 5


**5.1.** Integration with allies will be

fundamental to retaining our global strategic
advantage. This chapter sets out our
commitments to NATO, the US and beyond to
tackle our shared security challenges. While
NATO and our relationship with the US remain
the bedrock of our security, we will look to other
alliances and partnerships – including in support
of the UK Government’s tilt to the Indo-Pacific to increase further our interoperability and
burden sharing across the world.

**5.2.** The ability and willingness to commit

hard capability to fighting wars is a fundamental
foundation of our influence and deterrence.
Combined with the strength of our alliances and
partnerships, it forms a vital part of the deterrent
effect that keeps our adversaries in check. The
flexibility of our armed forces and their ability to
deploy where they are most needed, is central to
our offer to allies and partners. Operating,
training and exercising together, as well as
developing doctrine and capabilities together, is
the foundation on which modern defence is built.

**5.3.** In an era of global competition and

security threats, we must be ready to bring
military support to our allies and partners
wherever that might be needed. Britain’s ability
to project power in this way remains a defining
feature of our defence policy. Demonstrating our
capability, and operating effectively alongside
partners, is the best way to ensure stability and
avoid conflict occurring.

**5.4.** NATO will remain the foundation of

collective security in our home region of the
Euro-Atlantic. It is the pre-eminent forum in
which Europe, the US and Canada shape their
strategy for responding to threats, and as such
must constantly adapt to a changing world.


NATO adapted to the threat of extremist
terrorists after 9/11, declaring Article V and
developing its expeditionary role, and since 2014
has successfully re-invigorated its defence and
deterrence in response to the threat posed by an
aggressive Russia.

**5.5.** NATO’s enduring strength remains its

ability to adapt. The Alliance must keep up with
technological change and apply the full range of
military and non-military capabilities against the
threats we face. We will continue to be the
leading European ally within NATO, as one of
only two Allies (with the US) that can bring to
bear nuclear, offensive cyber, precision strike
weapons and fifth-generation strike aircraft
across the NATO region. Our efforts to
modernise our own armed forces will ensure we
can play a leading role in NATO’s own
transformation in delivering its deterrence and
defence. From both a political and military
standpoint, NATO must respond to trends such
as:

- the importance of space and cyberspace as
operational and warfighting domains.

- the systemic challenge posed by China.

- the weakening of arms control architecture,
the global proliferation of advanced weaponry
and increased threat of nuclear coercion by
our adversaries, especially Russia.

- global health crises (including our response to
Covid-19) and the challenges posed by
climate change.

- the speed, scale and potential disruptive
impact of technological development.

**27**


-----

- the need to deter and constrain hybrid attacks
on the Alliance and its members, such as
cyber attacks, assassinations, disruption to
space based systems, disinformation and
attempts to erode our technological base
through espionage.

**5.6.** These challenges require NATO to

ensure that its command structure, force
structure, operational activity, doctrine and the
capabilities it asks allies to invest in, keep pace
with the scale and complexity of change. They
also require NATO to work in different ways,
including with Allies’s non-military agencies, as
well as with a range of partner countries who
share its values and interests. Improving our
collective ability to manage a wide range of
multi-domain crises will be key. On all these
issues the UK is committed to playing a leading
role, driving NATO’s conceptual development
and taking on our share of the burden across
cash, capabilities and contributing to every NATO
operation and mission. Our wider global role is
an asset to NATO, as the Alliance’s security is
inextricably bound up in global security.

**5.7.** Our own approach within NATO will be

driven by developing a truly joint, high readiness
force, integrating innovative technologies and
approaches, and operating in all five domains,
including cyberspace and space. We will remain
the leading European Defence spender in NATO,
delivering a unique set of capabilities and
activities, including:

- A campaigning approach to better
understand, manage and, where appropriate,
contest aggression below the threshold of
armed conflict in the Euro-Atlantic area.



- Further developing the JEF (with Denmark,
**Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, the**
**Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and from**
spring 2021, Iceland) so that it offers these
countries flexible options for managing subthreshold competition as well as responding
to crises, and improving its interoperability
with NATO.

- Forward presence to deter our adversaries,
including Enhanced Forward Presence, Air
Policing, regular naval patrolling, and
exercising with our allies.

- Persistent engagement activities in NATO’s
near and far geographic regions, delivering
upstream prevention of instability and terror
threats. We retain an enduring commitment
to KFOR, the NATO mission in Kosovo. And
we will remain committed to working with
partners to address the threats to NATO’s
southern and eastern flanks, including by
addressing them through upstream
interventions.

- High readiness forces, including our Carrier
Strike Group and Littoral Strike Forces, ready
to respond to threats within 30 days.

- a nuclear deterrent declared to the defence of
NATO Allies.

- Our offensive cyberspace capabilities
committed to the Alliance.

- A suite of high readiness warfighting
capabilities aligned with our commitments to
the NATO Readiness Initiative and NATO
Defence Planning Process.

**5.8.** The UK and the US are indispensable

allies and pre-eminent partners for security,
defence and foreign policy. UK-US defence cooperation is the broadest, deepest and most
advanced of any two countries in the world.

**28**


-----

Together, we help to share the burden of
international leadership, based upon our shared
values, our global reach and capabilities, and our
common interest in maintaining international
peace and security in this era of systemic
competition. The breadth of our relationship is
unparalleled, extending across the full spectrum
of Defence including intelligence (notably
through the Five Eyes relationships), nuclear
cooperation, scientific research and flagship
capability programmes. We will deepen our
unique partnership in areas such as cyberspace,
space, next generation capabilities and
deterrence, and work together to further
strengthen the NATO alliance.

**5.9.** The Five Eyes (Australia, Canada, New

**Zealand, the UK and the US) is fundamental to**
our approach. It is a group of like-minded allies
with a shared view of the threats, the challenges
and the opportunities. It is also the pre-eminent
global intelligence sharing arrangement. But it is
much more than that. For Defence it is the basis
for collaboration on strategic analysis, capability
development, interoperability, burden-sharing
and operational co-ordination. We will continue
to engage as a Five Eyes community at all levels,
from Defence Ministers down, to ensure we
deliver on all that the group has to offer. Our
partnerships with Canada, Australia and New
**Zealand will be at the heart of our tilt to the**
Indo-Pacific as we work to support them to
tackle the security challenges in the region. The
joint development with Australia and Canada of
our Anti-Submarine Warfare capability through
the Type 26 and Hunter class frigate
programmes, is just one example of the benefits
that deep collaboration can bring.

**5.10.** The UK remains committed to working

with European partners and allies, and will
remain deeply invested in European security and
prosperity. We will work together to build
influence and cooperation across Europe, to


counter malign influence, deter and defend
against threats, build resilience and look for
opportunities to enhance our shared prosperity
where our interests align. While NATO will
remain our main forum for engagement on
European security, we will re-energise bilateral
relationships in Europe, enhance our network of
Defence Attachés and Defence Staffs and deepen
our relationship with the Joint Expeditionary
Force. We will increase our commitment to the
Black Sea region, the High North, the Baltics and
the Western Balkans (where we will implement a
new regional training initiative), building and
working through multilateral groupings, such as
the Northern Group.

**5.11.** Allies for over a century, France and UK

are vital partners in the security of Europe and in
NATO. We operate alongside each other in
Estonia, West Africa and Iraq, and have a close
nuclear partnership. A decade after the Lancaster
House treaties we are closer and more
interoperable than ever, with our Combined Joint
Expeditionary Force (CJEF) reaching full operating
capability in 2020. This provides a unique
capability for expeditionary operations and a
framework to ensure co-operation and alignment
of national deployments, such as our respective
Carrier Strike Groups. We will continue to
collaborate on capability development, delivering
next generation missile technologies, including
cruise and anti-ship missiles, and a revolutionary
autonomous mine hunting system. The UK and
France are also natural partners when it comes to
leading thinking in Europe on new trends such as
adapting defence to climate change, evolutions
in space and cyberspace, arms control, and our
respective roles in the Indo-Pacific region.

**5.12.** **Germany is a crucial member of NATO**

with whom we share a wide range of defence
interests and which remains an important
location for the forward deployment of UK
forces.


-----

Our defence industrial partnership, forged over
40 years of co-operation on combat air, will
develop into new areas including land systems.
And we will be key partners on space, cyberspace
and the security of Europe. Together with Italy
and Spain, we will continue to develop the
Eurofighter system, Europe’s most widely used
fighter jet. We will look to partner more often
with Germany on operational deployments, such
as air policing and naval missions outside the
Euro-Atlantic area.

**5.13.** **Italy is becoming a more significant**

partner for the UK, with a shared commitment to
security in the Mediterranean, the Levant and
Afghanistan. We are partners on helicopters,
missiles and, together with Sweden, on future
combat air capability development. As well as
our JEF partners, Greece, Poland, Spain and
**Turkey have key roles to play in the defence of**
NATO’s flanks, face significant security threats
the UK can help to manage, and are defence
industrial partners for the UK. The Republic of
**Cyprus has a uniquely close link with the UK**
through the Sovereign Base Areas that are an
increasingly important asset for the defence of
Europe as a whole.

**5.14.** **Ukraine has suffered significant**

territorial loss as a result of Russian aggression.
Together with NATO Allies we will help to build
Ukraine’s resilience to the continued aggressive
tactics – conventional and sub-threshold – used
by its neighbour. Our capacity building mission,
which includes both land and maritime training,
will support the development of the Ukrainian
Armed Forces and their interoperability with
NATO. We will work with other partners in the
**Black Sea region, notably Bulgaria, Greece,**
**Romania and Turkey, to ensure freedom of**
navigation and security. As part of this we will
continue to exercise our freedom to operate in
the Black Sea, in strict accordance with the
Montreux Convention, both through NATO and


on stand-alone deployments.

**5.15.** **Turkey is a crucial NATO Ally with a role**

to play in many aspects of wider regional
security, including the fight against terrorism. It
is dealing directly with Russia’s military
interventions in the Mediterranean and Black Sea
regions. We will work to cement a long-term
relationship on operations (including NATO
reassurance measures), capabilities and industrial
co-operation.

**5.16.** The UK has longstanding relationships

with Saudi Arabia and all six countries of the
**Gulf Cooperation Council in support of shared**
security and prosperity objectives. With the
region home to maritime choke points that are
vital to global trade, these relationships will
remain important, as will our increased
commitments in Oman. We will work in
partnership with our allies to make the region
more secure and stable, including through our
military exercising, training and loan service
teams. We are also working to support the Saudi
Arabian MOD’s reform programme. In 2018 we
established an innovative Typhoon Joint
Squadron, which trains both UK and Qatari pilots
and provides Qatar with experience in
preparation for receiving in 2022 their first
Typhoon aircraft purchased from the UK.

**5.17.** In Iraq, the UK is a significant contributor

to the 82 Member Coalition to Defeat Daesh.
Following a concerted campaign, Daesh no
longer holds significant territory in Iraq and
**Syria. The UK has trained over 120,000 Iraqi and**
Iraqi Kurdish soldiers and during the decisive
multi-domain air campaign over Iraq and Syria,
we provided one third of all coalition intelligence,
surveillance, target acquisition and
reconnaissance, and released over 4,000
precision weapons. This commitment to allied
defence will endure into the future.

**30**


-----

The enhancement of NATO Mission Iraq, and
particularly professional military education and
ministerial advisory support, will contribute to
Iraq’s future as a functioning, stable and secure
state, able to provide for its own security needs.
The UK maintains our deep and historic ties
across the Levant and North Africa, with regular
joint training exercises and counter-terrorism
cooperation in, for example, Egypt and
**Morocco, along with persistent engagement in**
**Jordan, with its permanent UK Loan Service staff.**
**Israel remains a key strategic partner.**

**5.18.** We recognise the strategic importance of

**East Africa to UK interests, where Kenya will**
continue to be our strategic partner and at the
heart of our plans for the region. We will work
closely with them regionally and internationally
to ensure that we are able to tackle collective
threats such as violent extremism and terrorism,
promote regional stability and collaborate on
peace support operations. Our relationship will
evolve in all domains, developing plans for joint
training and readiness and collective institutional
development. Our forces can learn from each
other by training and learning together. We plan
to increase our military presence in Kenya,
bolstering our networks with a British Defence
Staff and regional hub.

**5.19.** We will actively contribute to action

against Al Shabab, the AQ-linked terrorist group
based in Somalia that poses a direct threat to UK
interests and regional stability. This will involve
Defence working across government and with
regional partners and key allies to weaken and
constrain the group. We will also take a role in
supporting the international community to help
Somalia develop ways to provide their own
security and preparing the ground for long-term
solutions. We will continue to support a stronger
and more stable Somalia; provide trainers and


advisers to the Somali National Army and liaison
officers to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the UN missions. In parallel, we
are providing capacity building for countries
including Kenya, Ethiopia and Uganda
contributing to support their AMISOM
operations – and making it increasingly difficult
for Al Shabab to operate.

**5.20.** In West Africa our support to UN peace

support operations now includes a substantial
contribution of 300 UK personnel to the UN
mission in Mali (MINUSMA) providing a longrange reconnaissance group. This supports our
goal to not only bolster the UN’s ability to
succeed in its most difficult missions, but also
contribute in the immediate term against
instability in the Sahel and support the efforts of
our European allies and regional partners
including the Economic Community of West
**African States (ECOWAS). We will also work**
with regional partners to support security efforts
in the wider Lake Chad Basin while developing
**Nigerian institutions consistent with our values.**
We are taking a more strategic approach to
addressing threats given the importance to the
UK of our seaborne trade through the Gulf of
**Guinea. We will develop maritime security**
partnerships with key coastal states like Ghana.
This will be supported by the visit of a UK
Offshore Patrol Vessel later in 2021, contributing
to maritime security, including tackling piracy.

**5.21.** Our contributions to UN Peacekeeping

across Africa demonstrate our commitment to
international peace and security. We will look to
help other countries develop their capacity as
Troop Contributors through training and
assistance missions, as well as deploy UK experts
to missions and UN headquarters.

**31**


-----

Indo-PacificIndo-Pacific

**5.22.** The Indo-Pacific region matters to the

UK: it is critical to our economy, our security and
our global ambition to support open societies. At
least 1.7 million British citizens live across the
region and our trading relationships continue to
grow. In the decades to come it will be the
crucible for many of the most pressing global
challenges – from climate and biodiversity to
maritime security and geopolitical competition
linked to rules and norms. The Integrated Review
highlights the growing importance of the IndoPacific for the UK’s security and prosperity and
sets a framework for increased UK engagement.
Defence is an essential part of the UK’s
integrated offer to the region and, as such, we
will be strengthening our regional defence
cooperation in the Indo-Pacific, in support of the
Government’s efforts to build wider security
partnerships. Our aim will be to mitigate growing
threats to our security, working with Indo-Pacific
partners to build resilience and capacity, tackle
shared security challenges and uphold freedom
of navigation and international law. We will
develop capability partnerships and support UK
prosperity by strengthening defence exports.
More specifically, we will:

- Increase our capacity building and training
across the Indo-Pacific, delivered through
longer and more consistent military
deployments and by better leveraging our
existing regional facilities.

- Maximise regional engagement as part of the
Carrier Strike Group deployment in 2021.

- Increase our maritime presence in the IndoPacific region through the deployment of
Offshore Patrol Vessels from 2021, Littoral
Response Group from 2023 and Type 31
frigates later in the decade, including to


uphold freedom of navigation.

- Make a bigger and more consistent
contribution to the Five Power Defence
**Arrangements (FPDA).**

- Pursue closer defence cooperation with the
**Association of Southeast Asian Nations**
**(ASEAN) member states.**

- Guarantee our regional access through
existing UK bases, including the British Indian
Ocean Territory, access to allied facilities, and
the development of an enhanced training
facility at Duqm, Oman.

- Deepen and expand defence industrial
relationships in the region, including with
Australia, Japan, Republic of Korea and India,
underpinned by co-operation on science and
technology. We will also enhance our
programmes of exercises, exchanges and
capability development with these key
partners.

- Expand our Defence Attaché and Advisor
network and build a new British Defence Staff
in Canberra to work alongside the existing
Defence Staff in Singapore and coordinate
Defence activity across the region.

**5.23.** Our partnership with India is a key pillar

of the UK’s tilt to the Indo-Pacific. We will
establish a maritime partnership with India in
support of mutual security objectives in the
Indian Ocean. We will enhance our industrial
cooperation, uplift our defence education,
training and reform relationship to enable us to
work together more effectively. We will carry out
integrated joint exercising, increase our
understanding of the maritime environment, and
sign key agreements to increase interoperability.

**32**


-----

All our activity will be underpinned by strategic
dialogues to promote high-level alignment and a
strong programme of military education and
exchanges.

**5.24.** Our Defence relationship with Japan has

deepened significantly in recent years with an
enhanced programme of exercises, training
exchanges, security arrangements and capability
development programmes that span all five
domains. The next decade will see further
development with our closest security partner in
Asia. We will deepen cooperation between the
Japanese Self Defence Forces and the British
armed forces towards a free and open IndoPacific.

**5.25.** The UK has a longstanding relationship

with Pakistan in support of shared regional
security and stability objectives. Its diaspora links
with the UK. Disputed borders and a complex
security environment mean that Pakistan’s
defence relationship with the UK will continue to
be important. Our cooperation encompasses
military exercising, professional military
education and exchanges, training and visits.

**5.26.** Our defence relationship with the

**Republic of Korea (ROK) is a highly significant**
area of focus for the UK, as it is a like-minded
democracy with similar views on regional security
priorities and the rules, norms and standards that
shape the international system overall. We will
build on the enduring strategic partnership


established during the Korean War by enhancing
opportunities for exchanges of personnel,
training, education and information sharing. We
will seek to improve our interoperability through
integrated joint exercises and further strengthen
our common commitment to work in third
countries on global peacekeeping initiatives. The
ROK has a modern, well-funded military force
with aspirations to further contribute to global
security. Their defence budget is projected to
soon exceed our own, and the UK will support
mutual prosperity through closer industrial
cooperation underpinned by military expertise,
particularly through their indigenous Light
Aircraft Carrier programme.

**5.27.** In Afghanistan, the UK is a key

contributor to NATO’s Resolute Support Mission,
to train, advise and assist the Afghan security
forces. The UK Government is committed to the
operation and to supporting the Afghan peace
process. A lasting political settlement is the only
means of ensuring security from terrorism for the
people of Afghanistan, the United Kingdom and
its Allies. The UK is committed to financial
sustainment of the Afghan security forces
through to 2024. Self-sufficient security forces,
alongside progress towards a political
settlement, offer the best prospects to achieve
the UK’s security objectives not to allow
Afghanistan to become a terrorist safe haven
once again.


-----

-----

#### Our workforce: our finest asset

###### Chapter 6


**6.1.** Our focus on exploiting technology at

pace must be matched with a more modern
approach to our finest asset – our people. This
Chapter sets out how we will attract and retain a
diverse, inclusive, motivated and professional
workforce, drawn from across the Union and the
Commonwealth, equipped with the specialist
skills required for contemporary conflict and
competition. And it sets out how we will
organise, support and reward our people,
through new career structures and a renewed
offer that better reflects the way they want to live
and work in the 21st century.


Modern and relevant skills Modern and relevant skills


**6.2.** As we respond to rapidly evolving

threats to our values and way of life, our people –
military and civilian – will remain fundamental to
delivering our competitive advantage, our links
to society, and our global standing. But that
competitive advantage no longer stems from
mass alone. Rather, it flows from the talents our
people possess, individually and collectively, and
how we harness them.

**6.3.** We want to attract the most talented

individuals to Defence. As the world changes
around us, we will invest in our people and equip
them with the specialist skills required to win in
the era of global systemic competition. This starts
from the moment they join. We will continue to
offer apprenticeships to over 80% of armed
forces recruits, with a third of those in science
and technology fields. Our National Cyber Force
and Space Command will be pathfinders and
experts in their field. Our scientists will lead our
innovation and experimentation. And we will
professionalise defence diplomacy, as we expand
our global network.


**6.4.** Members of the armed forces are

recruited from civilian life and will return to it at
the end of their service. To ensure that they can
make effective use of the skills and qualifications
they acquire in the military, we will undertake a
review within the next 12 months into the
professional accreditation of career courses.

**6.5.** Reflecting the increasingly specialised

nature of many of our roles, we will place skills at
the heart of how we organise and reward our
workforce. This means transforming career
structures, introducing new ways of recruiting
talent, and breaking down barriers to movement
between the military, the civil service and
industry. Within the next two years, we will
undertake a comprehensive review of how we
pay and reward our military personnel. This costneutral review, led by an expert with a proven
track record of managing global talent, will guide
our efforts to develop a modern, holistic,
through-life approach to the military offer. This
will be tailored more closely to the changing
needs of the individual at different stages of their
career and will better reflect the skills that they
bring to Defence. We are determined that a
career in the armed forces remains at the
vanguard of career choices on offer to the UK’s
most talented people.


**6.6.** The challenges of the next decade will

require us to maximise the outputs, talents and
synergies of the whole force. Our reserve forces
will be given new, more clearly defined roles.
They will provide capacity, alongside their regular
and civilian colleagues, and an alternative source
of diverse talent to conduct operations at home
and abroad.

**35**


###### Modernising the Whole ForceModernising the Whole Force


-----

We will create an efficient and fluid spectrum of
military service, providing our people with a
range of commitment options at different stages
of their lives. We will improve the way we recruit
and employ reserves, enabling us to bring
expertise from across society, government,
industry and academia to bear on some of the
greatest challenges we face, and consider any
recommendations from the Reserves Forces 30
review in due course.

**6.7.** As we modernise, we will seize

opportunities to automate tasks, driving greater
efficiency and effectiveness. By harnessing
technology, exploiting data and analytics, and
comprehensively transforming our corporate
services, we will develop a leaner but more highly
skilled and capable workforce.

**6.8.** If we are to attract and retain the UK’s

most talented people, how we manage and
empower that cohort must keep pace with our
competitors. We will produce a Digital People
Strategy, which will focus on putting career
management in the palm of our people’s hands
through digital applications in a unified approach
across Defence.


**6.10.** Service families are at the very heart of

the armed forces community and it is vital that
we provide our people with the appropriate
flexibility and support to bring up their children
while they serve. As part of a revised Families
Strategy, we will introduce measures to ease the
burden for parents who might be deployed at
short notice, including investing £1.4bn over the
next decade to provide wraparound childcare.
Through spousal employment initiatives,
increasing opportunities for flexible service and a
modern approach to societal relationships, we
are determined to make the armed forces a more
family friendly employer, encouraging our people
to pursue long and fulfilling careers in uniform.

**6.11.** We are clear that whilst attracting the

UK’s leading talents, we must foster an
environment that genuinely empowers them to
be the best version of themselves. We will further
invest in our people’s health, wellbeing and
welfare. And we will harness the lessons from
elite sport and performance coaching to ensure
that our finest asset – our people – are nurtured,
trained and looked after in the way that they
deserve.


Support to our PeopleSupport to our people


###### Diversity and InclusionDiversity and Inclusion


**6.9.** We recognise that the demands of

military life are unique, and we will continue to
support our armed forces personnel and their
families accordingly. We will go further over the
next decade, by investing around £1.5bn in
improving Single Living Accommodation. We will
also provide greater choice over where, how, and
with whom our people live, through the future
accommodation model. We will set this out in a
Defence Accommodation Strategy in 2021.


**6.12.** We are proud of the opportunities that a

career in Defence offers people from all walks of
life, regardless of their race, gender, sexual
orientation, disability, age or faith. But if we are
to maximise the talents of all our people, we
must go further in our efforts to become a more
diverse and inclusive organisation, which better
represents the society we serve. We recognise
that diversity and inclusion is essential to our
operational effectiveness and it ensures we can
safeguard the security, stability and prosperity of
our nation.

**36**


-----

**6.13.** We will deliver our Diversity and

Inclusion Strategy and implement the
recommendations of the Wigston and Gray
reviews into unacceptable behaviours. And we
will improve the way we reach out to the
community, forging strong links to all parts of
the society. We have established a new Diversity
and Inclusion Directorate to drive forward
change, as a clear and public statement of our
intent to tangibly, rapidly and significantly
improve the lived experience of all those working
in Defence. Progress will be reported quarterly to
Ministers. We will continue to comply with the
Public Sector Equality Duty. Defence has policy,
guidance and tools to support compliance, help
improve inclusion and encourage good equality
thinking.

**6.14.** The armed forces represent a key

element of our national identity. We recruit
nationally and base ourselves across all parts of
the UK, we provide unparalleled opportunities for
social mobility and personal development, and
we represent the UK's interests overseas as a
unified entity. The complementary efforts across
the UK to support our personnel, their families
and veterans provide positive examples of how,
under devolved arrangements, governments and
stakeholders can work together to achieve
common interests. We will go further by
enshrining the Armed Forces Covenant in law, to
ensure that serving and former service personnel
and their families are not disadvantaged by their
service.

CadetsCadets


later this year which examines how cadets benefit
from their experience and the contribution they
make to wider society.

Veterans

###### Veterans


**6.16.** The UK Government has committed to

making the UK the best country in the world to
be an Armed Forces Veteran. We have clear
responsibilities in ensuring our people transition
to civilian life greatly enhanced by their Service
through a seamless transition. The new Defence
Transition Service underlines this commitment,
with specialist tailored support to those finding
transition particularly difficult.

**6.17.** The Armed Forces Covenant is a

recognition between the nation and those who
serve, of the unique sacrifices, way of life, and
demands of military service. It is underpinned by
two key principles, that of seeking to remove
disadvantage because of military service, and
that special consideration may be justified,
including for the seriously injured and bereaved.
This commitment will be enshrined in law in the
Armed Forces Act of 2021 in the contexts of
housing, education and healthcare, taking it from
a voluntary code in those contexts to something
that is enforceable on behalf of Service
Personnel, Veterans and their families.

**6.18.** The UK’s first Office for Veterans Affairs

was established by the Prime Minster in July
2019. It seeks to pull together all functions of
government, harnessing existing and new
programmes across the third sector and state
provision, to ensure this nation’s duty to her
Veterans by delivering the UK’s first ‘Strategy for
our Veterans’ which was published in December
2019. The Armed Forces Covenant annual report
requirements will be amended to include delivery
for our Veterans against this strategy.

**6.19.** Veterans UK, the Government’s delivery

arm to support veterans and their families, the
Veterans Welfare Service and injury/bereavement
compensation scheme payments, will undergo a
£25m digital transformation programme from
current paper-based records by 2023.

**37**


**6.15.** The cadets are a key part of our youth

agenda and help young people from across the
UK to broaden their horizons and unlock their
potential. We will sustain the five MODsponsored cadet forces across the UK that
currently provide opportunities for 130,000
cadets. Having exceeded our previous target to
increase the number of cadet units in state
secondary schools, we will go further, with the
Department for Education, by investing in the
Cadet Expansion Programme to bring this
fantastic opportunity to more young people. We
will publish an independent peer-reviewed study


-----

-----

#### Modernised forces for a competitive age

###### Chapter 7


**7.1.** This Chapter will set out how we will

transform our armed forces to adapt to our new
tasks and approach. As set out in Chapter 3, our
Integrating Operating Concept requires our
forces to be credible and capable to deter, and if
necessary, defeat our adversaries in conflict as
well as to allow us to compete below the
threshold of armed conflict. It also requires our
armed forces to be integrated across domains
and across government, and to deliver a more
dynamic posture through persistent
engagement.

**7.2.** These requirements have driven our

future capability plans. We will invest more in
our armed force’s capability to ensure they can
deal with the threats we face now and in the
future. We have taken a hard-headed and
unsentimental view of those capabilities that will
be less relevant to the changing threat. The
changes we make will ensure our armed forces
are more agile, more lethal and more integrated.
We will maintain our operational advantage by
increasing the pace at which we adapt our
capabilities and by exploiting new and emerging
technology. We will deliver this through
increased R&D spending, increased focus on
experimentation and by speeding up our
acquisition processes.

**7.3.** We must both mobilise our existing force

to meet the challenges of today and modernise


for the threats of tomorrow. We have already
begun this journey of modernisation; capabilities
we invested in a decade ago are coming into
service now and will be vital to our success in the
coming years. Our Carrier Strike Group is perhaps
the most powerful example of this. Our new
posture will demand more availability from our
current and future force, so we will invest to
improve readiness, resilience and sustainability of
our armed forces.

**7.4.** We will also invest in transformative and

digital capabilities that will enable multi-domain
integration and ensure that we are able to
compete more effectively in space and
cyberspace. Capability in the future will be less
defined by numbers of people and platforms
than by information-centric technologies,
automation and a culture of innovation and
experimentation.

**7.5.** We will be one of the most integrated,

digital, and agile forces in the world, projecting
our influence and promoting our capabilities on
the world stage across land, air, maritime,
cyberspace and space. Multi-domain integration
will underpin how we operate and fight. It will
drive force experimentation, development and
capability prioritisation. This will ensure the UK's
armed forces remain interoperable with our most
capable allies and keep ahead of adversaries.

**39**


-----

###### Persistent

 Engagement

**Red** **Ice Patrol**

**Arrows** **Ship**

**Rivet Joint**

**E-7A**

**Shadow**


**STA Regt**

**Boxer Bn**

**Field Hospital**

**Operational**

**Sustainment**

**CEMA Regt**

**CBRN Regt**

**Land EWSI**

###### Crisis Response

 & Warfighting

**Div HQ** **UAS Regt**

**Theatre Sustainment**

**(TLR, FLR, P&M, PC/MC)**


###### Homeland

**EOD Regt** **E-7A** **Voyager** **P-8A** **Chinook** **Wildcat**

**Mine Counter**

**Frigate**

**(T23/T26/T31)** **Measure System** **CEMA Regt** **Typhoon** **A400M** **Rivet Joint**

**Medium Lift**

**Survey Vessel** **Tanker** **Light Infantry** **Merlin** **Helicopter**

**Red**

**Offshore Patrol** **Arrows**

**MROSS** **Vessel** **Air Defence Regt** **CBRN Regt**

**P-8A**

**SSN** **SSBN**

**SF** **Voyager**

**Global**

**Defence** **Strategic** **Protector** **A400M**

**Science** **Network** **Base** **Combat Air**

**& Tech** **Outload** **(F35B, Typhoon)**

**Defence**

**Intelligence** **Light Cavalry**

**C-17** **Regt**

**Air**

**Manoeuvre**

**Space** **NCF** **BCT**

**Armoured**

###### INTEGRATED Regt Ajax Regt

**Digital Backbone**

###### FORCE Ranger Bn

**Deep Fires Regt** **Boxer Bn**

###### 2030 Defence Medical

**Cyprus** **Ascension** **Light**

**Operational**

**Mechanised Bn** **Light**

**Sustainment**

**Gibraltar** **Kenya** **Infantry Bn**

**Germany** **Brunei**

###### Global BIOT

**Oman** **Air Defence Regt** **Chinook**

**SFA Bn**

###### Foundation Falklands

**Medium Lift**
**Merlin** **Wildcat** **Apache**

**Helicopter**

**LSD(A)** **LPD** **Destroyer** **Aircraft** **Frigate**

**Amphibious Shipping** **(T45)** **Carrier** **(T23/T26/T31)**

**SSN** **Survey Vessel**

**Future** **Offshore Patrol** **Fleet Solid**

**Commando** **Vessel** **Support Ship**

###### Persistent Force

 Engagement RAF FP Wing Div HQ

**Tanker** **RoRo** **SF**

###### Crisis Response

**ARRC HQ** **Theatre Sustainment**

###### & Warfighting Measure SystemMine Counter Warfighting (TLR, FLR, P&M, PC/MC)


-----

Research and DevelopmentResearch and Development

**7.6.** The Integrated Review sets out the

importance of building a durable competitive
edge in science and technology, ensuring our
research base translates into the design and use
of critical and emerging technologies. As part of
the Government’s commitment to spend at least
2.4% of GDP on R&D by 2027, we are renewing
our focus on R&D to make generational leaps in
our future capability. We have committed to
spending at least £6.6bn on R&D over the next
four years. We will invest in next generation
capabilities (including directed energy weapons
and swarming drones), in the newer domains of
space and cyberspace, and in the modern
platforms and weapons systems that will enable
us to extend our technological advantage over
our competitors. Greater investment in R&D will
underpin the modernisation of our armed forces
and ensure long-term strategic advantage. A
network of Defence innovation hubs working
alongside UK technology clusters and investment
in Defence and Security Accelerator challenges
will maximise the 'pull through' of this R&D
investment into cutting-edge equipment. As part
of our longer-term strategy, we also intend to
develop future Test and Evaluate (T&E) capability
for Novel Weapons, Artificial Intelligence,
synthetic/digital systems and space-based


systems. These are areas we are starting to
consider under the T&E Futures programme, in
which we intend to invest over £60m over the
next four years. Overall, our investment will
accelerate these next generation technologies
into the hands of our personnel and develop a
pipeline of future capabilities for the armed
forces of tomorrow.

**7.7.** We will prioritise our R&D pipeline based

on the capability challenges we need to address
in this new operating environment. Our Science
and Technology 2020 Strategy sets out the five
most pressing areas where capability
development can deliver a decisive edge to the
UK in the future:

- Pervasive, full spectrum, Intelligence,
Surveillance and Reconnaissance.

- Multi-domain Command and Control,
Communications and Computers.

- Securing and sustaining advantage in the subthreshold.

- Asymmetric hard power.

- Freedom of access and manoeuvre.


-----

##### Artificial Intelligence

###### Artificial Intelligence (AI) and AI-enabled autonomous capabilities will be essential to Defence modernisation: accelerating decision-making and operational tempo; extending the range, persistence and mass of our capabilities; removing personnel from harm’s way by undertaking ‘dull, dirty and dangerous’ tasks; and delivering significant efficiency and affordability gains. Future conflicts may be won or lost on the speed and efficacy of the AI solutions employed. It is imperative that we move quickly to secure the benefits of these transformative technologies, and we will publish an ambitious AI Strategy to drive and cohere efforts across Defence at pace.

 We are making significant investments in AI across Defence. The creation of a new Defence Centre for Artificial Intelligence will be at the core of these developments, serving as the nucleus to accelerate the development and exploitation of these critical technologies from the battlespace to the back office. Activities will range from implementing data management techniques, developing common AI platforms, toolkits and best practices, testing and validating novel capabilities, and ultimately delivering scalable solutions to meet the challenges and threats facing the nation.

 Some of those threats will come from the unscrupulous and unprincipled use of AI by others. It is therefore critical that the UK remains at the forefront of the rapidly-evolving debate on responsible development and use of AI and Autonomy in Defence, working with liberal- democratic partners to shape international legal, ethical and regulatory norms and standards. We are developing a framework for our own ethical development and use of AI in partnership with experts in industry and academia, and closely aligning with wider government frameworks.


-----

###### Integrated Force 2030 Icons not to scale

##### Strategic Command

###### Defensive Cyber National Cyber Force

 Digital Backbone Operational HQs

 Defence Support Defence Medical

 Defence Attaché Network Defence Intelligence

 Skynet 6 Space ISR

 Synthetics Defence Academy & DCDC

 Special Air Service Special Boat Service


-----

**7.8.** Strategic Command is at the heart of

confronting the myriad threats we now face.
Driving integration across all domains. Strategic
Command will ensure we join up the people, the
equipment and the information, and deliver our
outputs in a more sophisticated way – from
space, in the skies, on land, at sea, or in
cyberspace – making the whole force more than
the sum of its parts.

**7.9.** Our ability to share and exploit data will

be fundamental to delivering multi-domain
integration and information advantage. Strategic
Command will lead a digital transformation
programme so we can better share and exploit
data. The creation of a Digital Backbone (digital
infrastructure optimised for information
exploitation and enabling multi-domain
integration) will underpin the modernisation of
our armed forces as well as supporting the
broader transformation of Defence capability.
This singular, modern and secure Digital
Backbone will drive significant savings by
replacing ageing and unreliable digital
infrastructure. It will ensure we exploit all data
through the cloud, and across secure networks,
to enable faster, better decisions between
decision-makers and with NATO and key allies. It
will also ensure our digital networks are
integrated across government.

**7.10.** Strategic Command will provide the

platform for our armed forces to shift to a more
dynamic and competitive posture. Exploitation


and enhancement of our existing operating
bases across the globe will ensure greater
presence. Investment in modernising and
transforming engineering and logistical support
systems will improve the availability and
sustainment of capabilities, equipment and
people. Strategic Command will continuously
experiment and innovate with technology to
ensure we maintain operational advantage.


**7.11.** We will significantly increase investment

to build on and maintain the UK’s status as a
leading, responsible, democratic cyber power.
The National Cyber Force (NCF) is transforming
our ability to contest adversaries as an integrated
component of our military capability. This is a
national endeavour for which the MOD
contributes the majority of the funding. It is a
joint MOD, Government Communications
Headquarters (GCHQ) and Secret Intelligence
Service (SIS) mission, working in close
partnership with law enforcement and
international partners. The NCF provides
capabilities that will be used to deceive, degrade,
deny, disrupt, or destroy targets in and through
cyberspace in pursuit of our national security
objectives. The MOD’s operational expertise and
scientific and technical capabilities, GCHQ’s
global intelligence and SIS’s expertise in
recruiting and running agents makes the NCF a
powerful, integrated force.

**44**


###### CyberspaceCyberspace


-----

At the same time, we will uphold our values and
are committed to using our cyber capabilities in a
responsible way and in line with UK and
international law.

**7.12.** As part of wider cross-government

efforts to improve the UK's cyber security, we will
harden our own resilience to a cyber attack by
protecting our systems and networks to ensure
they are defended against current and future
threats.

**7.13.** We are investing in a new dedicated

career pathway for Defence cyberspace
specialists. This will include a new employment
model to manage, develop and reward our
cyberspace talent and expansion of our Defence
Cyber School so we have the right skills in the
right teams at the right time. We will enhance
our understanding of the domain, through
experimentation, education, collective training
and by drawing on expertise from our allies,
industry and academia.

**7.14.** The electromagnetic environment, of

which cyber is a part, is a fundamental aspect of
the modern battlespace. Our adversaries are
increasingly active across it and rely on it. We
must be able to understand, exploit and secure
advantage in this environment. We are therefore
investing over £500m in capabilities that will
enable us to respond in the electromagnetic
environment. Integration across its continuum
will be central to our approach.


SpaceSpace


**7.15.** Space, and our assured access to it, is

fundamental to military operations. Loss of, or
disruption to, the space domain could severely
impact our ability to undertake most Defence
tasks, and have a catastrophic effect on civilian,
commercial and economic activity. As our
reliance on space has grown, so has our
vulnerability. Our adversaries now seek to
undermine our capability in all domains and
diminish our operational advantage. We must
develop military, civilian and commercial
capabilities that are resilient to and protected
from space threats. We must also help shape an
international environment of behaviours and
operating norms that deters adversaries and
lessens their appetite for engaging in deliberate
disruption or denial of essential space services.
By 2030, the Government’s ambition is for the UK
to have the ability to monitor, protect and
defend our interests in and through space, using
a mixture of national capabilities and burdensharing partnerships with our allies.

**7.16.** In support of this we will deliver the

Skynet 6 programme, investing around £5bn
over the next 10 years to recapitalise and
enhance our satellite communication capabilities,
and spend an additional £1.4bn on space over
the next decade to:

- Establish a new Space command to enhance
the UK’s military command and control of the
space domain, assist in coordination of
commercial space operation and lead the
development of new space-based capability.

**45**


-----

- Enhance our space domain awareness,
including the establishment of a National
Space Operations Centre, so that we can
track, attribute and take action against
nefarious activity.

- Develop a UK-built Intelligence, Surveillance
and Reconnaissance satellite constellation and
a supporting digital backbone in space.

- Create a Space Academy to develop the skills
and training of our Defence space specialists.

**7.17.** Research and Development in space will

accelerate development and adoption of new
technologies. These investments will
demonstrate our ability to operate in an
increasingly congested and contested
environment and signpost a credible path to
meet the Government’s ambition to be a
meaningful player in space by 2030. Our
ambition in space will underpin a vibrant UK
space commercial sector, harnessing niche UK
expertise to place capability into the hands of the
user and strengthening our credibility as a
meaningful international partner. This ambition
includes the ability to launch British satellites
from the UK by 2022. The UK space sector
currently contains an exceptionally skilled
workforce totalling more than 41,900 jobs, from
Cornwall to the Scottish Highlands and Islands.
The global space sector is growing and is
expected to double by 2040. It is expected to
create well over 10,000 additional Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM) jobs in the UK.


###### Special ForcesSpecial Forces


**7.18.** Our Tier 1 Special Forces will continue to

be second to none - respected by our friends
and feared by our adversaries. We will ensure
they continue to be equipped to undertake rapid,
precision strike operations when UK interests are
threatened. They will provide a high-end CT force
to support the police in the UK, and a highreadiness intervention force with global reach.
But we will also develop their role and capability
to meet the changing threat. We will increase
their capacity and improve their ability to operate
covertly in the harshest environments worldwide,
equipping them with integrated multi-domain
capability. Special Forces are at the heart of our
approach to modernisation. They embody the
culture of innovation, experimentation and pull
through of technology that delivers a cuttingedge.

**7.19.** We will also draw on special operations

capable forces from an Army Special Operations
Brigade, the Future Commando Force and
elsewhere in Defence to conduct special
operations to train, advise and accompany
partners in high threat environments. Special
operations will integrate capability across all five
operational domains. They will improve our
interoperability with international partners like
NATO, gain access to the most innovative
equipment and intelligence capabilities and
adopt a more assertive posture. They will project
UK global influence and pre-empt and deter
threats below the threshold of war as well as
state aggression.


-----

###### Integrated Force 2030 Icons not to scale

##### Royal Navy

###### Attack Submarine (Astute Class) Ballistic Missile Submarine

 Aircraft Carrier with F35B Landing Platform Dock

 Destroyer (Type 45) Landing Ship Dock (Auxiliary)

 Frigates (Type 23/26 Towed Array) Frigate (Type 31)

 Mine Counter Measures Systems Survey Vessels

 Batch 2 Offshore Patrol Vessel Multi Role Ocean Surveillance Ship

 Tankers (Tide/Wave Class) Fleet Solid Support Ship

 Strategic RoRo Ice Patrol Ship


-----

**7.20.** The Royal Navy is transforming at pace,

becoming more threat focussed and more lethal.
Optimised to fight alongside our allies, the Royal
Navy will contribute to UK interests: safeguarding
our homeland, Overseas Territories and Crown
Dependencies, protecting the maritime
environment, including our fisheries, projecting
global influence, boosting UK trade and
prosperity, and upholding our values and
International law.

**7.21.** As the foremost Navy in Europe - one of

only three navies in the world to be able to
operate two 5th generation carriers and F-35B
jets - the Royal Navy provides a critical
contribution to NATO’s Defence and Deterrence
of the Euro-Atlantic area through its highly
capable, high readiness forces. By permanently
attributing the nuclear deterrent, a Carrier Strike
Group and Littoral Strike forces, we will cement
our enduring commitment to NATO security
objectives.

**7.22.** The Royal Navy will be a constant global

presence, with more ships, submarines, sailors
and marines deployed on an enduring basis,
including to protect shipping lanes and uphold
freedom of navigation. With support from
partners in the Indo-Pacific, Offshore Patrol
Vessels will be persistently deployed and a
Littoral Response Group (LRG) in 2023 will
complement the episodic deployment of our
Carrier Strike Group; contributing to regional
security and assurance.


**7.23.** The Royal Navy will invest £40m more

over the next four years to develop our Future
Commando Force as part of the transformation
of our amphibious forces, as well as more than
£50m in converting a Bay class support ship to
deliver a more agile and lethal littoral strike
capability. Forward deployed to respond rapidly
to crises, this special operations-capable force
will operate alongside our allies and partners in
areas of UK interest, ready to strike from the sea,
pre-empt and deter sub-threshold activity, and
counter state threats. This will be enabled by the
deployment of two Littoral Response Groups; the
first in 2021 will be deployed to the Euro-Atlantic
under a NATO and JEF construct, while a second
will be deployed to the Indo-Pacific region in
2023. They will also be able to deliver training to
our partners in regions of the world where
maritime security is most challenging.

**7.24.** In conjunction with the US, and other

NATO Allies, the Royal Navy will continue to
invest in underwater capabilities as this remains
pivotal to protect our critical national
infrastructure, safeguard maritime trade and
maintain our underwater advantage. This will
include delivering a safer, faster and automated
Mine Hunting Capability (MHC) in partnership
with France. The Royal Navy will retire Mine
Counter Measures Vessels as these new
capabilities come into service.

**48**


-----

We will also develop a new Multi-Role Ocean
Surveillance capability to safeguard the critical
undersea national infrastructure on which our
prosperity depends. We remain committed to
building seven Astute class submarines, four of
which have already been delivered into service.
The Trafalgar class has been extended to ensure
a seamless transition to the Astute class. We
commit to funding for the next generation of
nuclear submarines (SSNs) to guarantee our
security well into the second half of the century.

**7.25.** Our Offshore Patrol Vessels will be

permanently stationed in the Falklands,
Caribbean, Gibraltar (to service both the
Mediterranean and Gulf of Guinea), and East of
Suez in the Indo-Pacific region. Providing a
platform for persistent engagement and
protecting UK’s interests, this will free frigates
and destroyers from less-demanding tasks. OPVs
have successfully been operating in these roles in
the South Atlantic for over 20 years and more
recently in the Caribbean, capable of contributing
to counter-narcotic, counter-piracy, counterillegal fishing and humanitarian operations
alongside our partners in these regions.


**7.26.** The Royal Navy will focus investment on

improving the sustainability, lethality and
availability of the fleet and delivering a more
modern, high-tech and automated Navy. To
enable this, the Royal Navy will retire legacy
capabilities including two of our oldest T23
frigates. We will bring Type 31 and Type 32
frigates into service, these new vessels are not
just replacements for existing platforms, they will
be more flexible than their predecessors.
Equipped with advanced sensors and weapons,
they will embrace modularisation to allow them
to quickly adopt emerging technology
throughout their life and to switch role
depending on the nature of the threat. The
lethality of the surface fleet will be increased by
upgrading the air defence capability in our Type
45 destroyers, replacing our Harpoon ship-toship missiles, and launching the UK-design
cutting-edge Type 26 Anti-Submarine Warfare
frigates alongside Canada and Australia.


-----

##### Shipbuilding

###### The Government’s vision for 2030 is to have a shipbuilding enterprise that is at the forefront of technological and environmental innovations, driving the sector to be globally competitive in key market segments, including the design, build, integration, test and evaluation and repair of naval vessels. As one of the major customers of the UK shipbuilding enterprise, Defence is committed to playing a leading role across government in support of the Defence Secretary in his role as Shipbuilding Tsar.  

 We will be investing in a renaissance in British shipbuilding through a shipbuilding pipeline. This will reinforce current spending in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland and provide opportunities across the Union.

 Strategic and long-term investment will increase the capability of the Royal Navy’s surface fleet and allow the development of:

 • A fleet of 3 Fleet Solid Support ships so the Carrier Strike Group can operate globally.

 • A Multi-Role Ocean Surveillance capability, improving our ability to protect our underwater critical national infrastructure and improving our ability to detect threats in the North Atlantic. 

 • Type 32 frigates, designed to protect territorial waters, provide persistent presence overseas and support our Littoral Response Groups.

 • Multi-Role Support Ships (MRSS), to provide the platforms to deliver Littoral Strike, including Maritime Special Operations, in the early 2030s.

 • The concept and assessment phase for our new Type 83 destroyer which will begin to replace our Type 45 destroyers in the late 2030s.

 This is on top of our existing commitments to build eight Type 26 Anti-Submarine Warfare frigates on the Clyde and five Type 31 general purpose frigates in Rosyth. These investments will help ensure the competitiveness of British shipbuilding and provide the modern vessels required by the Royal Navy to protect our territorial waters and the global shipping routes on which our economy relies.

 Overall shipbuilding investment will double over the life of this Parliament rising to over


-----

###### Integrated Force 2030 Icons not to scale

##### Army

###### ARRC HQ & Divisional HQs Heavy Brigade Combat Teams

 Deep Recce Strike Brigade Combat Team Light Brigade Combat Teams

 Air Manoeuvre Brigade Combat Team Combat Aviation Brigade Combat Team

 Army Special Operations Brigade Security Force Assistance Brigade

 77 Brigade Information Manoeuvre Groups


-----

**7.27.** The Army will receive significant

investment in order to become more agile,
integrated, lethal and expeditionary. We will
invest an additional £3bn in new Army
equipment on top of the more than £20bn
planned. Investment in new vehicles (including
Ajax, Boxer and, Challenger III); modernised longrange precision fires (including multiple launched
rocket systems and Apache); new air defences;
tactical surveillance drones; and new electronic
warfare and cyberspace capabilities, will
transform the Army’s equipment over the next
decade.

**7.28.** The Army will be designed to operate

globally on a persistent basis. A new Ranger
Regiment will be the vanguard of this
expeditionary posture as part of an Army Special
Operations Brigade. This Regiment’s four all-arms
units will be aligned with the new Divisions of
Infantry and initially seeded from the current
Specialised Infantry Battalions: 1 SCOTS, 2 PWRR,
2 LANCS and 4 RIFLES. They will be able to
operate in complex, high-threat environments,
taking on some tasks traditionally done by
Special Forces. This work will involve deterring
adversaries and contributing to collective
deterrence by training, advising and, if necessary,
accompanying partners. The Army will establish
this Regiment in August and invest over £120m
over the next four years in equipping it.

**7.29.** In addition, a new Security Force

Assistance Brigade will be established. They will
draw on personnel and expertise from across the


Army. These units will be expert in building the
capacity of allied and partner nations. Routinely
deployed around the world these Security Force
Assistance units will contribute to conflict
prevention and resilience at an early stage.
Defence's global foundation will underpin this.

**7.30.** The Army’s increased forward presence

will be supported by a very high readiness Global
Response Force, consisting of 16 Air Assault
Brigade and the newly formed 1st Combat
Aviation Brigade, which will be ready to respond
to emerging crises from humanitarian relief
through to crisis response and warfighting. The
newly formed Land Operations Command will
coordinate the Army’s global engagement daily.

**7.31.** While this renewed structured is

optimised to operate, warfighting capability
remains the cornerstone of deterrence and the
bedrock of a world-class British Army. The 3rd
(UK) Division will remain at the heart of this, able
to manage a multi-domain battle in ever greater
depth; designed to act with NATO and capable of
providing a framework for Allies. The 1st (UK)
Division will be capable of operating
independently or as part of multilateral
deployments. It will provide theatre enablement
and offers NATO the agility to command
operations on its flanks.

**52**


-----

The 6th (UK) Division will deliver cyber, electronic
warfare, information operations and
unconventional capabilities designed for
warfighting and for operations conducted below
the threshold of war. We will also continue to
lead the Allied Rapid Reaction Corps (ARRC)
headquarters, which stands at high readiness to
deploy and lead NATO’s Response Force. The
Reserve component is intrinsically important to
the generation of warfighting mass.

**7.32.** The Army of the future will be leaner,

more lethal, nimbler, and more effectively
matched to current and future threats. The new
structure will reorganise the Army into more selfsufficient Brigade Combat Teams (BCT) able to
meet demand by drawing on their own
dedicated logistics and combat support units. A
new Deep Recce Strike BCT will combine the
Ajax’s formidable sensors with enhanced fires
systems to provide long-range persistent
surveillance for the coordination of deep fires.
Overall, this restructuring will see a reduction
from the current Full Time Trade Trained strength
of 76,000 to 72,500 by 2025.

**7.33.** The restructuring of the Army means

fewer units are required. The creation of Combat
Service Support Battalions will require fewer
separate units of logisticians, electrical and
mechanical engineers, and medics. The Infantry
will be restructured into four divisions. These
divisions will comprise a balanced number of
battalions offering the full range of infantry roles.
No cap badges will be deleted nor any
redundancies required. It will ensure all infantry


soldiers can access the full range of operational
opportunities. Across all parts of the Army, these
new structures provide more operational
resilience, integration, deployability and greater
opportunity for our people. The introduction of
‘Intelligent Recruiting’ will ensure that personnel
are also better allocated across the Infantry. This
new structure will require the deletion of a single
infantry battalion and a further four battalions
will provide the foundational units of the Ranger
Regiment.

**7.34.** Through a more productive integration

of the Reserves, increased lethality of weapon
systems and survivability of platforms, and a
specialised workforce fit for the digital age, the
Army will continue to be world-class. Humanmachine teaming will also play an increasingly
prominent role in how the Army delivers effects.
We will make sure that we are fit for the
challenges of the future with the establishment
of a new experimentation battalion, drawn from
the Yorkshire Regiment, which will lead in the
trialling of cutting-edge technology and its
integration into the way we fight; testing the
BCTs to their limits, driving innovation and
ensuring that the Army's structures, equipment
and way of fighting evolve in line with the
threats.

**7.35.** Investment in longer range artillery will

mean the Army is able to deliver a more precise
and lethal response and attack potential
adversaries at greater depth, providing greater
protection.

**53**


-----

We plan to invest over £250m over ten years in
the Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System
(GMLRS) which will provide an upgraded longrange rocket artillery platform with new missiles
that travel further and are more accurate. In
addition, the Army is spending over £800m over
the next ten years on a new automated Mobile
Fires Platform that will deliver enhanced close
support artillery systems and greater operational
mobility. In the short term, the Army will invest to
sustain the Exactor missile system. Over the
longer-term this capability will be upgraded to
provide enhanced lethality against emerging
threats.

**7.36.** Investment in ground-based air defence

will deliver a system of survivable and digitally
connected platforms with a new short-range
capability, including small drones, and a new
deployable medium range capability. These will
give the Army an air defence capability to defeat
modern airborne threats.

**7.37.** An investment of over £200m over ten

years will deliver an enhanced electronic warfare
and signal intelligence capability. An increase in
new personnel able to collect and exploit signals
intelligence will demonstrate a significant uplift in
our electronic warfighting capability in all
formations.


**7.38.** Modernising the Army will mean some

legacy platforms that have already been
extended beyond their planned life will be
retired. In doing so, the Army will be able to
invest new funds into accelerating the in-service
date of the Boxer armoured vehicle and
enhancing its capability. Boxer will allow the
Army to respond at pace to deliver soldiers
around the battlefield, travelling long distances
quickly, cross country, and in the most austere
and hostile environments. As planned, the Army
will invest around £1.3bn in our armoured
capability by upgrading 148 of our main battle
tanks to ensure the Challenger III will become
one of the most protected and most lethal in
Europe. The remaining fleet will be retired. We
will no longer upgrade Warrior but it will remain
in service until replaced by Boxer, which we
expect to happen by the middle of this decade.

**7.39.** The Army is retiring its oldest CH-47

Chinook helicopters and investing, alongside the
US, in newer variants of this operationally proven
aircraft, enhancing capability, efficiency and
interoperability. Our AH-64 Apache Attack
Helicopters will be upgraded to a state-of-the-art
capability by 2025. Investment in a new medium
lift helicopter in the mid-2020s will enable a
consolidation of the Army’s disparate fleet of
medium lift helicopters from four platform types
to one; including the replacement of Puma. The
Army will also retain and upgrade Watchkeeper.


-----

###### Integrated Force 2030 Icons not to scale

##### Royal Air Force

###### Typhoon Shadow

 F35B Lightning II Protector

 P-8A Poseidon E-7A Wedgetail

 Voyager Red Arrows

 C-17 Globemaster CH-47 Chinook


-----

**7.40.** The Royal Air Force will continue to

deliver decisive air and space power even as the
operating environment becomes more complex
and contested. The Royal Air Force will conduct a
radical overhaul of how it is organised and how it
approaches its people, training, bases and the
aircraft and equipment it operates, harnessing
the ever-increasing effectiveness of a digitally
empowered force.

**7.41.** The Royal Air Force will continue to grow

its Combat Air capacity over the next few years
as we fully establish all seven operational
Typhoon Squadrons and grow the Lightning II
Force, increasing the fleet size beyond the 48
aircraft that we have already ordered. Together
they will provide a formidable capability, which
will be continually upgraded to meet the threat,
exploit multi-domain integration and expand
utility. The Royal Air Force will spiral develop
Typhoon capability, integrate new weapons such
as the UK-developed ‘SPEAR Cap 3’ precision airlaunched weapon and invest in the Radar 2
programme to give it a powerful electronically
scanned array radar. We will integrate more UK
weapons onto Lightning II and invest to ensure
that its software and capability are updated
alongside the rest of the global F-35 fleet.

**7.42.** We will also make a strategic investment

of more than £2bn over the next four years in the
Future Combat Air System (FCAS). FCAS will
deliver an innovative mix of crewed, uncrewed


and autonomous platforms including swarming
drones. This will deliver an advanced combat air
system capable of fighting in the most hostile
environments. The development of novel
technologies, and a step change in how we use
simulators for mission rehearsal and training, will
enable the Royal Air Force to be among the most
technologically innovative, productive and lethal
air forces in the world.

**7.43.** The Royal Air Force’s cutting-edge

equipment programmes will supercharge our
contribution to national prosperity through
innovation and investment in science and
technology, building on our unique partnership
with the UK’s aerospace and space technology
sector.

**7.44.** The Royal Air Force will retire equipment

that has increasingly limited utility in the digital
and future operating environment. This will
include rationalising older fleets to improve
efficiency, retiring Typhoon Tranche 1 by 2025,
and Hawk T1. We will enhance the new military
flying training system with further investment in
synthetic training that will deliver more capable
pilots more quickly and more efficiently. The
Royal Air Force will retire the BAe146 as planned
by 2022 and take the C130 Hercules out of
service by 2023. The A400M Atlas force will
increase its capacity and capability, operating
alongside C-17 Globemaster and Voyager
transport aircraft and tankers.

**56**


-----

**7.45.** We will retire the E-3D Sentry in 2021, as

part of the transition to the more modern and
more capable fleet of three E-7A Wedgetail in
2023. The E-7A will transform our UK Airborne
Early Warning and Control capability and the
UK’s contribution to NATO. The nine P-8A
Poseidon maritime patrol aircraft will help to
secure our seas. The introduction into service of
the 16 long-range Protector remotely piloted
systems will be the backbone of persistent, multispectral surveillance, with the ability to strike and
act decisively against our potential adversaries
around the globe.

**7.46.** The Royal Air Force will amplify UK

global influence by deepening our alliances in
the Indo-Pacific, Middle East and Africa.
Developing a global network of adaptable basing
with key allies and partners will enable our
aircraft to be forward deployed and able to
respond ahead of potential adversaries. The


Royal Air Force will play a key role in persistent
engagement, including seeking prosperity
opportunities through the delivery of world-class
aviation training and building the capacity of
partner nations’ air forces, such as the Joint
Typhoon Squadron with Qatar. In addition, the
Royal Air Force will continue to provide niche
capacity building missions, including in areas
such as intelligence and targeting, space,
surveillance and reconnaissance, force protection,
battlespace management, air traffic control,
aeromedical advice and air safety.


-----

##### All the UK’s Defence

###### With widespread capabilities and a large footprint across the UK investing in industry, infrastructure, jobs and skills, Defence embodies the mutual benefits and shared dependencies that bring the UK together so successfully across the Union. Whether that is keeping the UK safe, or the pan-UK Covid-19 response, Defence is woven into the four nations. In 2019-20, Defence spending with UK industry and commerce directly supported over 18,000 jobs in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The latest settlement has allowed us to protect our existing commitments in these nations and catalyse growth in associated sectors.

 Our investments in Future Combat Air System (FCAS) and the UK space programme are two examples where companies in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland can take full advantage of Defence’s funding pipeline. Defence employs around 14,000 service personnel and 6,000 civilians in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, with many of the service personnel routinely deployed on operations in support of UK commitments to NATO and UN Peacekeeping. Defence returns over 15,000 skilled veterans and civilians per year to society throughout the UK, improving links to communities and enriching our contribution to the nation.

 Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland all play an important role in supporting our people and our capabilities to defend the whole of the UK. Scotland is the home of our UK submarines, Continuous At-Sea Deterrence and the RAF’s fleet of Boeing P8 Poseidon and E-7A Wedgetail airborne warning aircraft. Her Majesty's Naval Base on the Clyde is one of the largest employers in Scotland providing over 6,800 jobs and infrastructure improvements are estimated to be worth about £1.5bn over ten years. At RAF Lossiemouth, we are still to spend approximately £160m of the £470m committed to ongoing infrastructure improvements to accommodate the new Maritime Patrol Aircraft and support Typhoon force growth. This will see an extra 550 service personnel and their families moving to the base.

 The excellence of the training our armed forces receive in Wales is central to their success - from fast jet pilot training at RAF Valley to the warfighting edge forged in the training areas around Brecon, and the vital testing and evaluation in Aberporth. The new £11m Royal Maritime Reserve centre in Cardiff will provide opportunities to expand the Royal Navy’s presence.

 In Northern Ireland, the regional economy continues to be boosted by defence contracts. As an example, Belfast-based companies have recently secured a five-year extension to maintain UK land forces’s Short Range Air Defence systems and a £30m deal to design and manufacture a prototype for the UK’s first fleet of uncrewed fighter aircraft, which is supporting more than 100 jobs in Belfast. Additionally, with Northern Ireland's renowned capabilities in the fields of cybersecurity and advanced manufacturing, it is well placed to benefit from additional Defence investment in new technology in both these domains.


-----

##### All the UK’s Defence

###### Regular military numbers Reserve military numbers Civilians

 Scotland

 Northern Ireland 9,820

 1,780
 4,800

 1,940
 3,970

 900
 £2.1bn total spend with industry
 £83m total spend with industry
 12,400 direct jobs
 500 direct jobs supported with supported with Industry industry
 Shipbuilding  Professional Services - £1.06bn: largest £22m: largest industrial industrial category of category of spend spend

 Wales

 2,160 1,700 1,080

 £909m total spend with industry

 5,700 direct jobs supported with Industry >500 personnel MOD locations

 Weapons & Ammo - £329m: largest industrial category of spend Other MOD locations

**59**


###### 4,800

 3,970

 £2.1bn t with industry
 total spend with

 12,400 supported with Industry

 Shipbuilding -
 Professional Services - £1.06bn: largest industrial industrial category of
 spend

 1,700 1,080

 total spend with industry

 direct jobs supported with


###### Wales

 2,160 1,700 1,080

 £909m total spend with industry

 5,700 direct jobs supported with Industry

 Weapons & Ammo - £329m: largest industrial category of spend


-----

**Belfast: Continued investment in** **Scotstoun, Rosyth and Govan shipyards will**
lightweight Multirole Missiles will sustain Thales benefit from the shipbuilding pipeline. Babcock
workforce. Additionally, in March 2021, the site in Rosyth will be the principal assembly site for
secured a 5-year extension to maintain Short- Type 31 frigates. BAE Systems’ Glasgow yards
Range Air Defence. are working on Type 26 ships. Scottish yards

will likely benefit from the new Type 32,

**Belfast: Spirit AeroSystems has recently been** MROSS and MRSS, and LSDA conversion.
awarded a £30m contract for a 3-year deal to

**Lossiemouth: There is an ongoing £470m**

design and manufacture a prototype for the UK’s

infrastructure investment to accommodate

first fleet of un-crewed fighter aircraft.

the new Maritime Patrol Aircraft Strategic

**Belfast: There is an opportunity for** Facility and support Typhoon force growth.
the Harland and Wolff shipyard to About £220m is still to be spent.
take advantage of the shipbuilding Lossiemouth will also base the RAF’s fleet
pipeline. of three Boeing E-7A Wedgetail Airborne

Early Warning aircraft.

**Belfast: Thales Alenia is home to the**

**Clyde Naval Base: HMNB Clyde is the**

company’s global Space Electric

second largest single-site employer in

Propulsion Integration Centre and

Scotland employing around 6,800 people

would be well placed to benefit from

now, a figure which will increase as

defence spending with

the base becomes home to all Royal Navy

the space industry.

submarines. The ongoing Clyde

Infrastructure Programme was

established in 2015 and is worth an

estimated £1.6bn.

###### Wales

**Sealand: The Defence Electronics and**
Components Agency employs more than
400 staff specialising in electronic and
component maintenance, repair, overhaul and upgrade. In 2019 DECA was awarded a long-term
assignment worth £500m by the US to support crucial services for the F-35 global fleet.

**Brecon will continue to be home to 160th Infantry Brigade and Headquarters (HQ Wales) and the**
Army also remains committed to relocating a major Regular Army unit to Wales.

**Merthyr Tydfil: General Dynamics UK is building the Army’s next generation of AJAX armoured**
vehicles. It is set to run until 2025 and support hundreds of jobs at the south Wales Plant

**Anglesey: RAF Valley is home to the RAF’s only fighter pilot training school. A total of around**
1,500 personnel, civil servants and contractors work together to delivery aircrew training. The base
on the island has been chosen as the future location for Defence Basic Flying Training.

**Cardiff Bay: In 2020 a new £11m Royal Maritime Reserve centre opened in the bay, providing**
opportunities further to expand the Royal Navy presence in Wales.

**60**


-----

### A stronger relationship with industry

###### Chapter 8


**8.1.** This Chapter sets out how we will adopt

a more strategic relationship with industry and
build a more sustainable industrial base. As well
as making our armed forces more effective, it will
drive benefits across the UK – sustaining high
tech jobs, strengthening productivity, and
powering UK competitiveness on the global
market.

**8.2.** We need a sustainable industrial base to

ensure that the UK has access to the most
sensitive and operationally critical areas of
capability for our national security, and to
maximise the economic potential of one of
Britain’s most successful and innovative sectors.
Alongside this paper, a new Defence and Security
Industrial Strategy (DSIS) will set out our plans
for a more strategic partnership between
government and the defence and security
industries.

**8.3.** We will take a more strategic approach

to industrial capability critical to our strategic and
operational needs. While competition will
remain an important tool to drive value for
money in many areas, and in the supply chain,
DSIS provides greater flexibility in designing
capability and acquisition strategies to deliver
and grow the onshore skills, technologies and
capabilities needed to counter the threats and
exploit opportunities. DSIS will ensure a more
consistent consideration of the longer-term
implications of Defence’s procurement decisions
for military capability and the industry that
produces and supports it.

**8.4.** The Defence settlement brings stability

to the Defence programme and provides industry


with the certainty they need to plan, invest and
grow. Increased investment in R&D and close
collaboration with industry will allow us to
experiment and bring new and emerging
capabilities more rapidly into service, creating
strategic advantage and economic opportunity.

**8.5.** Our investment in the Future Combat Air

System (FCAS) programme represents a
paradigm shift in the UK’s combat air industrial
sector to achieve the pace, affordability and
operational capability we need to meet our
requirements. This approach will deliver
capabilities twice as fast, at a lower cost,
designed and delivered in a fully digital
enterprise. Exploiting model-based design,
systems engineering and embedding the latest
agile design principles to deliver faster. FCAS has
already created over 1,800 new STEM jobs in
over 300 companies nationwide, sustaining and
supporting over 18,000 existing highly skilled
jobs in the sector, as well as tens of thousands
more in the wider supply chains across the UK.

**8.6.** To stay ahead of our adversaries, we also

need to make our acquisition and procurement
policies and processes more agile. We will reform
acquisition to make it more responsive to the
changing nature of the industry. We will also
review our procurement practices to enable more
small and medium sized enterprises to
participate in Defence procurement. The Land
Industrial Strategy within DSIS will be a catalyst
for such an approach for land combat systems,
while assisting with the development of a
globally competitive land industrial and
technology sector in the UK.

**61**


-----

**8.7.** We are working to grow the contribution

that defence makes to UK prosperity. Together
with industry, we are refreshing the Defence
Growth Partnership’s strategy on exports and
economic growth. We are jointly investing in the
UK Defence Solutions Centre to improve the
quality of information on the UK defence sector
and potential market opportunities. Within the
MOD, with UK Defence & Security Exports, and
with other government departments, there is a
renewed focus on delivering export success at
every stage, from defining military requirements
for our equipment, to building crossdepartmental packages and expanded export
finance support. We will work collaboratively to
support prosperity objectives across all four
nations of the UK and to support regional and
local growth through initiatives such as the
Defence and Security Accelerator’s involvement
in Regional Defence and Security Clusters. We
will continue to strengthen our prosperity work
with key global primes to create opportunities
for the UK’s highly capable and innovative
defence supply chain. We will include the
Government’s new Social Value criteria in
contracts covered by the Defence and Security
Public Contracts Regulations, supporting the
creation of new businesses, new jobs and new
skills within the UK.

**8.8.** The UK is open to research, capability


and industrial collaboration with trusted Allies
and partners, and we will support our industrial
and technology base to work internationally
whilst strengthening our protections from
investments in supply chains that could harm
national security. Alongside this we are
strengthening our protections against economic
risks and hostile investments in sensitive, defence
and dual-use technology that acts against
national security. As outlined further in the DSIS,
Defence will look to invest in priority
international strategic partnerships across the
globe, including with Five Eyes, Europe, Gulf and
Indo-Pacific nations.

**8.9.** We will work at pace with our allies to

reduce barriers to sharing technology, skills and
knowledge, and accelerate collaborative
innovation and industrial cooperation to secure
and extend our collective advantage over our
potential adversaries. From the business space to
the battlespace, we will enhance the UK’s
academic and industrial base, collaborating with
partners to shape global thinking, standards and
norms for the responsible and ethical adoption
of these new technologies. We will work to
reduce barriers to cooperation with our closest
allies. And we will provide the foundations of
new strategic relationships with industry to shape
the market, stimulate innovation, build skills and
foster a thriving and competitive sector.


-----

##### Future Combat Air System

###### Combat Air will play a vital role in our military strategic capabilities for decades to come, enabling us to make a decisive contribution to global security as well as create jobs and spread prosperity across the United Kingdom. We are investing now to launch the next phase of the FCAS Acquisition Programme to design and deliver the Tempest Concept: innovative systems of optionally-crewed and autonomous systems to preserve our operational advantage long into the future. Tempest will exploit our unique industrial base to create a 6th generation combat air enterprise centred in the UK. This fully digital enterprise will transform delivery, achieving pace and lowering cost and disrupting traditional approaches to defence procurement. We are deepening FCAS partnering with Italy and Sweden through an international Concept and Assessment Phase beginning this year and are exploring important cooperative opportunities with Japan. Combat Air will remain a key pillar of the UK’s global approach as we reinforce interoperability and cooperation with the US and strengthen our relationships with the Typhoon consortium in Europe and other like-minded nations. The UK Combat Air industry directly supports 18,000 jobs with tens of thousands more in the wider supply chain, with the number of highly skilled jobs set to rise rapidly from 2021. This is a major national and international endeavour, investing in our domestic technology and skills base across the United Kingdom, and showcasing UK leadership on the global stage.


-----

-----

#### Transforming our ways of working

###### Chapter 9


**9.1.** We also need to make changes to the

way we manage our business. This Chapter sets
out the role of our new Secretary of State’s Office
for Net Assessment and Challenge (SONAC),
which will ensure that everything we do is
informed by the evolving threat picture. We also
need to undertake a programme of reform,
optimise our infrastructure based on value,
potential and sustainability, and build the
resilience of our estate and our armed forces to
respond to the challenges posed by climate
change.


the department. SONAC will work with external
experts to bring their expertise and cutting-edge
analytical techniques to sharpen our thinking and
explore innovative strategic options to offer
alternative perspectives to Ministers. This will
include wargaming and red teaming work,
informed by Defence Intelligence, to ensure
strategies are tested by independent and diverse
voices before they are implemented.

**9.5.** These changes will radically change the

way the MOD thinks about strategy – shifting
from an approach that was grounded in the 20th
Century to one that is forward looking to the
threats of the future and ready to drive the UK’s
advantage forward in the mid-21st Century.


Secretary of State’s Office for Secretary of State’s Office for
Net Assessment and ChallengeNet Assessment and Challenge


**9.2.** Given the complex, multifaceted

challenges that we face, strategic decision
making in the MOD must be guided by clear
objectives, threat-focused and evidence-driven.
We are establishing the SONAC which will bring
together the best of the civil service, armed
forces, academia and business.

**9.3.** SONAC will challenge the accepted

wisdom and way of doing things. The unit will
provide a central hub for strategic analysis in our
Head Office, ensuring that our strategy and joint
force development remains threat and evidenceled, now and in the far future. It will develop new
ways to understand the threat, including by
incorporating a Net Assessment approach to
assess how we compare to adversaries now and
in the future. It will ensure we learn the strategic
lessons from our own activity, but also
importantly the approaches of other
international actors.

**9.4.** The team will improve the use of

challenge and drive innovative new thinking in


**9.7.** We will be a global leader in the


Defence IntelligenceDefence Intelligence


**9.6.** Defence’s intelligence enterprise also

needs to adapt to the new threat. Open source
intelligence, automation and AI provide
potentially game-changing ways to understand
and counter these new challenges. By
understanding the threats, we will be able to
protect our most precious assets, whether our
armed forces personnel, our critical national
infrastructure, our intellectual property or our
strategic nuclear deterrent. We can protect our
vulnerabilities as well as identifying opportunities
to exploit those of our adversaries. As the threat
continues to evolve and as technology presents
new opportunities, Defence Intelligence will
direct and coordinate intelligence operations
across Defence and will become more agile in
exploiting its knowledge for impact and effect.


Climate Change and SustainabilityClimate Change and Sustainability


**65**


-----

response to the emerging geopolitical and
conflict-related threats being exacerbated by
climate change. Driven by an ambitious Climate
Change and Sustainability Strategy, we will build
the resilience of our armed forces to more
extreme weather conditions to sustain our
strategic advantage and freedom of manoeuvre
in ever more unforgiving environments. In
addition, we will mitigate against the impact of
our Departmental carbon footprint on the
climate and seize opportunities to improve the
sustainability of our operations.

**9.8.** We will be in the vanguard for

contributing to achieving HMG’s legal
commitment of Net Zero emissions by 2050. To
date, Defence has outperformed its emissions
reduction targets, reducing its emissions by 48%
against a 39.9% target as well as increasing its
recycling by 56%, and reducing overall waste by
38% in comparison to the 2009/2010 baseline.
However, we acknowledge we need to do more.
We will embrace the opportunity presented by
the UK’s presidency of COP26 to work with our
allies and partners to achieve commitments on
adaptation, resilience and mitigation activities. In
addition, we will seek to reduce our impact on
the environment and seize opportunities to
embed sustainability considerations into every
part of Defence from infrastructure and estates,
to contracting, culture, equipment and operating
practices; all supported by technology. This will
enable defence to actively contribute to the
achievement of the UK's Net Zero commitment
and wider sustainability commitments.


compliant estate. The Defence Estate
Optimisation (DEO) Portfolio is an ambitious 25year portfolio of interdependent programmes
across the UK, including construction activity, unit
and personnel moves, and land release. We are
investing some £4.3bn over the next decade in
this programme, ensuring that we build back
better, faster and greener. The MOD has
responsibility for approximately 1% of the UK’s
landmass in its estates, primarily used for training
purposes. Emissions from infrastructure make up
approximately 30% of the baseline emissions for
Defence. The DEO Programme will modernise
infrastructure and increase efficiency in estates
management over the next 25 years.

**9.10.** Over time we will move away from

reactive maintenance regimes and augment our
building standards to ensure that we only
construct accommodation and offices that meet
the expectations of our personnel both now and
in the future. We continue to make
improvements to our service accommodation to
improve the lived experience of our personnel.
We plan to spend around £1.5bn over ten years
on upgrades to Single Living Accommodation.


###### Financial SustainabilityFinancial Sustainability


InfrastructureInfrastructure


**9.9.** We will invest to transform our estate to

maximise its value and potential. We will
prioritise funding for our critical infrastructure
projects to enhance our resilience while reducing
the size of the estate, consolidating our asset
base and continuing to maintain a safe and


**9.11.** Our approach is predicated on meeting

the threats we face affordably and at the pace
required to keep us safe. This is a crucial
opportunity for Defence to move to a sound
financial footing. We are working to strengthen
our mechanisms to drive and assure value for
money. We are instigating improvements in
programme delivery, procurement, and
acquisition to manage complexity, risk, and the
pace of technological change affordably and
rigorously.

**66**


-----

##### Acronyms

**AI** Artificial Intelligence

**AMISOM** African Union Mission to Somalia

**ARRC** Allied Rapid Reaction Corps

**ASEAN** The Association of Southeast Asian Nations

**BCT** Brigade Combat Team

**CBRN** Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear

**CJEF** Combined Joint Expeditionary Force

**CT** Counter Terrorism

**DEO** Defence Estate Optimisation

**DSIS** Defence and Security Industrial Strategy

**Dstl** Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

**ECOWAS** Economic Community of West African States

**FPDA** Five Power Defence Arrangements

**GCHQ** Government Communications Headquarters

**GMLRS** Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System

**HMG** Her Majesty’s Government

**HQ** Headquarters

**ISTAR** Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance

**IOpC** Integrated Operating Concept

**JEF** Joint Expeditionary Force

**KFOR** Kosovo Force (NATO-led peacekeeping force)

**LRG** Littoral Response Group

**MINUSMA** United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilisation Mission in Mali

**MOD** Ministry of Defence

**NATO** North Atlantic Treaty Organisation

**NCF** National Cyber Force

**NHS** National Health Service

**PPE** Personal Protective Equipment

**R&D** Research and Development

**SIS** Secret Intelligence Service

**STEM** Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics

**UAV** Uncrewed Aerial Vehicle

**UN** United Nations

**UNCLOS** United Nations Convention on the Law Of the Sea


**67**


-----

##### Technical Terminology

**Capability** **Description**

**16 Air Assault Brigade** Army’s most rapidly deployable brigade

**1st Combat Aviation Brigade** Formation comprising Army’s attack and reconnaissance and RAF support helicopters

**1st (UK) Division** Army’s second deployable manoeuvre Division

**3rd (UK) Division** Army’s principal combat formation and primary armoured warfighting capability

**6th (UK) Division** Army’s unconventional warfare Division

**A400M** Aircraft providing tactical and strategic lift

**AH64 Apache** Attack helicopter with surveillance and force protection capabilities

**Ajax** Army’s family of armoured reconnaissance fighting vehicles

**Army Special Ops Brigade** Army formation for preparing and generating special operations-capable forces (Ranger Regiment) for
deployment

**Astute class** Nuclear powered submarine

**ASW frigate** A surface warship optimised for Anti-Submarine Warfare

**BAE 146 - CSAT** Command Support Air Transport capable of passenger and cargo delivery

**Ballistic Missile Submarine** Submarine capable of firing inter-continental ballistic missiles

**Bay class support ship** Royal Fleet Auxiliary ship used in amphibious operations

**Boxer** The Army’s new wheeled Mechanised Infantry Vehicle (MIV), a highly mobile armoured vehicle to carry troops
at long range into operational theatres


**Combat Service Support**
**Battalions**


Army’s new integrated units combining logistic, equipment and medical support elements


**C130J Hercules** Multi-role tactical transport aircraft

**C-17 Globemaster** Strategic over-sized lift military transport aircraft

**Carrier Strike Group** Fifth generation aircraft carrier supported by frigates, destroyers, submarines and F-35B jets

**CH-47 Chinook** Multi-role heavy lift support helicopter

**Challenger III** Upgrade of Challenger II battle tank with added mobility, survivability and lethality

**CJEF** Combined Joint Expeditionary Force – UK-French bilateral force designed to be an early entry intervention
force

**Deep Recce Strike Brigade** Army fighting formation for executing long-range strike and reconnaissance activities

**Defence Cyber School** A centre of excellence for cyber training and exercise based at the Defence Academy

**Directed Energy Weapons** Highly focused energy aimed at damaging a target, including laser, microwaves and particle beams

**Dreadnought class** Nuclear powered ballistic missile submarine replacing the Vanguard Class

**E-3D Sentry** Airborne early warning and command and control aircraft

**E-7A Wedgetail** Next generation airborne early warning and command and control aircraft

**Exactor Missile System** Electro-optically guided missile capability

**F-35B Lightning II** Fifth-generation multi-role aircraft

**FCAS** The Future Combat Air System containing highly networked aircraft, uncrewed drones, sensors and weapons,
connected across every domain

**Five Eyes (countries)** Australia, Canada, New Zealand, UK and US intelligence sharing community

**Fleet Solid Support Ship** Royal Fleet Auxiliary ship mainly used to supply the Carrier Strike Group with stores and ammunition

**Future Commando Force (FCF)** UK’s new littoral strike fighting capability, centred around the Royal Marines

**Global Response Force** Army’s very-high-readiness crisis response capability drawing from 16 Air Assault Brigade and 1[st] Combat
Aviation Brigade

**Hawk T1** Training aircraft used by RAF and Royal Navy front-line units

**High North** The Arctic and surrounding region

**Hunter class frigate** Name of the Australian variant of the Type 26 Frigate

**Hypersonic glide vehicles** A strategic weapon system that is capable of speeds greater than five times the speed of sound

**Hypersonic missiles** A missile capable of travelling at more than five times the speed of sound

**Ice Patrol Ship** Royal Navy ship capable of ice breaking

**HQ Allied Rapid Reaction Corps** UK commanded NATO 3-star headquarters based in the UK

**68**


-----

**Capability** **Description**

**JEF** The Joint Expeditionary Force is a UK-led coalition of like-minded Partner Nations (Denmark, Estonia, Finland
Latvia, Lithuania, The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and Iceland from spring 2021), composed of high
readiness forces, primarily configured for responding rapidly to crises in the High North and Baltic Sea
Region

**Landing Platform Dock (LPD)** Royal Navy ship used in amphibious operations


**Landing Ship Dock Auxiliary**
**(LSD(A))**


Royal Fleet Auxiliary Ship used principally in support of amphibious operations


**Light Brigade Combat Teams** Army fighting formation centred around light infantry units

**Lightning II Force** F-35B Lightning II (see F-35 definition)

**Littoral Response Group** A bespoke force assigned to a geographical area, that contains dedicated shipping, helicopters and boats

**Mine Hunting Capability** Royal Navy’s new, autonomous and remote system for hunting and destroying mines

**Mobile Fires Platform** A future indirect fire weapon system

**Multi-Role Ocean Surveillance** Planned Royal Navy ship which will support a broad array of missions
**Ship**

**Northern Group** Nations committed to maintaining security and stability in Northern European region and wider continent.
Includes Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
Sweden and UK

**Offshore Patrol Vessel** Royal Navy vessel which undertakes constabulary, support and training missions around the globe

**P8-A Poseidon** Maritime Patrol Aircraft primarily focussed on Anti-Submarine Warfare

**Protector** New remotely piloted air system with surveillance and strike capability

**Puma** Medium lift helicopter

**Radar 2** A new radar system to be fitted to RAF Typhoons

**Ranger Regiment** Army’s new all-arms special operations-capable units

**Security Force Assistance** Army formation for conducting overseas capacity building and assistance missions
**Brigade**


**Skynet 6** Military satellite communication network

**SPEAR Cap 3** Precision air-launched weapon

**Synthetics** The use of advanced digital technology to support training and planning

**Tempest** See FCAS

**Trafalgar class** Nuclear powered submarine


**Trident Strategic Weapon**
**System**


The UK’s nuclear deterrent


**Type 23 frigate** A general purpose frigate, typically optimised for Anti-Submarine Warfare

**Type 26 frigate** A global combat ship optimised for Anti-Submarine Warfare

**Type 31 frigate** A versatile, surface warship. The replacement for Type 23 frigates

**Type 32 frigate** A new class of surface warship

**Type 45 destroyer** A destroyer optimised for Air Defence Warfare

**Type 83 destroyer** Concept replacement warship for Type 45

**Typhoon** Multi-role fourth-generation combat aircraft

**Vanguard class** Nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine

**Voyager** Air-to-air refuelling tanker capable of air transport

**Watchkeeper** Uncrewed aerial vehicle with Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance capability

**Y-20** Chinese heavy transport aircraft

**Skynet 6** Military satellite communication network

**SPEAR Cap 3** Precision air-launched weapon

**Synthetics** The use of advanced digital technology to support training and planning

**Tempest** See FCAS

**Trafalgar class** Nuclear powered submarine


**Trident Strategic Weapon**
**System**


The UK’s nuclear deterrent


**Type 23 frigate** A general purpose frigate, typically optimised for Anti-Submarine Warfare

**Type 26 frigate** A global combat ship optimised for Anti-Submarine Warfare


**69**


-----

-----

###### ISBN: 978-1-5286-2462-6


###### ISBN:


-----

