**RESEARCH PAPER 98/91**
# The Strategic Defence
15 OCTOBER 1998
# Review White Paper

The Labour Government began its Strategic Defence
Review (SDR) in May 1997. After longer than
expected, an SDR White Paper was published on 8 July
1998 as Command Paper 3999.

This Paper will summarise the course and results of the
Review, outline reactions to it and discuss its merits.
An earlier Paper, RP 97/106, _The Strategic Defence_
_Review, examines the origins of the Review and its_
parameters.

The SDR has been the subject of an extensive
investigation by the House of Commons Defence
Select Committee. The resulting report, The Strategic
_Defence Review, HC 138 1997-1998, was published on_
3 September.

The House will debate a motion to approve the
conclusions of the SDR on 19 and 20 October.

Tom Dodd and Mark Oakes

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE SECTION

HOUSE OF COMMONS LIBRARY


-----

**Recent Library Research Papers include:**

List of 15 most recent RPs

**98/76** The Northern Ireland Bill: Implementing the Belfast Agreement 20.07.98

[Bill No 229]

**98/77** The Northern Ireland Bill: Some Legislative and Operational Aspects 17.07.98

of the Assembly

**98/78** EMU: the constitutional implications 27.07.98

**98/79** Child Benefit 29.07.98

**98/80** Voting Systems - The Government's Proposals (2[nd] revised edition) 31.07.98

**98/81** Cancellation of Third World Debt 04.08.98

**98/82** Working Time Regulations SI 1998 No 1833 10.08.98

**98/83** Unemployment by Constituency - July 1998 12.08.98

**98/84** Fireworks 18.08.98

**98/85** House of Lords reform: developments since the general election 19.08.98

**98/86** Parliamentary Pay and Allowances: Current Rates 21.08.98

**98/87** The Criminal Justice (Terrorism & Conspiracy) Bill Bill 244 of 1997-9802.09.98

**98/88** Unemployment by Constituency - August 1998 16.09.98

**98/89** Democracy in Russia 07.10.98

**98/90** Unemployment by Constituency - September 1998 14.10.98

_Research Papers are available as PDF files:_

_• to members of the general public on the Parliamentary web site,_

_URL: http://www.parliament.uk_

_• within Parliament to users of the Parliamentary Intranet,_

_URL: http://hcl1.hclibrary.parliament.uk_

Library Research Papers are compiled for the benefit of Members of Parliament and their
personal staff. Authors are available to discuss the contents of these papers with Members
and their staff but cannot advise members of the general public.


-----

## Summary

Following fourteen months of consultation and preparation, the results of the Government's
Strategic Defence Review were finally announced to the House on 8 July 1998. The SDR
fulfils the Government's manifesto commitment to undertake a foreign policy-led review to
reassess the UK's security and defence needs. This paper takes each main element of the
SDR in turn, providing a summary of Government policy followed by an attempt to assess
the possible implications of the White Paper's proposals.

The two central pillars to emerge from the SDR are the moves towards more rapidly
deployable armed forces and "jointery".[1]

The SDR begins with an assessment of the strategic realities and security context of the post
Cold War world. The Government recognises that the collapse of the Warsaw Pact means
that there is no longer a direct military threat to the UK. It also acknowledges, however, that
the world is an increasingly unstable and unpredictable place where indirect threats to the UK
still persist and can arise in many areas around the globe. In this scenario a requirement for
more mobile, responsive and flexible armed forces is called for. To this end the SDR
signifies a major shift towards expeditionary armed forces, involving the rapid deployment of
sustainable military force often over long distances. The planned purchase of two new large
aircraft carriers and the establishment of structures to support new Joint Rapid Reaction
Forces (JRRF) represent the most potent symbols of this change.

The JRRFs form part of a wider "Joint Vision" intended to maximise the operational and cost
effectiveness of the Armed Forces through initiatives aimed at co-ordinating the activities of
the three Services more closely. Other elements of this "Joint" approach include combined
RAF/RN Harrier forces (Joint Force 2000), a Joint Helicopter Command, a Joint Ground
Based Air Defence organisation and the establishment of a further joint command of Army
and RAF personnel in a Nuclear, Chemical and Biological Defence Regiment. The joint
approach also extends to the logistical base at home where the three single Service logistical
organisations will be grouped under a new four-star Chief of Defence Logistics.

Of the other key findings of the SDR, the most controversial would appear to be the planned
reduction in the number of Territorial Army units. Other noteworthy points include: the
Government's commitment to maintaining a nuclear deterrent, but at a reduced level; a
revision of equipment procurement through the 'Smart Procurement' initiative; Government
support for greater defence industrial collaboration and rationalisation; and an attempt to
address the problems of overstretch and undermanning through the 'Policy for People'
initiatives.

1 "a series of initiatives across defence to co-ordinate the activities of the three services more closely, pooling
their expertise and maximising their punch, while at the same time eliminating duplication and waste." The
_Strategic Defence Review, Cm 3999, Introduction, para 4_


-----

### CONTENTS

 I The Course of the Review 9

 A. The Review Process 9

 B. Consultation 11

 C. Immediate Reactions to the Review 12

 II Defence Strategy: Threats and Commitments in a Changing World 14

 A. The Security Context 14

 B. The Impact of Technological Change 16

 C. Assessment 17

 III Defence Missions and Tasks 22

 A. Policy 22

 B. Assessment 25

 IV Joint Operations 27

 A. Policy 27

 B. Assessment 29

 V Nuclear Forces and Arms Control 31

 A. Policy 31

 B. Assessment 33

 VI Conventional Forces 36

 A. The Royal Navy 36

 B. The Army 38


-----

### C. The Royal Air Force 42

 D. The Reserves 44

 VII Defence Procurement 49

 A. Policy 49

 B. Assessment 52

 VIII Defence Industries 54

 A. Policy 54

 B. Assessment 56

 IX Personnel Issues 57

 A. Policy 57

 B. Assessment 59

 X Defence Expenditure 62

 A. Spending 62

 B. Assessment 63

 XI The Longer Term 65


-----

## I The Course of the Review

### A. The Review Process

On 8 July 1998 George Robertson, the Secretary of State for Defence, came to the House
to announce the results of the Strategic Defence Review and their publication in a White
Paper.[2] He concluded his opening remarks by stating that:

This truly radical review builds on the strengths and successes of our armed
forces. It rectifies the weaknesses that we inherited, and it modernises our forces
to deal with tomorrow’s threats rather than yesterday’s enemies. It places the
skilled, brave and versatile people on whom our defence depends firmly at the
centre of planning, and it gives them a clear sense of direction into the next
century. Above all it delivers the modern forces Britain needs for the modern
world.

A promise to conduct “a strategic defence and security review to reassess our essential
security and defence needs” was included in the Labour Party's 1997 election manifesto.[3]

The Review was officially launched by Mr Robertson at a press conference on 28 May
1997, although earlier notice had been given in the Queen's Speech on 14 May.[4]

The SDR was originally intended to last six months. This period was then extended to
around nine months. There was then evidence of further delay and, in November 1997,
the MOD stated that the White Paper detailing the Review’s results would now be
published in the “first part of next year [1998].”[5] The SDR White Paper was finally
presented to the House by the Defence Secretary and published in July 1998. The
statement’s impact was lessened by the leaking of the White Paper the day before. This
leak was the subject of mutual recrimination between Government and Opposition and
became the subject of a Cabinet Office inquiry. However, many of the Review’s broad
conclusions had been known for some time as a result of the Government’s own efforts at
consultation and previous seepage of information from the MOD. The Review had, in
fact, been broadly concluded prior to Easter, being presented to the Prime Minister on 23
March 1998.[6] There then followed a debate with the Treasury over the future size of the
defence budget, the SDR constituting the MOD’s contribution to the Treasury’s
Comprehensive Spending Review (CSR).[7] These deliberations were apparently still not

2 HC Deb 8 July 1998 c 1073-1096 and Cm 3999
3 New Labour Because Britain Deserves Better, p. 38
4 MOD PR 28 May 97 and HC Deb 14 May 1997 c 43
5 HC Deb 25 November 1997 c 499-500w
6 Essay One, Para 33
7 HC Deb 3 November 1997 c 79w


-----

concluded in late June.[8] The results of the CSR were announced after the statement on
the SDR on 14 July 1998.[9]

A central element of the SDR was that it was to be “foreign policy and not Treasury led,”
that the new shape of the armed forces would be dictated by defence and security needs
over a twenty year timeframe, rather than by any overriding quest for financial savings.[10]

Accordingly, the first stage of the Review was conducted jointly by the MOD and FCO to
determine the policy framework or baseline. This:

assessed our national interests, commitments and responsibilities, and considered
potential risks and challenges in the decades ahead, and set out the overall role of
defence in support of Britain’s foreign and security policy.[11]

This stage was completed by September 1997. Its assessment was converted into
guidance for the second stage, the drawing up of planning assumptions by broadly based
working groups, and identified in eight military missions. In a third stage, working
groups translated these missions into 28 military tasks and additional work was carried
out on the development of specific capabilities and the future impact of technology on
equipment and capability. In the fourth and largest stage of the Review, working groups,
overseen by senior officers and officials, assessed the forces, capabilities, equipment and
support needed to conduct the missions and military tasks.[12] The Treasury was kept
abreast of discussions in post-first stage working groups, whilst the DTI was involved in
those with potential industrial aspects.[13] The work was overseen and co-ordinated by a
steering group, chaired by John Reid, the Minister of State for the Armed Forces. John
Spellar, the Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Defence, led work on Smart
Procurement, the initiative to make procurement “faster, cheaper and better”, announced
by the Secretary of State and incorporated in the SDR on 30 July 1998. Dr Reid chaired a
parallel review of efficiency and assets aimed at maximising “the efficiency of our
organisational structures and working practices”.[14] The options emerging from the
Review were costed and then considered by the Defence Secretary and other Defence
Ministers, the Chiefs of Staff and senior officials in early 1998 and in some cases were
referred for further examination. The views of other departments were sought via an
inter-departmental committee in the Cabinet Office. Options were then drawn together
into a package for presentation to the Prime Minister.[15]

8 “£2bn defence cuts showdown looms”, The Daily Telegraph 27 June 1998
9 See Chancellor’s statement HC Deb 14 July 1998 c 187-21 and see Modern Public Services for Britain:
_Investing in Reform, Cm 4011_
10 HC Deb 16 June 1997 c 9
11 Essay One, Para 8
12 Examples of working groups are given in Essay One, Annex A
13 HC 138, pp.10-11
14 Essay One, Paras 11-18
15 Essay One, Paras 30-33


-----

The Review is presented in a White Paper, with important additional information in a
separate volume of eleven supporting essays and 41 separate factsheets on specific forces
and policies. The press summary also contains information on costings of force
enhancements which is not covered elsewhere. The SDE White Paper does not contain
some of the data, particularly financial, which has appeared in previous Defence White
Papers. Due to the Review, the MOD did not publish a Defence White Paper in 1997,
although some of the factual information normally contained in it was later released in
autumn 1997 in an expanded performance report.[16]

### B. Consultation

Another aim of the SDR was to forge a national consensus on defence. In his press
statement announcing the SDR, the Defence Secretary promised to involve both the
opposition parties and parliamentary defence committees in the review process. Mr
Robertson wrote to all Members outlining the scope of the SDR in similar language.[17] He
held meetings on the SDR with interested Members of both Houses and with spokesmen
of all the leading parties. Ministers also held a series of lunches and meetings with
former defence ministers and retired senior civil servants and Service leaders.[18] The
House of Commons Defence Committee took evidence from Mr Robertson, other ministers,
civil servants, academic defence specialists and NGOs and published a comprehensive
report on the review on 3 September 1998.[19]

The process of consultation also encompassed the wider defence community and the public.
Three seminars on the SDR were arranged with defence and foreign affairs specialists from
outside the civil service in 1997 and their proceedings were made available to the House.[20]

In addition, the Secretary of State established a panel of 18 external experts, who acted as a
sounding board for conclusions as they emerged from the review.[21] The MOD also asked
for written submissions from the general public and received over 450.[22] MOD civilian and
service personnel were also invited to submit their views.[23] A Liaison Team visited bases
and 7,500 staff were given the opportunity to express their views.[24] Serving members of
the armed forces and MOD officials will also be able to submit written comments on the
SDR, outside the chain of command.[25] Digests of internal submissions and Liaison Team
reports were deposited in the House in July 1998.[ 26]

16 HL Deb 3 June 1997 WA31
17 HC Deb 19 June 1997 c 264w
18 MOD PR 11 December 1997
19 Defence Committee, The Strategic Defence Review, HC 138, 1997-98
20 Deposited Papers 3S/5396 and 5768
21 A list of the experts is provided in Essay One, Annex B
22 Where author permission was obtained these were deposited (Dep 3S/ 5433)
23 HC Deb 16 January 1998 c 348w
24 Essay One, Para 28
25 _The Independent 13 October 1997_
26 Dep 98/723


-----

The consultation process also encompassed work on ‘Smart Procurement’. The subject of
defence procurement was not specifically mentioned in the official launch of the SDR but
was added in July 1997.[27] The concept of 'Smart Procurement' was deliberately taken
forward under the auspices of the National Defence Industries Council (NDIC), a joint
Government and industry body which is chaired by the Secretary of State. A combined
industry-government steering group was established in November 1997 and was jointly
led by Kevin Smith, a BAe executive, and Mr Spellar.[28] The group supervised the work
of a number of teams, composed of MOD officials, representatives from industry and
staff from the consulting firm, McKinsey.[29] Details of preliminary findings were given to
an MOD seminar at Didcot at the end of January 1998.[30]

### C. Immediate Reactions to the Review

Reactions to the Review have been varied. Responding to the Secretary of State’s statement
on the Review, John Maples, Conservative defence spokesman, welcomed many aspects of
the White Paper, seeing much, as a continuation of initiatives of the Conservative
Government. However, pointing to cuts both in the defence budget and in manpower and
equipment, he challenged the essential premise of the SDR, declaring that “… this was never
a strategic defence review, but was always about cutting defence expenditure”. He also
expressed concern about the delay in completing the SDR and the impact that this had had
on Service morale.[31]

For the Liberal Democrats, Menzies Campbell also supported many of the SDR’s measures
including “the premium to be placed on flexibility, mobility and rapid deployment, the
decision to restrict the number of Trident warheads, the confirmation of the commitment to
Eurofighter and the emphasis on joint operations and planning”. However, he expressed
regret at the paucity of information on European defence co-operation.[32]

Given that this review was intended to be driven by foreign policy considerations, both the
leading opposition parties and the Defence Select Committee, the latter generally endorsing
the Review, as well as a number of commentators, have expressed concern about the lack of
clarity on foreign and security policy commitments and objectives.[33] Mr Maples commented
during the statement on the SDR:

27 HC 138, pp. 2-3
28 MOD PR 13/11/97
29 Essay Ten, Paras 7-11
30 _The Financial Times 21 January 1998_
31 HC Deb 8 July 1998, c 1076-1077
32 Ibid, c 1082
33 HC 138, Para 54


-----

Nor was it [the SDR] ever a foreign policy-led review. The Government has
never published the foreign policy baseline as they promised – not even today.
Even the panel of experts set up by the Government to advise them has never
seen it. If the review had genuinely been foreign policy-led, it would have had to
have made some effort to match capabilities to commitments. There is no
attempt in the White Paper to do that.[34]

Separately, Mr Campbell has written:

The Government’s much-anticipated Strategic Defence Review will be
memorable for its premature publication, but not, I fear, for the clarity of the
foreign policy objectives, which the armed forces are being redesigned to
support. In a document allegedly foreign policy-driven the reader requires much
diligence to find detailed reference to foreign policy.[35]

An account of the policy framework, or policy baseline, was originally to have been
published as a separate document prior to the end of the Review.[36] This did not occur as
“this work could not be easily separated out from the review’s later stages”.[37] However, the
MOD maintains that some of the “broad conclusions” of the review of the policy framework
were revealed by the Secretary of State in a speech to the Royal United Services Institute
(RUSI) on 18 September and during the annual defence debate in October 1997.

The general response of the defence community has been favourable. However,
commentators have tended to disagree with the Secretary of State’s view that the SDR is
“the most radical restructuring of our armed forces for a generation”, seeing it more as
“sensible” and “evolutionary”.[38] They have welcomed the SDR’s relative openness in most
areas, the lack of Service in-fighting and the signs of successful co-operation between
Servicemen and officials in its production. All of the Service chiefs published statements
personally endorsing the SDR. This contrasts with what was seen by many as the excessive
secrecy surrounding previous defence reviews, such as Options for Change, and the interService competition which has also affected earlier attempts to reorder British defence
policy.

34 HC Deb 8 July 1998, c 1077
35 _The House Magazine, July 27, 1998_
36 HC Deb 28 July 1997 c 75w
37 Essay One, Para 10
38 George Robertson in The House Magazine 27 July 1998, Michael Evans “Robertson’s blueprint is more
sensible than truly radical”, The Times 8 July 1998 and Michael Codner, ‘The Strategic Defence Review
A Good Job’, RUSI Newsbrief, August 1998


-----

## II Defence Strategy: Threats and Commitments in a Changing World

### A. The Security Context

The White Paper and the Second Supporting Essay give the Government view of the new
strategic realities of the post-Cold War world. The Government recognises that the
collapse of the Warsaw Pact and the emergence of democracy throughout most of Eastern
Europe and in Russia means that there is now no direct military threat to the UK
(excluding terrorism related to Northern Ireland), its dependent territories or its western
European allies. However, this does not mean that this general state of European security
should be taken for granted; the wider world is no less dangerous.

During the Cold War, the East/West Confrontation dominated strategic thinking
in a way that produced a misleading impression of stability in large parts of the
world. In part this was because that confrontation temporarily suppressed
underlying tensions and problems. In part, it was because the scale of risks
involved in the Cold War obscured the potential importance of the newer style
security risks that were emerging.[39]

Such instability in, for example, Africa, the Balkans and the Middle East can affect
Britain indirectly. “There is an increasing danger from the proliferation of nuclear,
biological and chemical technologies.”[40] Terrorism, drugs and organised crime pose a
threat both to British society and in other countries. Environmental degradation, ethnic
tensions, population pressures, competition for resources, and the collapse of states which
may result, also fuel instability and human misery. The nature of conflict has therefore
changed. The wars of the future are less likely to be between states, but rather within
them, with instability and conflict spreading across international borders.[41]

The challenges to British security are most likely to arise in Europe, in the Mediterranean
and in the Middle East and Persian Gulf. Although Europe is more secure than in the
past, there is still evidence of instability. This, and any deterioration in the political
climate, can best be insured against through continued membership of NATO, although
the EU, WEU and OSCE also have a (lesser) role in enhancing and preserving European
security. The maintenance of an effective Alliance is therefore important, particularly the
strength of the transatlantic link. The UK’s influence in NATO is based on a
commensurate national conventional and nuclear contribution. Further afield, British
interests are most likely to be affected by events in the Gulf, threatening oil supplies, and

39 Cm 3999, Para 5
40 Ibid, Para 8
41 Ibid, Paras 29-30


-----

in the Mediterranean, potentially threatening the EU’s and NATO’s southern members.
However, in responding to potential crises Britain is unlikely to operate alone.

The best way to manage these challenges to security is through prevention. This requires
an “integrated external policy through which we can pursue our interests using all the
instruments at our disposal, including diplomatic, developmental and military.”[42]

However, the armed forces may be needed to conduct effective military operations if
prevention and military deterrence fails: “Our armed forces are Britain’s insurance against
a huge variety of risks”.[43] They need to be flexible, highly capable, mobile and
responsive, i.e. they need to be prepared for expeditionary operations. In the words of the
Secretary of State, “In the post Cold War world, we must be prepared to go to the crisis,
rather than have the crisis come to us.”[44] They also need to be ready for, "modern, high
intensity conventional warfare”.[45] They have responded “outstandingly” to “a series of
new and largely unexpected operational challenges” but personnel shortages, coupled
with a high level of operational commitments, have led to overstretch. These and other
weaknesses, particularly in rapid deployment capabilities, need to be addressed.[46]

The Government explains that it is following this expeditionary strategy because Britain
is internationalist:

Britain’s place in the world is determined by our interests as a nation and as a
leading member of the international community. Indeed, the two are inextricably
linked because our national interests have a vital international dimension.[47]

The UK is a leading member of many international organisations, including the EU and
NATO and is a Permanent Member of the United Nations Security Council. (Indeed, the
Government intends to make more forces potentially available to the UN for peace
support and humanitarian operations.)[48] The economy is founded on international trade,
is assisted by extensive foreign investment and is dependent on imports of raw materials.
These overseas economic interests and historical links around the world give rise to
international responsibilities. Ten million British citizens live and work abroad and there
are 13 Overseas Territories scattered across the globe.[49] Yet this global role is more than
just self-interest, it is also founded on idealism. In the words of the Defence Secretary:

42 Cm 3999, Chapter 1, para 10
43 Ibid, Introduction, Para 2
44 Ibid, Para 6
45 Essay Two, Para 25
46 Cm 3999, Para 11
47 Ibid, Para 17
48 Ibid, Para 52
49 Paras 36-40


-----

The British are, by instinct, an internationalist people. We believe that as well as
defending our rights, we should discharge our responsibilities in the world. We
do not want to stand idly by and watch humanitarian disasters or aggression of
dictators go unchecked. We want to give a lead, we want to be a force for good.[50]

This explanation reflects the mission statement issued by the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office shortly after the last election.

The Mission of the Foreign and Commonwealth Officer is to promote the
national interests of the United Kingdom and to contribute to a strong world
community.

We shall pursue that Mission to secure for Britain four benefits through our
foreign policy:

    - Security: We shall ensure the security of the United Kingdom and the
Dependent Territories and peace for our people by promoting international
stability, fostering our defence alliances and promoting arms control actively;

    - Prosperity: We shall make maximum use of our overseas posts to promote
trade abroad and boost jobs at home;

    - Quality of Life: We shall work with others to protect the World's environment
and to counter the menace of drugs, terrorism and crime;

    - Mutual Respect: We shall work through international forums and bilateral
relationships to spread the values of human rights, civil liberties and democracy
which we demand for ourselves.[51]

### B. The Impact of Technological Change

Technological change will also alter the shape of future conflict and this is discussed in
some depth in Supporting Essay Three. Whereas it will enhance British and Allied
strengths in conventional weaponry, it may also open their armed forces and society to
novel forms of attack. These include the use of information warfare against increasingly
vital computer systems, and the wider availability of chemical and biological weapons
and other so-called dual use technologies. There will also be greater pressures on
operational decisions arising from instant media coverage (the CNN factor).[52]

50 Introduction by Secretary of State, Para 19
51 FCO PR 12/5/97
52 Essay Three. Para 34


-----

The rapid pace of technological change will also have implications for defence
procurement. Weapons platforms, for example aircraft, may have longer lives but will
need more frequent upgrades.[53] It is important that the UK's armed forces remain at the
forefront of military technological change, although civil equipment may have increasing
numbers of defence applications. The application of information technology, in particular
to command and control, may be leading to a Revolution in Military Affairs. By the year
2015, the distinction between air, land or maritime operations will have faded with the
creation of a single battlespace, where joint and combined operations will dominate. The
USA is leading the process of applying new technologies to warfare and it is important
for the conduct of multinational operations, likely to be led by US forces, that British
forces can inter-operate with them. This may lead to choices between national and
European technologies and those advanced by the Americans.

Domestically, the MOD needs to remain abreast of technological developments as they
impact on defence. This will involve collaborative research and planning between the
MOD, its Defence Evaluation and Research Agency (DERA), other Government
departments, allies and industry. Technology transfer will become more a two-way
street, where the MOD will not only contribute skills to industry but will also benefit
from “industrial developments in the world market”.[54] A key part in this process will be
played by the Defence Diversification Agency.[55] With a view to the advantages of interoperability, international collaboration to develop new defence technologies will become
the norm. There will be a greater use of modelling and simulation and of technology
demonstrators.

### C. Assessment

The Government’s analysis of the UK's security environment and of the potential threats
and benefits from advancing technology is fairly orthodox. The Review could, however
be criticised on a number of grounds.

One of the chief criticisms of the Review is that it is one-sided. It produces a fairly
comprehensive security analysis but then only proceeds to set out how the Ministry of
Defence and armed forces should respond to these threats and opportunities. The Labour
manifesto promised a “strategic defence and security review” but only delivers on the
former. The SDR outlines the threats posed to the United Kingdom and UK interests by
drugs, international crime and environmental degradation, but it could be argued that
these problems lie outside the remit of the armed forces. What was required, in this view,
was a cross-departmental military and security review, involving from the outset, the
MOD, FCO, the intelligence services, the Home Office, Customs and Excise, the DTI,

53 Ibid, Para 9
54 Ibid, Para 24
55 See Defence Diversification: Getting the Most Out of Defence Technology, Cm 3861


-----

DETR and Department for International Development (DFID), which could have
considered the threats to both UK interests abroad and the UK homeland and thought out
suitable countermeasures. Instead what occurred was a SDR baseline drawn up by the
FCO and MOD, with other departments with an external or security interest only
involved at a later date. Thus, responses to threats to the UK homeland were given less
consideration than some had hoped. In the words of the Defence Select Committee:

… because the Review was foreign policy led, we fear it may have led to neglect
of certain aspects of the fundamental duty of defence of the United Kingdom's
territory, its constitution and the way of life of its citizens. The chosen strategy is
to prepare for the expected—for our Armed Forces to be ready to do the kind of
operations they are most likely to be called upon to undertake. This is common
sense. But the diminished probability of the emergence of a serious threat to the
United Kingdom should not cause us to forget the first purpose and mission of
defence. There are elements of the package contained in the Review that suggest
to us that this is a danger that has not entirely been avoided.[56]

The Review does make a nod towards a cross-government approach by stating that the
defence of national security requires an “integrated external policy with the combined
application of all tools at our disposal – diplomatic, trade, developmental as well as
Armed Forces”. However, what is presented is a reorganised military instrument and no
new central government mechanisms are established to promote such integration.

One defence analyst suggests:

For all its virtues, the SDR is an internal management review with the MOD. It
has not been “strategic” as the MOD would have us believe, and has made some
important assumptions that may not stand up over the next few years. We do
need another review, but not of the MOD alone, rather of the way our
government and our civil service approach the world around them.[57]

The SDR does include a new emphasis on conflict prevention, but some critics,
particularly on the Left, do not see this as going far enough. The use of military force,
they would maintain, is ultimately reactive and the Review does little to address one of
the main causes of global insecurity, which is inequality. Conflict is not only generated
by differences of wealth between states, but more often by vast differences in wealth
between elites and the masses in many less developed countries. Notwithstanding an
increase in the DFID budget under the Comprehensive Spending Review, some maintain
that more should be spent on alleviating global poverty, particularly in relation to the
reduction of Third World debt.[58] This school of thought would also favour stronger curbs
on the arms trade, whereas the SDR sees the defence industries as an important national

56 HC 138, Para 419
57 Michael Clarke ‘How the MoD came to rewrite our foreign policy’ The Independent 8 July 1998
58 Paul Rogers at RUSI Seminar ‘The Outcome of the Strategic Defence Review’, 10 September 1998


-----

asset and defence exports as beneficial “not just to Britain’s economy but directly to the
MOD”.[59]

The confirmation of an expeditionary strategy is also open to debate. Britain has fought a
series of expeditionary and "withdrawal from empire" campaigns overseas since the end
of the Second World War. These engagements have generally been successful and have
resulted in very few casualties. In contrast, other states which have followed an
interventionist foreign policy have suffered heavy casualties and, on occasion, major
defeat. The USA lost over 100,000 men in Korea and Vietnam combined. France lost
similar numbers in Vietnam and Algeria. Whether it is under UN auspices or in concert
with the USA, the UK could be committing itself to future conflicts which could turn out
to be domestically divisive and costly, both in terms of expenditure and in lives.

The acceptance of a secondary role to the USA is also a matter of concern to some
analysts. Although there are good arguments for retaining a continued alliance with the
world’s strongest power, some see active UK military support to US expeditionary
operations as irrelevant and thus pointless. In almost every area the US armed forces
possess significantly more capability than those of Britain. Whether in the Gulf War or
the more recent Iraq crisis, the UK's significance to Washington has been more in
providing political than military support. Others worry that given the known US aversion
to incurring any military casualties abroad, British and perhaps French soldiers could
become the tool of US foreign policy:

Since the fear of ‘body bags’ is most keenly felt in Washington, the possibility
exists that the Americans will offer the Europeans logistic support, while
expecting Britain and France to provide most of the soldiers and casualties.[60]

Some analysts question whether such a close alliance with the USA is really in Britain’s
long-term interests.[61] As Lord Wallace, a Liberal Democrat spokesman, remarks,
“Following the Americans up and down the Gulf, grappling with the confusions and
domestic lobbies which shape American foreign policy, is scarcely a firm basis for British
strategy”.[62] This school of thought would see the future of UK defence and security
policy lying with the majority of its trade, in Europe. The dominance of the AngloAmerican relationship in defence could be seen as being at odds with a continuing
economic and possible further political convergence in Europe.

Those who fear the implications of being too closely linked to US military power are also
concerned at the relative absence of reference to even current military links with Britain’s

59 Essay Ten, Paras 28-30
60 Jonathan. Eyal “Defence on the cheap’, The Financial Times 9 July 1998
61 Michael Clarke ‘How the MoD cam to rewrite our foreign policy’ The Independent 8 July 1998
62 ‘Spent Force: Following the Americans up and down the Gulf scarcely justifies us spending billions on
new aircraft carriers’, The Guardian 9 July 1998


-----

European allies.[63] Although NATO’s survival and renewal in the post-Cold War era has
surprised many of its critics, it certainly cannot be regarded as immutable over the next
two decades, nor are significant developments in European security co-operation to be
ruled out. The SDR says little about the future development of the WEU as an equal
European pillar of the Atlantic Alliance, the European Security and Defence Identity, or
as the defence dimension of the European Union.[64] Although the UK under successive
governments has opposed the creation of independent European defence institutions,
which were not linked or subordinate to the Atlantic Alliance, one way in which it can
maximise its defence output is via bilateral defence co-operation with European allies.
One of the most productive initiatives in the last decade has been a new, mutual
enthusiasm for Franco-British defence co-operation, born, in part, out of a shared military
experience of peace-keeping in Bosnia. In another example, the Army has recently
signed a new co-operation agreement with the Dutch Army. The SDR says nothing about
such co-operation. Although European allies were informed about the SDR as it
progressed, it seems that no attempt was made to co-ordinate the proposed changes in the
British armed forces with them.[65] There is also no reference to NATO’s strategy review,
due to finish in 1999, which might, it could be argued, have important implications for the
role and structure of UK defence.

The Review, while reducing defence expenditure and forces, does not actually reduce the
UK’s defence commitments. Indeed, by making more forces potentially available to the
UN for peace support and humanitarian missions, it could be said to increase them.
Although there are some indications that deployments beyond the Gulf are not planned,
the UK is still committed under the Five Power Pact to “consult” along with Australia and
New Zealand with Malaysia and Singapore if the latter fell under threat. The armed
forces must assist the civil power in Northern Ireland, while maintaining a division in
central Germany as part of a NATO commitment, defend widely spread overseas
territories, and, potentially, come to the assistance of allies in the Middle East.

The SDR thus commits the UK to maintaining sophisticated and expensive armed forces
and engaging them in crises far from home. Although there may be diplomatic gains
from having armed forces which are capable and respected, it is still open to question why
Britain should spend more in GDP terms on defence than many of its competitors, when
home is acknowledged to be no longer under a direct threat.[66] _The Economist comments,_
“a truly radical review would have asked why Britain needed much defence at all, once
the threat to it had disappeared”.[67] Both Japan and Germany follow more low key
diplomatic and military policies in international affairs but have enjoyed economic
success in the post-war period. The SDR does recognise that, after the end of the Cold

63 _The Guardian 10 July 1998_
64 Essay Two, Para 12
65 Essay One, Para 25
66 In 1996, while the USA spent 3.7 per cent of its GDP on defence, France and Britain spent 3 per cent,
Italy 2 per cent, Germany 1.7 per cent and Canada 1.5 per cent (Cm 3781, Para 40).
67 The Economist 11 July 1998


-----

War, a policy of active internationalism is a matter of choice, “We could, of course, as a
country, choose to take a narrow view of our role and responsibilities which did not
require a significant military capability”, before dismissing this approach. Being “a force
for good” in the language of the Labour Government, or “punching above our weight” in
the words of its predecessor, runs a risk of perpetuating a delusion about Britain’s status
in the world and the real economic means it has to support it. As The Economist remarks,
“In real life, boxers who punch above their weight tend to get flattened …”.[68]

The implications of following an active internationalist policy in a reduced threat
environment remains to be seen. Ultimately, it may depend on public support. This point
is addressed by Freedman: 
The success of deterrence during the Cold War could be readily judged. If
nothing happened, the policy could be assumed to be working. The success of
the new policy will be far harder to judge. If nothing happens, it will soon be
argued that the Government is making provisions for which there is no call. A
similar view may be taken if contingencies regularly arise but prudence and
politics argue against intervention. The policy will also be questioned if
interventions turn out to be hazardous and ineffectual. A substantial military
establishment can be justified only if it is kept busy at low risk to good purpose. [69]

68 Ibid

69
Lawrence Freedman ‘Britannia returns to the waves’, The Times 7 July 1998


-----

## III Defence Missions and Tasks

### A. Policy

The SDR White Paper translates responses to the UK’s external challenges and
responsibilities into a number of missions and subordinate military tasks, which are
outlined in Supporting Essay Six.

Between 1992 and early 1997 UK strategy was configured around three defence roles:
one, the defence of the UK mainland and its dependent territories; two, insurance against a
major external threat to the UK and its allies (i.e NATO); and finally, the promotion of the
UK's wider security interests through the maintenance of international peace and stability
(UN peacekeeping, etc).[70] These three roles were then replaced by seven core missions:
security of the UK; security of the Dependent Territories; military assistance; support of
international order and humanitarian principles; regional conflict outside NATO; NATO
regional conflict; all-out War.[71] Apart from the addition of a new mission, Defence
Diplomacy, the SDR does not lead to great change. The new missions are as follows: 
_A: Peacetime Security: To provide forces needed in peacetime, to ensure the_
protection and security of the United Kingdom, to assist as required with the
evacuation of British nationals overseas, and to afford Military Aid to the Civil
Authorities in the United Kingdom, including Military Aid to the Civil Power,
Military Aid to Other Government Departments and Military Aid to the Civil
Community.

_B: Security of the Overseas Territories: To provide forces to meet any challenges_
to the external security of a British Overseas Territory (including overseas
possessions and the Sovereign Base Areas) or to assist the civil authorities in
meeting a challenge to internal security. (An amendment to legislation in due
course will formalise the change of title from "Dependent Territories" to
"Overseas Territories".)

_C: Defence Diplomacy:_ To provide forces to meet the varied activities
undertaken by the Ministry of Defence to dispel hostility, build and maintain
trust, and assist in the development of democratically accountable armed forces
(thereby making a significant contribution to conflict prevention and resolution).

_D: Support to Wider British Interests: To provide forces to conduct activities to_
promote British interests, influence and standing abroad.

70 _SDE 93, Para 103_
71 _British Defence Doctrine, February 1997_


-----

_E: Peace Support and Humanitarian Operations: To contribute forces to_
operations other than war in support of British interests and international order
and humanitarian principles, the latter most likely under UN auspices.

_F: Regional Conflict Outside the NATO Area: To contribute forces for a regional_
conflict (but not an attack on NATO or one of its members) which, if unchecked,
could adversely affect European security, or which could pose a serious threat to
British interests elsewhere, or to international security. Operations are usually
under the auspices of the UN or the Organisation for Security Co-operation in
Europe.

_G: Regional Conflict Inside the NATO Area: To provide forces needed to respond_
to a regional crisis or conflict involving a NATO ally who calls for assistance
under Article 5 of the Washington Treaty.

_H: Strategic Attack on NATO: To provide, within the expected warning and_
readiness preparation times, the forces required to counter a strategic attack
against NATO.[72]

Outlined in a separate Supporting Essay Four, Defence Diplomacy will include the work
of the MOD and armed forces in arms control, non-proliferation and confidence and
security building, including the restoration of a British aircraft to help to enforce the Open
Skies Agreement. It will include an expanded ‘Outreach’, the programme which aims to
promote security and stability in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union,
particularly in Russia, by encouraging efficient, democratically-accountable armed forces
and promoting their integration with and understanding of NATO forces. This is
accomplished through activities such as unit and ship visits, defence consulting, loan
personnel, joint training, and educational courses. Similar activities will take place in
non-Outreach countries. New Defence Diplomacy Scholarships will be established for
foreign officers and officials at the Joint Service Command and Staff College. Following
a review of requirements, the number of British defence attachés abroad will be increased
and they will be given new importance and training as "ambassadors of defence
diplomacy".

In Essay Six, the military tasks identified within the missions of the armed forces are
maintained but refined and rationalised from 50 to 28. As before, the force planning
assumptions for each Military Task are shown. The most important change here is that
Britain “will no longer maintain forces to meet a strategic attack on NATO”.[73] Other
thinking behind the levels of forces allocated to each Military Task is revealed. Firstly,
the MOD considered the scales of effort required over and above that needed to meet dayto-day commitments. These are defined as: small scale (requiring the allocations of a
battalion, squadron, ship as in the No-Fly Zones over Iraq, the Armilla Patrol in the Gulf
and UNFICYP in Cyprus); medium scale (needing a brigade, as in Bosnia); large scale,

72 Ibid, Annex A
73 Essay Six, Para 4


-----

which would be the largest contribution to peace enforcement or regional conflict outside
NATO (at divisional level as during the Gulf War); very large scale and full scale (a
contribution of all available forces to NATO to defend an ally, with the distinction being
differing lengths of warning times, ranging from at least months to years). Planning for
these force commitments was then influenced by other factors: the levels of _readiness_
required for units; the _endurance of the total force structure, shaped by length of_
deployments and the possible need for unit rotation. Once all these factors were
examined, the MOD decided that the shape of the armed forces should be guided by a
requirement to plan for: either two concurrent small-scale operations, one six-monthslong warfighting operation and another enduring non-warfighting operation; or, a single
full scale operation, utilising the bulk of the UK’s armed forces.

Force planning is also governed by a number of conclusions about the nature of warfare.
Firstly, the new importance of force projection. During the Cold War, the UK faced the
prospect of fighting a brief but highly intense conflict close to home from well-stocked
home bases. With the risk of a strategic attack on NATO now remote, UK forces will
now need to be deployed to a (distant) operation, which they will possibly need to
undertake without a local military infrastructure, for an indefinite period of time.
Secondly, with the exception of national commitments, future operations “will almost
always be multinational”.[74] The UK will work in the UN, NATO or WEU context or with
other states in "coalitions of the willing" and “this means that we do not need to hold
sufficient national capabilities for every eventuality”. The analysis rejects any distinction
between high and low intensity warfare. Recent experience in Bosnia has shown that
troops trained for conventional war and their heavy armour, such as tanks, can
successfully be turned to peacekeeping. “We therefore need a balanced and coherent
spectrum of capabilities, which collectively provide a range of deployment options”.[75]

The Essay identifies certain trends in military capabilities. Of increasing importance are
command, control and communications; ISTAR (Intelligence, Surveillance, Target
Acquisition and Reconnaissance); rapid deployment, and therefore transport (lift);
sustainability, and therefore combat support (logistics, equipment and medical services);
the need to protect forces against the chemical and biological weapons they may
encounter in certain theatres of operations; the utility of Special Forces and of air
manoeuvre forces in high intensity conflict. Of relatively declining importance are some
required for the direct defence of the UK and blue water naval operations. This analysis
also informs changes to the force structure, which are set out below.

74 Essay Six, Para 13
75 Ibid, Six, Para 14


-----

### B. Assessment

The military missions and military tasks identified with them represent continuity rather
than change. The military missions were last redefined in 1997 and no major alteration,
apart from the definition of defence diplomacy, has been made. The only exception is
that the UK will no longer maintain forces to meet a strategic attack on NATO. This
statement is important since it, in a sense, reverses a half century of UK defence planning.
From the onset of the Cold War and increasingly thereafter, the UK’s defence effort was
dedicated to NATO. Forces to meet contingencies outside western Europe were to be
drawn from those allocated to NATO. This assumption is now reversed. No longer is the
force structure primarily defined by the contribution to NATO, but, rather by the need to
launch expeditionary operations. It is therefore missions which UK forces are likely to
perform which determine the force structure, rather than commitments.

On the one hand, the SDR states that such missions are likely to be multinational but on
the other, it decides not only to maintain a purely national capability to deploy and
operate overseas, but also to enhance it. This may preserve a degree of UK independence
of action and also increase leverage with the USA, by retaining the ability to deploy fully
coherent national force packages, but it could also be seen as wasteful. The SDR
implicitly rejects role prioritisation, the idea that allies should specialise in specific
defence functions either within NATO or in preparation of rapid deployment operations.
If operations overseas are to be multinational, then, it could be argued, the UK could enter
into binding agreements with other European states to supply force components, along the
lines of similar agreements in defence supply being considered (see below). As one
academic study comments:

Since the UK’s slimmed down forces will only be able to contribute to even these
smaller operations as part of a multinational effort, it is especially regrettable that
the SDR has so little to say about this multinational context and how Britain’s
input can be co-ordinated more closely with that of other nations.[76]

There is the risk here of ‘role prioritisation’ by default with certain European states
shedding capabilities and making unchecked assumptions about the types of forces which
may be made available by their allies.

As it stands, the SDR is absolutely clear as to which forces are required for which
mission. It has been argued that this could place the Government and the MOD in a
politically precarious position in the future if force cuts were being considered. The 'twocampaign' strategy may also prove a liability. The new force structure may create the
impression in the international community that the UK will contribute to military
intervention missions come what may. If the UK were involved in one major

76 _The Strategic Defence Review: How Strategic? How much of a Review?, London Defence Studies, July_
_1998_


-----

peacekeeping operation, it would be difficult to reply to the UN or the USA that forces
were insufficient to provide for another, whatever its circumstances.[77]

Defence Diplomacy, although it has been given much publicity, is as the MOD admits,
“not a new idea”.[78] UK servicemen have been engaged in training foreign forces for
many years. In the 1981 Defence Review, the MOD envisaged the projection of British
interests overseas by politico-military activity based on “military assistance, advice,
training, loan of personnel, and provision of equipment to friendly countries whose
security benefits from our help”.[79] The Defence Diplomacy initiative does, however, give
a greater intellectual coherence to a number of previously unlinked activities and fits in
with the new preventative onus on security policy. Still, in this new guise it could be
regarded as insufficiently ambitious. Given that the greatest indirect threats to British
security have been identified as coming from the (southern) Mediterranean, Near and
Middle East, perhaps a greater emphasis could have been placed on defence diplomacy
activities in these regions, rather than in eastern Europe and the Commonwealth.

77 M. Codner “The Strategic Defence Review: How Much? How Far? How Joint is Enough? _RUSI_
_Journal, August 1998_
78 Speech by George Robertson to the European Atlantic Group on “NATO, its Partners and Defence
Diplomacy” 29 October 1997 and Essay Four, Para 1.
79 1981 White Paper, p. 11, Para 33


-----

## IV Joint Operations

### A. Policy

A key element of the SDR is the establishment of structures to support one, and if need
be, two new Joint Rapid Reaction Forces (JRRFs), which will carry out the new
expeditionary strategy. This is part of a wider Joint Vision intended to maximise the cost
and operational effectiveness of the armed forces through inter-service co-operation or
pooling in what is expected to be a three-dimensional battlespace.[80]

The JRRFs will be available from a pool of Service assets. For the Army, this will
include four high readiness brigades: the 3[rd] Commando Brigade; a new Air manoeuvre
Brigade; and two ‘ready’ brigades, one each from the 1[st] Armoured and 3[rd] Mechanised
Divisions. The Navy will supply around 20 major warships, including carriers, attack
submarines, destroyers, and 22 minor/support vessels. The RAF will commit around 110
combat aircraft and 160 other support aircraft. Special Forces will also be available.
There will be a dedicated JRRF HQ, together with the nucleus of another. Both will be
backed up by medical and logistical chains, under Joint Force Logistics Component HQs.
As a result, the Forces will be able to support two concurrent operations, each including
up to 15,000 tri-service personnel. Deficiencies have been identified in supporting JRRFs
overseas. These will be remedied by the acquisition of new strategic air and sea lift and
through extra spending on the defence medical services, both in front-line units and in the
Defence Secondary Care Agency. These enhancements are shown under individual
Service headings below.

Responsibility for command and the organisation of the JRRFs, due to be operational in
2001, falls to the existing three-star Chief of Joint Operations (CJO) at the Permanent
Joint HQ, Northwood. This post will be given more responsibility and accordingly raised
to four-star level and become a Top Level Budget Holder (TLB), on a similar budgetary
level as the single-Service commanders. (Within the MOD, the Vice Chief of the
Defence Staff (VCDS) and 2nd Permanent Under Secretary (PUS) Top Level Budgets
(TLBs) will be merged into a single centre TLB.) The CJO will be supported in this role
by a new two-star Chief of Joint Force Operations and Training. The planning and
conduct of joint operations will be influenced by a new Joint Defence Centre which will
work on tri-service doctrine.

In keeping with the new emphasis on "jointery", a number of joint forces are to be
created. RAF Harriers GR7, dedicated to ground attack, and RN Sea Harriers FA2,
optimised for air defence, were embarked together on RN carriers during the recent Iraq
crisis, providing a combined and more powerful air wing. Both RN and RAF Harrier
forces will now be brought together under a Joint Force 2000, which will harmonise

80 See Joint Vision Statement, Essay Eight, Para 1


-----

operational practice and orchestrate joint RN/RAF Harrier forces able to operate from
both land and sea. In the longer term, such co-operation will be taken a step further with
the acquisition of a Future Carrier Borne Aircraft, common to both services. Separately,
all Service battlefield helicopters, that is including Navy commando helicopters, Army
attack helicopters and RAF support helicopters, but excluding those used for antisubmarine warfare, search and rescue and airborne early warning, will be brought
together in a Joint Helicopter Command, under a 2-star officer. In addition, a Joint
Ground Based Air Defence organisation will be set up by 2002, pooling Army and RAF
Rapier surface to air missile units around a common Rapier standard C system.[81] A
further joint command will be established in Nuclear, Chemical and Biological Defence
Regiment, formed from both Army and RAF personnel. This will take over a role
currently performed by the TA. In all cases, the intention is to promote best practice,
enchance operational effectiveness and make economies in support costs.

The joint approach extends not only to joint force logistics abroad, but also to the
logistical base at home. Here, the main initiative will involve bringing the three single
Service logistical organisations (CinC Fleet Support, the Quartermaster General and RAF
Logistics Command) under a new four-star Chief of Defence Logistics in April 1999,
with a view to their later merger into a single organisation. The aim is again to spread
best practice and make efficiency gains. A number of changes will be made to support
organisations. In some areas these will merge on a greater tri-service basis, in others a
single Service will take the lead in providing a particular function. Thus, there will be a
single Defence Transport and Movements Organisation, pooling the work of the Defence
Transport and Movements Executive, the Air Movements Executive and the Joint
Transport and Movements organisation; and a Defence Storage and Distribution Agency
responsible for all third and fourth line storage. Both should be established by April
1999. Responsibility for explosive storage, processing and distribution, currently divided
between the Army and RN, will pass to the Naval Base Support Agency. A fully unified
explosive distribution and storage organisation is envisaged by 2004/5. The RAF will
take lead responsibility for fuel and lubricants. A tri-service Defence Aviation Repair
Agency will be established, responsible for both helicopters and fixed wing aircraft and
will become a trading fund.[82] This consolidation will result in a number of future base
closures. In the short-term, storage depots at Rosyth and Colerne will close earlier than
previously planned.[83]

81 Factsheet 4
82 Essay Eleven, Para 38-47
83 Factsheet 30


-----

### B. Assessment

As the Review admits, the development of the concept of "jointery" is based on
inheritance. A Joint Rapid Deployment Force, albeit weaker than the JRRFs now
planned, was formed in 1996, as was a Permanent Joint Headquarters to plan and execute
all overseas operations. It was the Defence Costs Study of 1994 which first pushed ahead
the concept of tri-service defence organisations in the support and training field, leading
to, for example, the Joint Service Command and Staff College. Although evolutionary in
advancing jointery, the SDR does attempt to give some greater direction to the process,
via the Joint Vision Statement, and greater operational robustness to rapid deployment,
though the establishment of JRRFs.

The SDR could still be accused of some timidity in this respect by not taking jointery
further. Few would advocate a total unification of the armed forces, as occurred in
Canada thirty years ago with rather mixed results. However, more could perhaps have
been done. Whilst merging the three separate logistical commands, the SDR might also
have formed a comparable single personnel and training command. Similarly, the single
Service chiefs have become much more like Service administrators, lending their forces
to the PJFHQ for overseas missions. Why not scrap this role and place all combat forces
under the Chief of Joint Operations? Ultimately, the single-Service Boards and their
related staffs could be abolished and the single-Service chiefs could be turned into
inspector generals and figureheads of their own Services, with all other functions done on
a tri-service basis.[84]

On the other hand, jointery should not be regarded as a panacea. There may be justifiable
reasons why certain operational functions should remain on a single-Service basis. A
major impetus for jointery is that it is expected to produce cost savings. Although this
may prove true in most cases in the long-term, in the short-term joint organisations, such
as the Chief of Defence Logistics, may be costly to set up.

In the operational context, jointery may also take some time to implement. For example,
the merger of the two Harrier forces, from two different traditions, into the Joint Force
2000 will require lengthy and complex implementation and, as a result, any financial or
operational gains arising may take many years to appear. One commentator writes:

… the Joint Force 2000 initiative will take years to implement and bed down, and
fundamental operational and training issues have not even begun to be addressed.
It remains to be determined, for instance, whether aircrew will be cross-trained
from air-to-air and air-to-surface operations.

84 Michael Codner, ‘The Strategic Defence Review: How Much? How Far? How Joint is Enough?’, RUSI
_Journal, August 1998_


-----

In terms of timescale, some senior RAF officers believe that it will take at least a
decade to implement the Joint Force 2000 concept of operations.[85]

It could be argued that the MOD could have avoided some of these problems by unifying
certain functions on a single service basis. Thus, rather than see the Royal Artillery and
RAF painfully thrash out joint practice in air defence in their new Joint Force, simply
transfer the RA air defence regiments into the RAF Regiment or the RAF air defence
squadrons into the Army. Notwithstanding, the trend towards jointery, coupled with the
development of common approaches to personnel issues, may lay the foundations for an
eventual merger of the armed forces sometime in the next century should future
governments wish to pursue this option.

85 D. Barrie, ‘Rhetoric or reality: the UK’s Labour Government has delivered its magum opus on its armed
forces’, Flight International, 15 July 1998


-----

## V Nuclear Forces and Arms Control

### A. Policy

As declared in the Labour election manifesto and confirmed at the start of the Review, the
SDR affirms the Government’s commitment to maintaining a nuclear deterrent but makes
a number of changes to it.

In Essay Five, the Government declares that:

The world would be a better place if such weapons were not still necessary, but
the conditions for complete nuclear disarmament do not yet exist.

Progress has been made through the START process in reducing Russian and
United States strategic range nuclear forces and deployed warheads.
Nonetheless, very large numbers of strategic and shorter range nuclear weapons,
and substantial conventional military capabilities, remain as a potent potential
threat to the security of Britain and our Allies should current circumstances
change for the worse. We and NATO have radically reduced our reliance on
nuclear weapons, but in present conditions nuclear deterrence still has an
important contribution to make in insuring against the re-emergence of major
strategic military threats, in preventing coercion, and in preserving peace and
stability in Europe.

The Government’s General Election Manifesto therefore promised to retain
Trident as the ultimate guarantee of the United Kingdom’s security while
pressing for multilateral negotiations towards mutual, balanced and verifiable
reductions in nuclear weapons. When we are satisfied with progress towards our
goal of global elimination of nuclear weapons, we will ensure that British nuclear
weapons are included in the negotiations.[86]

In the meantime, improvements in the strategic landscape mean that it is possible to make
changes in the manner in which the deterrent is exercised. The British warhead stockpile
is to be cut from the ceiling of up to 300 warheads maintained by the previous
government to less than 200 operationally available warheads.[87] With earlier reductions
under Conservative administrations, the potential explosive power of the deterrent will
have fallen by more than 70 per cent since the end of the Cold War. “This is the
minimum necessary to provide for our security for the foreseeable future and smaller than
those of the major nuclear powers”.[88]

86 Essay Five, Paras 3 -5
87 Cm 3999, Para 64
88 Ibid, Para 70


-----

The patrol cycle of the Trident submarines has also been relaxed with normally only one
submarine on patrol at any one time. Each submarine will have one instead of the current
two crews and will carry out secondary tasks while on patrol, such as exercises, “without
compromising their security”.[89] As with pre-Chevaline Polaris, each submarine will now
only carry a maximum of 48 warheads, rather than the ceiling of up to 96 under the
Conservatives.[90] The Government claims that the explosive power of a Trident submarine
will now be less than one third of that of the previous Polaris Chevaline submarine.[91] The
Trident submarine's alert status will also be reduced. Missiles have not been targeted for
some years but, in addition, henceforth submarines will normally be at several days’
notice to fire them. A requirement for an additional seven Trident missile bodies has
been cancelled, leaving a new total of 58.[92]

The SDR did consider more radical measures such as taking the Vanguard submarines off
patrol altogether and also separating warheads from the missiles. However, it felt that
both measures could lead to a crisis of escalation if they were required to be reversed
during a period of rising tensions and could, as a result, undermine the deterrence effect
of the weapons system.[93] Although the Government intends to retain a capability to
design and produce nuclear warheads, “There are no current plans for any replacement for
Trident, and no decision on any possible successor system would be needed for several
years”.[94] Fresh information is given on the costs of the nuclear deterrent. The total cost
of Trident is estimated to be about £12.5bn and the running costs of Trident submarines
are put at £280m per annum over the next 30 years. The nuclear warhead programme
will cost £410m in 1997/98, of which £114m is directly related to Trident.[95]

On nuclear arms control, while hoping for progress in the START negotiations, the SDR
catalogues a number of British initiatives. The UK is committed to its obligations under
the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and was one of the first states to ratify the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). The UK continues to pressure other
countries to do so. It encourages India and Pakistan, states which have both recently
tested atomic bombs, to sign the CTBT and NPT. Britain is also committed to the
negotiation of a Fissile Material Cut-Off Convention, i.e. that no more bomb-making
nuclear material should be manufactured. To support this aim, the White Paper reveals a
decision to make a minor cut in the UK’s stock of fissile material as well as other
measures to reduce the use and increase the transparency of this stockpile; the UK claims
to be the first nuclear weapons state to declare the size of its stocks of nuclear materials.
These total 7.6 tonnes of plutonium, 21.9 tonnes of highly enriched uranium (HEU) and

89 Essay Five, Para 12
90 Cm 3999, Paras 66-67
91 Chevaline was a secret project begun by the Callaghan Government to upgrade Polaris. One effect was
to reduce the number of warheads on each upgraded submarine from the previous 48 to 36.
92 Cm 3999, Para 68
93 Essay Five, Para 13
94 Ibid, Para 14
95 Ibid, Para 18-19


-----

15,000 tonnes of other uranium.[96] Nine thousand tonnes of non-HEU will be placed
under international safeguards alongside 4.4 tonnes of plutonium (including 0.3 tonnes of
weapons grade material). All planned future reprocessing and enrichment will also take
place under international safeguards, but the UK retains the right to resume activities if
necessary. It aims to publish a report on past fissile production in 2000.[97] The
Government will also develop a new capability to verify reduction and elimination of
nuclear weapons. Separately, it supports the various nuclear weapons free zones around
the world “where conditions are right”.[98]

The SDR details UK support for the implementation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the strengthening of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention and the
operation of various international export control regimes. It assesses that 20 states either
possess or show an interest in developing offensive chemical/or biological capabilities.
These capabilities pose a threat to UK forces deployed overseas and hence steps are
described elsewhere in the White Paper to strengthen Army/RAF NBC defence. The
SDR states that:

At present, any risk to Britain from the ballistic missiles of nations of concern in
terms of proliferation is many years off, but the risk to some of our NATO allies
is less distant; and British forces must be able to operate in regions, such as the
Gulf, where they might face these risks.[99]

The Government has decided not to develop a national ballistic defence capability, partly
as technology in this field is changing rapidly. However, the government will monitor
developments and consult with allies, particularly within NATO.[100]

Essay Five details other areas of work in conventional arms control. These include
negotiations to ensure the continued relevance of the CFE Treaty, which since 1991 has
limited heavy weapons in NATO and the former Warsaw Pact, and of the Vienna
Document on confidence-building measures in the OSCE. An RAF Andover will be reroled for use in inspection flights under the Open Skies Treaty, restoring a previously
deleted capability.

### B. Assessment

The changes announced to Trident in the SDR are minor rather than fundamental. On the
operational side, the use of single crewing and the practice of having one submarine on
patrol at any one time has reduced Trident to a minimum _active nuclear deterrent._

96 Cm 3999, Para 72
97 Essay Five, Para 26-28
98 Ibid, Para 32
99 Ibid, Para 40
100 Ibid, Para 45


-----

However, on close analysis, the reduction in warhead numbers may represent an act of
frankness rather than a real cut. Under the Conservative Government, Britain was to have
maintained up to 300 warheads but, according to SIPRI, it actually possessed around 260,
including at least a ten per cent margin for spares and maintenance, that is about enough
for three boatloads (48 missiles), each with five warheads. This requirement was due to
fall with the introduction of a small number of single warhead missiles, to be used in the
sub-strategic role.[101] The figure of “less than 200 operationally available warheads” must
be seen in this light.

The SDR states that “There are no current plans for any replacement for Trident, and no
decision on any possible successor system would be needed for several years”.[102]

However, this should be considered within the twenty-year purview of the Review. It
took 15 years from the firm decision to procure Trident (1980) to the operational
deployment of the first Trident submarine (1995). If the pre-procurement studies are
taken into account, then the procurement span was almost 20 years. On this basis,
preliminary decisions about a possible follow-on to Trident might need to be taken
between 2000 and 2005.

The SDR might be criticised by those in favour of more rapid progress towards nuclear
disarmament. The Government states that it is “unequivocally committed to Britain’s
obligations under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty”.[103] Under Article VI of the NPT,
the nuclear weapons states, that is the Permanent Five members of the UN Security
Council, are "to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation
of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament". Notwithstanding
other arms control initiatives, the UK Government position to wait for progress in
bilateral reduction negotiations between Russia and USA could be viewed as being rather
passive. In addition, its decision not to end nuclear patrols and store nuclear warheads
separately from missile bodies would also be seen by some as overly cautious. At a time
when there is concern about the physical security of Russian nuclear weapons, it might be
appropriate for the UK to promote an international agreement to store warheads
separately from missile bodies.

CND has expressed doubts about the Government figure for Trident running costs, some
£280m per annum. It points out that this figure ignores the costs of decommissioning the
Trident submarines and claims that 70 per cent of the operating costs of the Faslane and
Coulport nuclear bases have been excluded (some £170m). It also suggests that other
related expenditure, such as the ships, submarines and aircraft required to protect Trident
submarines on the departure and return from patrol, and the costs of the physical security
of nuclear bases should also be added (some £50m). Coupled with the £114m for
1997/98 which the MOD states is attributable to Trident costs, CND maintains that

101 _SIPRI Yearbook 1998, pp. 439-440_
102 Essay Five, Para 14
103 Ibid, Para 22


-----

Trident operating costs are in fact in excess of £500m per annum. CND also holds that,
due to insufficient clarity in the defence votes, the true costs of the nuclear weapons
programme is not £410m but in excess of £1bn.[104] The USA became the first nuclear
weapons state to reveal full details of its stocks of plutonium, and their location, in
1996.[105]

Perhaps the most trenchant criticism of the UK’s nuclear weapons policy is the lack of
clarity about the role of the sub-strategic nuclear deterrent. Given that this is the most
likely, although still remote, contingency for Trident use, there is no text in the SDR on
sub-strategic doctrine. If Trident is intended to have a deterrent role against the use of,
for example, chemical weapons by ‘rogue’ states, then some explanation of the thinking
might be expected.

The Government’s position on the threat from ballistic missile development overseas
could also be regarded as unduly complacent. In 1997, the US Congress established a
Commission to Assess the Ballistic Missile Threat, known as the Rumsfeld Commission.
This is a bi-partisan expert body tasked with examining the US administration’s claim
that the continental USA faced no threat of missile attack from states newly acquiring this
capability before 2010. The Commission reported that the long-range ballistic missile
threat to the USA is “broader, more mature and evolving more rapidly than has been
reported in estimates and reports by the intelligence community”. The report did not rule
out the development of long-range missiles by Iran, North Korea and Iraq within the next
decade.[106] Whatever the nature of the Government’s risk assessment, an influence on
decision-making is likely to have been the huge cost of any ballistic missile defence
system. On the one hand, the UK appears to look to US capabilities for the current
defence of UK forces from ballistic missile attack in certain expeditionary operations, i.e.
an act of role prioritisation, and, on the other, looks to possible future multilateral NATO
solutions to European defence. However, the principle of role prioritisation and multilateralism of defence capabilities is implicitly rejected elsewhere in the SDR.

104 CND, Lies and Damn Lies Within the Strategic Defence Review, August 1998 CND states that, when
related expenditure such as on the development of Trident reactor, construction at AWE, Faslane and
Coulport, and work on the Trident warhead are included, the capital costs of Trident are in excess of
£20bn, rather than the £12,520million stated by the Government.
105 ‘US Plutonium Inventory is nearly 100 Metric Tons’, The Washington Post, 7 February 1996
106 _Armed Forces Journal International, August 1998_


-----

## VI Conventional Forces

### A. The Royal Navy

**New Structure**

In line with the greater emphasis on rapid deployment, the Royal Navy will change its
bias from open-ocean warfare, as formally envisaged in the North Atlantic, to force
protection and near coast (littoral) operations. Shallow water operations in UK waters
will also be given less importance.

The centrepiece of the new strategy of force projection is the planned acquisition of two
large, 40,000 ton aircraft carriers, with a complement of up to 50 aircraft and helicopters
each. The first will have an in-service date of 2012. The fixed-wing component could be
provided by the Joint Strike Fighter but the MOD is also studying a marinised Eurofighter
2000, an upgraded Sea Harrier and other existing US and French naval jets for its Future
Carrier Borne Aircraft requirement.[107] The two new carriers will replace the three
existing Invincible class light carriers, which will be retained in the meantime. The latter,
of 20,000 tons, only deploy a maximum of 24 aircraft and helicopters and were originally
designed for anti-submarine warfare operations rather than force projection.

Deployment capabilities will be improved by the acquisition, possibly as part of a PrivatePublic Partnership, of four additional 'roll-on roll-off' container ships to add to the
existing two (Sea Chieftain and _Sea Crusader). The 3[rd] Commando Brigade will be_
retained in its present form. Modernisation of the amphibious squadron will continue
with the recent addition of a helicopter carrier (HMS Ocean) and the construction of two
replacement Landing Platforms Dock (HMS Albion and HMS Bulwark). A tender will be
invited for two replacement Landing Ships Logistic(LSL); refurbishment of two older
LSLs has proved more expensive and time-consuming than originally intended.[108] As
planned, the Royal Fleet Auxiliary will also acquire 2 Auxiliary Oilers. A 200-bed
hospital ship will be procured with provision made for a second.

Due to the reduced threat in UK waters and new flexibility in certain deployments, the
size of the destroyer/frigate force will be cut from 35 ships to 32. This will be achieved
over the next three years by paying-off five Type 22 frigates (HMS Boxer, _Beaver and_
_London_ in 1999, _HMS Brave_ in 2000 and _HMS Coventry in 2001) and, as previously_
intended, one Type 42 destroyer (HMS Birmingham in 1999) and bringing three Type 23
frigates into service over the same period.[109] There will be no further order for Merlin
ASW helicopters; the RN will only procure 44. In order to fill the gap left by an earlier

107 ‘UK studies Eurofighter for future carrier’, Jane’s Defence Weekly 22 July 1998
108 See R. Scott, ‘RN abandons plans to prolong LSL vessels’, Jane’s Defence Contracts, December 1997
109 HC Deb 8 July 1998 c 1096


-----

expected order for 24 Merlins, 10 Lynxs will be upgraded from Mk 3 to Mk 8 standard.[110]

The MOD remains committed to the Horizon anti-air frigate as a replacement for the
Type 42. A Future Escort is planned to replace the Type 22 and 23s.[111]

The attack submarine fleet will be cut from 12 to 10 with the paying off of HMS Splendid
in 2003, when it is due for refit, and HMS Spartan in 2006, after a refit in 1999.[112] All
remaining attack submarines will be fitted with (conventionally-armed) Tomahawk cruise
missiles, rather than only seven as originally planned. Despite the cut in the fleet size,
two further Astute class submarines will be ordered after 2000 to join the three already on
order, which will start to enter service in 2005.

Due to a reduced mine threat in home waters, the Mine Counter Measures Vessel
(MCMV) fleet will increase from a current 19 to only 22 ships, rather than 25 as
previously intended. This will be achieved by continuing to commission Sandown
MCMVs while paying off three Hunt class ships after 2000.[113] Although the often
reviewed Fishery Protection Squadron will remain in being, the decision of the Scottish
Fishery Protection Agency that it no longer requires a dedicated RN ship means that HMS
_Orkney will pay off in 1999.[114] Overall, personnel freed from reductions in the fleet will_
be used to fill gaps elsewhere. However, the net effect of the force changes will be a cut
of 1,400 posts.

**Assessment**

The decision to acquire two large carriers has a certain irony, in that it was an earlier
Labour government which decided to scrap plans for a new generation of large fixedwing carriers in 1966. The new ships will also be expensive, costing perhaps £2bn not
including aircraft, and it remains to be seen whether the MOD will be able to afford them,
even if, as with _HMS Ocean, commercial rather than military specifications are used._
Given that the first is not intended to enter service until 2012, it stands outside the MOD’s
current long-term costings. Indeed, a future government could well review this decision
on economic grounds. It is also open to question whether Britain should place so many of
its financial and weaponry eggs in one carrier basket, which may be vulnerable to attack
from mines, missiles and aircraft. Still, the reluctance of all the Gulf States but Kuwait to
sanction the use of their airfields for potential air strikes on Iraq earlier this year, severely
hampered the organisation of a projected air campaign. In international waters, aircraft
carriers offer independence and mobility as command and force platforms. However, it is
notable that the MOD has only decided to plan for two carriers. Although this may be all
that Britain can afford, the provision of two ships will mean that when one is in refit and

110 D. Barrie, ‘Rhetoric or reality: the UK’s Labour Government has delivered its magum opus on its armed
forces’, Flight International, 15 July 1998
111 HC Deb 21 July 98 c 478w
112 Ibid
113 Factsheet 28
114 Factsheet 29


-----

another undergoing a period of regular maintenance, none will be available. In these
circumstances, a naval task force would lack its most potent element or, more likely, opt
to deploy HMS Ocean in a task for which it has not been designed.

Within a fixed Naval budget, as with the other services, new capabilities have been
bought with cuts elsewhere. In the RN these fall primarily on the submarine and
destroyer/frigates fleets. The decision to continue with the £150m refit of HMS Spartan
at the Rosyth dockyard, for only an additional four years of service life has been the
subject of criticism by the Opposition.[115] NATO, overseas, training and other
destroyer/frigate commitments have not been changed. The cuts in the destroyer/frigate
force are partly gained by altering the manner in which some of these commitments are
discharged. With new ‘flexibility’ the Falklands and Caribbean guardships and Armilla
patrol are maintained, but, in the former two cases, 12-month cover will no longer be
instantly available, and for the latter a reduction from two ships to one.[116] It remains to be
seen whether these changes are entirely consistent with the UK’s ostensible commitments
to the defence of its Overseas Territories and its reaffirmed defence interest in the Gulf.
Moreover, the paying off early of a number of frigates is not reversible. Rather than
perhaps being placed in reserve for future eventualities, as for example, certain ships are
in the US Navy, these frigates will be sold abroad. A reduction of the national antisubmarine warfare capability must also be balanced against the proliferation of submarine
technology, particularly in the Middle and Far East. Forty countries now operate dieselelectric submarines. Iran, for example, has acquired such submarines from Russia.[117]

And given the commitment to rapid deployment, it seems odd that there is no mention of
a replacement for the Sea King helicopters in either their commando or early warning
role.

### B. The Army

**New Structure**

The SDR reorganises the Army’s existing structure in order to conform with the policy of
retaining forces capable of engaging in conventional warfare but making them more
deployable and more mobile. The basic structure of two combat divisions is retained but
significant changes are made to the brigade structure. The current force of five heavy
brigades (three armoured and two mechanised) and three light brigades (one airborne, one
airmobile and one attached RM Commando) will be altered by converting the 5[th]

Airborne Brigade into a third mechanised brigade (the 12th Brigade). This is because
“we do not see a need for parachute operations at bigger than battalion level”.[118] The new

115 See HC Deb 20 July 1998 c 771w
116 HC 138, Para 227
117 D. Foxwell,' Sub proliferation sends navies diving for cover: the multiple menace of diesel electric
submarines', International Defense Review, August 1997
118 Cm 3999, Para 112


-----

brigade will also help with overstretch and form part of an innovative readiness cycle.
Each Brigade will “spend a year training, followed by a year at high readiness as part of
the Joint Rapid Reaction Forces pool, followed by a year either preparing for, deployed
on (for six months) or recovering from peace support operations such as Bosnia”. The
plan is to make available: an armoured or mechanised brigade at high readiness for JRRF
operations; two brigades annually to meet an indefinite one brigade peacekeeping
commitment; a division of up to three brigades with a choice of capabilities at varying
states of readiness for warfighting; and an armoured and a mechanised brigade able to
train coherently; and, in parallel, retain Britain’s contribution to NATO.[119] A key element
of the JRRF will be the 24 Airmobile Brigade, incorporating two battalions of the
Parachute Regiment and the new attack helicopters as a new air manoeuvre force under
the Joint Helicopter Command (see below).

Although no cuts will be made to the number of armoured and infantry formations, there
will be some changes in their role to fit the new brigade structure. Only six heavy
armoured regiments will be retained with the remaining two being re-roled as a fourth
armoured reconnaissance regiment and an NBC regiment. Of the 40 infantry battalions, 9
instead of 8 will be armoured infantry (with Warrior) and 6 instead of 4 mechanised (with
Saxon), leaving 22 rather than 25 in the light infantry role. In the Parachute Regiment
only one battalion, instead of the current two, will be prepared for airborne operations.
Provision for airborne support elements will presumably be made from within 24
Brigade.

386 Challenger II main battle tanks will still be procured but will be organised in a
manner aimed at maximising efficiency and at prolonging their longevity. The six
remaining armoured regiments will each gain an additional squadron, expanding from 38
tanks and 470 personnel to 58 tanks and 600 personnel. They will only utilise 30 tanks
each for training purposes, with the remaining being in maintenance or reserve for rapid
deployment. Similar ‘whole fleet management’ of the Warrior and Saxon fleets will
allow extra equipment to be released for the new armoured infantry and mechanised
battalions. The MOD will collaborate with the US government to develop a new
reconnaissance vehicle in the TRACER/Future Scout and Cavalry System programme
and with France and Germany to develop a Multi-Role Armoured Vehicle (MRAV).

Plans to acquire Medium Range Trigat and a Next Light Anti-Armour Weapon are
retained but orders will be reduced to reflect the Army’s new structure and readiness
patterns.

In combat support, the Royal Artillery will retain its 15 regiments, but one will convert
from l05mm light guns to the AS90 self-propelled gun. Programmes for new precision
munitions for the AS90 and Multi-Launch Rocket System and a light gun replacement
will continue. The Royal Engineers will expand with an increase from five to six close

119 Factsheet 31


-----

support regiments, the establishment of a full regiment to support the air manoeuvre force
and two new engineering squadrons to back RAF overseas deployments. Two new
signals squadrons will also be formed for this purpose.

Extensive enhancements are made to combat service support units centred around the
formation of two logistical supply chains capable of sustaining two concurrent medium
scale deployments and reinforcing the support elements of the six heavy brigades. This
will involve the establishment of 2,000 additional posts chiefly in the Royal Logistics
Corps, Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers, Royal Engineers and Royal Signals.
A new field ambulance regiment will also be formed. Four field hospitals will be given
higher readiness. In the only reduction in this area the Army's Landing Craft Logistic
will be withdrawn from service from 1 April 1999.[120] In support, Army equipment
support will be reorganised with the absorption of the Army Technical Support Agency
into this new body. The Army Base Repair Organisation will be re-structured and may
become a trading fund.[121]

The British Signals Brigade and 1[st] Armoured Division dedicated to the Allied Rapid
Reaction Corps (ARRC) will remain in Germany although three of the existing six heavy
armoured regiments and some support units, together 186 tanks and some 2,500 personnel,
will be repatriated. The garrisons and units affected by these changes have yet to be
selected. Retaining a German deployment is justified on grounds of mutual NATO
obligations, particularly to the ARRC, training opportunities with allies, closer proximity of
potential operational areas, and the cost and practicality of finding barracks and training
areas for the division in the UK.[122]

The rationalisation of the Army’s district/divisional structure is still under study, with a
possible reduction from the six districts to three.[123] Overall, the regular Army’s
establishment will increase by 3,300 posts to 111,300. Full implementation of the postSDR structure will not be complete until the Army has recruited to new manpower levels
and sustainability shortfalls are met, although the JRRF should be operational by 2001.[124]

**Assessment**

In a review which is fairly neutral in its impact, the Army could be said to be the chief
beneficiary. This arises partly from a realisation that it is the Army, of all the Services, that
has suffered the most from overstretch. The combination of heavy commitments in
Northern Ireland and Bosnia, coupled with personnel shortages, has placed it under intense
pressure in recent years. The strain has fallen not only on the infantry but also on combat
service support units. The additional manpower is intended to relieve this overstretch.

120 Factsheet 38
121 Essay 11, Para 48
122 Factsheet 33
123 Essay 11, Para 36
124 Essay Six, Paras 30-36


-----

However, it remains to be seen whether recruitment will be sufficient to meet this target.
Full manning at the previous level was not expected until 2002; this date has now been put
back to 2004.[125] The extra manpower allotted to the Army is also a feature of the SDR’s
land-based emphasis. Whatever the publicity given to the concept of a three-dimensional
battlespace, the strategy which the SDR assumes is based mainly on achieving security
objectives on foreign territory. The major improvements to lift and logistical and medical
support are all about getting the Army to a crisis and supporting it there.

The creation of the readiness cycle is an innovative attempt to grapple both with the
problems of overstretch and with the need for more rapidly deployable forces. However, it
is predicated on formations of brigade size. Most emergency deployments are at battalion or
sub-battalion level. In particular, the cycle also does not seem to allow for the deployment
of units to Northern Ireland for six-month roulement tours; formations in the six deployable
brigades may still be sent to Ulster when they are supposedly training or recovering from
overseas operations. The main burden of roulement tours in Northern Ireland is likely to
continue to fall on home-based defence battalions outside the JRRFs. The maintenance of
reasonable gaps between such tours for these units and for those in the ‘readiness cycle’ will
be dependent on developments in the Northern Ireland security situation, which may allow
the future reduction of the Army garrison there, and on the pattern of overseas missions.

The decision to scrap the airborne brigade has had its critics, fearful of the impact on the
Parachute Regiment’s particular ethic and the loss of this capability at brigade level.
However, the SDR does retain a battalion in a secondary air-dropping role, albeit that in the
longer term this will be dependent on retaining para-trained combat and combat service
support units. It remains a fact that the last British combat drop was at Suez in 1956 and the
RAF probably does not have sufficient airlift for more than a battalion group mission in any
case. Even its close ally, the USA, which retains an entire parachute division, last dropped
in brigade strength during the Vietnam War. As the Army’s new elite rapid deployment
force, the air manoeuvre brigade will take some time to bed down. It should also be pointed
out that the brigade is only manoeuvrable for as far as the range of its helicopters and is
dependent on a large logistical base. Although the SDR has made some extra provision for
this, the last operational deployment of 24 Airmobile Brigade to Bosnia and Croatia in 1995
was delayed and hampered by a lack of logistical support.

Although some reductions are made and a practical justification given, the commitment to
retain a division in Germany over the twenty year purview of the SDR is open to question.
The SDR admits that “the specific military argument for stationing forces close to the Cold
War front line has disappeared”.[126] Many would see the continued stationing of a quarter of
the UK Army on the continent as a Cold War anachronism. The British military presence
may look even more anomalous following NATO enlargement to the east in 1999 The SDR
talks of the benefits of training with allies, but it is actually quite difficult to train in

125 Essay Eight, Para 13
126 Essay Six, Para 34


-----

Germany due to environmental restrictions. There would seem to be no reason why units
could not be sent from the UK to exercise with allies on the continent, as indeed they were
frequently during the Cold War. As regards NATO, Britain could be said to be enhancing
its contribution to the Alliance of the future by developing its rapid deployment forces for
service outside the NATO area. In this context, Britain could retain leadership of the ARRC,
whilst withdrawing its combat formation from Germany. In the same manner, it could be
argued that the Eurocorps has not been materially affected by the French decision, in 1996,
to withdraw all but a few thousand of its remaining troops in Germany by the end of the
decade. It remains open to doubt whether Britain will still need to retain a permanent force
in Germany in 2015.

### C. The Royal Air Force

**New Structure**

Air power is seen by the SDR as complementing ground and maritime operations but also
having an offensive role in its own right. This will be further enhanced by the acquisition
of further precision air-delivered weapons. Air power will also have a role in non-war
fighting missions, such as the enforcement of no fly zones and the provision of
humanitarian aid. The SDR concludes that a balanced force, similar to the present force
structure, is required to meet these contingencies.

The Review reconfirms the procurement of 232 Eurofighter 2000s, now renamed the
Typhoon. “Eurofighter will be the primary component of the Royal Air Force future
fighting capability and a vital element in Britain’s overall defence effort”.[127] The
Typhoons will replace the Tornado fighters and the Jaguars with 140 in the front-line and
the remainder used for training and replacement. The existing front-line fast jet strike
fleet will be reduced from 177 aircraft to 154. Consequently, 12 Tornado GR1s, 9
Harriers and 2 Jaguars will be placed in store. One of the existing strike squadrons, No.
17 (Tornado GR) Squadron at RAF Bruggen will disband in 1999. Of the other Tornado
squadrons at Bruggen, 14 Squadron will move to RAF Lossiemouth and 9 and 31
Squadrons to RAF Marham. The Tornado Operational Conversion Units (OCU) will
move to RAF Colisthall. The moves will occur in 2001.[128] The Harrier squadrons will
form part of the Joint Force 2000. The air defence force will be cut from 100 to 87
aircraft with one of the six squadrons, No. 29 (Tornado F3) Squadron at RAF Coningsby,
being disbanded.[129] A greater call will be made on aircraft and staff aircrew in OCUs for
use in combat operations.

127 Essay Six, Para 38
128 MOD PR 19 August 1998
129 HC Deb 9 July 1998 c 595w


-----

Elsewhere, the RAF Regiment will be reduced from 14 to 13 squadrons but some
Regiment personnel will be drafted into a new joint Army/RAF NBC defence unit. The
Regiment’s air defence squadrons will form part of the joint air defence command with
the Army. In order to improve medical evacuation, an additional RAF aeromedical flight
and 18 paramedic air escort flights will be established. The Search and Rescue helicopter
force will retain its current structure but there will be more civilianisation. The support
helicopter fleet, with 22 Merlin and 14 Chinook helicopters already ordered, will transfer
to the new Joint Helicopter Command. There will be no redundancies in the RAF arising
from the SDR, with the released manpower used to help fill current shortfalls.

On procurement, the Review confirms a number of existing missile projects: BVRAAM
(Beyond Visual Range Air to Air Missile), the Brimstone advanced anti-armour missile,
and the Storm Shadow stand off air-to-surface long range cruise missile. More
AMRAAMs (Advanced Medium Range Air to Air Missile) will be acquired. The
Tornado GR4 squadrons will be given more logistical support to improve their
deployability, as well as a new collision warning system early in the next century. The
Nimrod reconnaissance aircraft will be fitted with the Joint Tactical Information
Distribution System to enhance their integration with other forces. The RAF’s
reconnaissance capabilities will also be improved by the procurement of ASTOR (the
Airborne Stand-Off Radar) perhaps involving five new aircraft. The MOD will continue
to pursue a successor to the Tornado GR4, the Future Offensive Air System (FOAS).
This could be supplied by manned aircraft, cruise missiles or Unmanned Air Vehicles
(UAVs).[130]

The modernisation of the air transport fleet, begun with acquisition of 25 Hercules C130Js, will continue with the procurement of four US Globemaster II C-17s “or their
equivalents” in the short-term and complete renewal of the remainder of the fleet in the
longer term. Requests for proposals will be issued in both cases in 1999 with a decision
expected in 2000. The Future Large Aircraft is a contender for the second order. The
tanker force will also be renewed.[131]

**Assessment**

For the RAF, by preserving a broad range of capabilities, the SDR essentially represents
the status quo, although the transfer of the Harriers and RAF helicopters to new joint
forces could be said to weaken the Service’s independence. The order for the Eurofighter
2000, although regarded as an expensive white elephant by some commentators, had been
ring-fenced at the start of the Review and was never in doubt. There is, however, a tilt
towards strategic lift with new aircraft here being paid for by cuts in the existing fast jet
fleet. Given the level of the perceived threat to UK airspace, a justification can be made
for the disbandment of an air defence squadron. More difficult to understand is the

130 Essay Six, Paras 37-49 and Factsheet 41
131 Essay Six, Para 18


-----

decision to cut the strike fleet in the light of potential calls for the use of RAF offensive
air power in future crises and conflicts abroad. However, it seems that one Tornado
squadron was to be disbanded in any case in order to stretch the life of the Tornado fleet
as a whole to 2018, when FOAS is intended to enter into service.[132]

Many expected RAF victims of the SDR escape. For Example, the often mooted
disbandment of the Jaguar force and merger of the RAF Regiment into the Army did not
occur. The Brimstone air launched anti-armour weapon, originally envisaged to counter
massed columns of Soviet tanks, also survives, but, although not mentioned in the
Review, the Tornado has apparently lost its anti-ship role. The withdrawal of the RAF
from Germany will still take place by 2002, despite the fact that an earlier pull out of
Tornado squadrons based there would save approximately £2 million per month.[133]

On the debit side a possible order for additional support helicopters did not materialise.
The BVRAAM will not enter service until 2008. This was earlier planned to occur in
2003, when the Typhoon will enter squadron service.[134] As an interim measure the MOD
will procure Raytheon ALM-120 active radar guided Advanced Medium Range Air-Air
Missiles (AMRAAM).[135]

Finally, the commitment to procure four large C-17 transport aircraft “or their equivalent”
appears curious when there is no comparable aircraft immediately available. A RAF
spokesman has been quoted as saying, “no decision has been taken on whether to buy or
lease the C-17; there really is no equivalent”.[136] Given that each C-17 costs some $200m,
leasing would seem a more likely option until such time as the second and larger batch of
new air transport aircraft is acquired.[137]

### D. The Reserves

**New Structure**

The SDR devotes considerable space to the future of the reserves and the Territorial
Army in particular. Both the Royal Naval Reserve (RNR) and the Reserve Air Forces are
to see minor expansions. The RNR will be increased by 350 posts to 3,850 to, "provide
an expanded pool of personnel to provide additional reinforcements for the Fleet”.[138] The
Royal Marines Reserve (RMR) will remain the same size but both the RNR and RMR
will be given provision for extra training. Two hundred and seventy posts are created in

132 HC 138, Para 254
133 MOD PR 19 August 1998
134 D. Barrie, ’Rocket’s red glare’, Flight International, March 1998 and Cm 3781, p. 34
135 D. Barrie, ‘Rhetoric or reality: the UK’s Labour Government has delivered its magum opus on its armed
forces’, Flight International, 15 July 1998
136 _Jane’s Defence Weekly 15 July 1998_
137 _The Financial Times 8 September 1998_
138 Essay 16, Para 16


-----

logistics and other supporting roles in the Reserve Air Forces, which will expand from an
establishment of 2,650 to 2,920. Firm support is given to the use of reservist aircrew. In
contrast, the TA will see a significant reduction from 57,000 to “around 40,000”[139]. The
bulk of these reductions will fall on yeomanry and infantry units.

The aim of the changes to the reserves is to make them more relevant and useable and
integrate them more closely into regular forces, in the context of a changed strategic
environment. Much of the TA, particularly its armoured and infantry units, has been
configured to resist a Russian attack. These units have either been allocated to home
defence or as reinforcements to UK forces in Germany. When there is no perceived
direct military threat to the UK, these formations had become less useful. The TA, both
as individuals and as formed units, will now be optimised to support the armed forces in
rapid deployment missions abroad under the authority of the Reserve Forces Act 1996.
The TA will not only meet routine commitments in Bosnia and elsewhere but, for the first
time, will be mobilised to support warfighting expeditionary forces of divisional size.
The TA will be particularly important to the medical services and as a consequence will
be mobilised for missions of brigade level. In order to facilitate rapid call-out, an Army
Mobilisation Centre is to be established at Chilwell for pre- and post-call out training. In
addition, a Reserves Manning and Career Management Division in the Army Personnel
Centre, Glasgow “will centralise all personnel management for the TA, bringing it into
line with the Regular Army and also providing a single focus for identifying and notifying
individuals for mobilisation”.[140] The Sponsored Reserve concept will be developed, that
is where the personnel of defence contractors have a liability for call-out. Such personnel
may be used, in particular, to fill logistical posts in an overseas mission after an initial
deployment phase. The number of Territorial Army and Volunteer Reserve Associations
(TAVRAs), which both administer and represent the TA, will be reduced from 14 to 12 to
conform with the boundaries of the Land Command Brigade structure.[141] The TAVRAs
will loose their financial autonomy and become financially subordinate to the
district/divisional commanders.[142] The reduction of the TA will only take place after
further consultation, not due to finish until the autumn, and with a view to the links
between the TA and local communities and TA support for the cadet forces, the latter
receiving some additional resources. A consultative document, TA Restructuring, which
outlines the suggested changes, has not yet been made available to the House.

**Assessment**

The changes to the Territorial Army have proved one of the most controversial elements
of the SDR. The reductions announced by the SDR amount to the fourth round of cuts
since the end of the Cold War. At 40,000 personnel, the TA will be less than half of its

139 Cm 3999 Para 109
140 Factsheet 39
141 Essay 11, Para 37
142 Factsheet 10


-----

91,000 establishment in 1991.[143] The new total bears comparison with that which resulted
from cuts to the TA under the Wilson government in the 1960s and which succeeding
governments reversed between 1970 and 1981.[144]

Although details of the implementation of the cuts have not been revealed officially, it
has been reported that the TA infantry battalions will be the hardest hit, falling from the
current 36 to 15. The TA RAC units will also see a reduction of over 50 per cent.
Perhaps more significantly, 140 out of the 443 TA centres will close. No mention is made
of the loss of an estimated 600 regular and MOD civilian posts attached to the
TAVRAs.[145]

The fact remains that no single formed unit of the TA infantry has been directly involved
in a UK military operation since World War II. Some members of the TA complained at
the time of the Gulf War of 1990-91 that TA units were not sent to the region. Although
this was partly for legal reasons, TA infantry units pointed to the use of three battalions of
regular infantry in the communications and guarding role. This was exactly the role
envisaged for much of the TA infantry in plans for the defence of West Germany against
a Warsaw Pact invasion during the Cold War. What the TA may have overlooked was
that in the Gulf, this prisoner guard force may also have been intended to provide a pool
of battle casualty replacements. It may have been the case that the Defence Staff felt that
it was not wise to use the TA in a front-line combat role. By contrast the US Army used
whole reservist artillery units in the Gulf.

TA enthusiasts would see the cuts as a result of a persistent neglect of the TA by the
regular Army.[146] When TA strength amounts to over half regular strength, then, it is
suggested, the TA should have far greater influence in the Army and MOD. There is, for
example, no TA officer above the level of brigadier. TA supporters also oppose the trend
towards breaking up TA formations into smaller groups. They might prefer to see the
formation of wholly TA Brigades within Land Command and more training at whole unit
level. It is certainly the case that the TA has had, in the past, a poor reputation in the
regular Army as the home of bands of ‘weekend warriors’. However, the TA has gained
much respect for its activities in Bosnia. In addition, there are now four TA brigadiers
and one RNR Commodore where there were no one-star volunteer reservists at all.[147]

Clearly the military potential of the TA will remain a matter of debate. However, the TA
does have a number of distinct advantages. The TA soldier is cheap and costs about 20
per cent of his regular counterpart.[148] The Reserves cost £360m per annum, plus the £80m
cost of the TAVRAs. As the Defence Committee points out, this sum supplies over
60,000 military personnel for about 2 per cent of the defence budget.[149] Perhaps more
importantly, at a time when memories of National Service are fading, the network of TA

143 The TA establishment was cut to 63,500 in 1991, to 59,000 in 1994 and 57,000 in 1997 (See RP 96/40,
_The Reserve Forces Bill, pp. 10-11)_
144 See RP 96/40, pp. 7-8
145 _The Times 20 April 1998 and The Sunday Telegraph 16 August 1998_
146 See, for example, Julian Brazier HC Deb 27 October 1997 c 664-5
147 HC 138, p. 59
148 _The Sunday Times 28 September 1997_
149 HC 138, Para 280


-----

units and drill halls provides an important link between the armed forces and the wider
community. Under the TA restructuring proposals, geographical coverage will be thin.
For example, there will apparently only be seven TA bases in the whole of Scotland and
five in East Anglia.[150] The distances involved in reaching them may not only harm TA
recruitment and retention but also affect the military ‘footprint’ which the Government is
keen to preserve.

The TA forms an important source of regular recruitment, both directly but also indirectly
through the cadet forces. The SDR recognises the role of the cadet forces as “a
significant national volunteer youth movement”.[151] Of the 443 TA centres, 376 are used
by the cadet forces.[152] The closure of many centres could have an adverse affect on cadet
recruitment, particularly if cadets are asked to travel long distances to their particular unit.
(The SDR promises to minimise this impact.)[153] Domestically, TA units have also been
used in various Military Aid to the Civil Community (MACC) tasks, such as disaster
relief, as a supplement to the usual emergency services, who are often hard-pressed in
such contingencies. On this point, the NBC defence role currently performed by the TA
is to transfer to the regulars. When this new regular force is abroad, there could be a role
for reservists in national defence against CBW attack.

There is a clear role to be played by individual specialists and groups of combat reservists
in support of the regulars in currently envisaged operations. Although the SDR states that
the number of medical reservists will increase, there will be reductions in the engineering
and transport units. Even if, as the SDR states, some of them “exist to support a rather
larger force than we are now likely to deploy”, it could be argued that this particular
reduction is inconsistent with the emphasis on deployment and logistical support.[154]

Furthermore, the modalities of how a TA support contingent would fit in with proposals
for a contracted civilian support force for expeditionary operations are unclear. The
personnel employed by such a contractor would presumably be required to join the as yet
untested Sponsored Reserve. Whatever the operational difficulties with this concept, this
might mean three tiers of personnel involved in a particular operation: regulars, TA and
sponsored reservists.

In a wider sense, there may be a critical mass, both in terms of size and number of
enthusiasts, below which the TA will loose any real effectiveness. TA membership could
be regarded as a pyramid in which only a fraction of the total is engaged to the highest
extent in reservist activities. An excessive cut in the overall TA strength could merely
demoralise and deconstruct the organisation as whole and hinder the 10 or 20 per cent of
the readily useable contingent from volunteering for additional call-outs.

Ultimately, as in other areas of the SDR, working within existing budgets has dictated
trade-offs. The most immediate missions in which the Army is likely to be engaged are
short-notice overseas expeditions. There are currently manning deficiencies in these

150 The Sunday Telegraph 16 August 1998 and The Scotsman 17 August 1998
151 Essay Seven, Para 28
152 HC Deb 27 April 1998 c 23w
153 Factsheet 10
154 Essay Seven, Para 17c


-----

areas and an extra 3,000 men can be paid for by reducing resources available to a TA,
much of which would be regarded as inappropriate to these contingencies. However, the
TA does serve as a platform upon which to reconstitute and expand the Army in the
future, should the UK face a greater level of threat. Even in the short-term the TA may
have an understated value as a last reserve. The SDR strategy sees the bulk of the Army
as an expeditionary force. This is at best a two-shot weapon, able to respond to at most
two small-scale overseas deployments at any one time. The potential destructiveness of
conventional warfare for the forces of a western power may often be underestimated and
should the regular Army suffer heavy casualties in a foreign campaign, then the TA may
offer an essential kernel for reconstruction. Here, the TA armour and infantry units could
play an important part. The TA in its present form could therefore be regarded as
providing a limited insurance policy. The SDR seems to have decided that, given the
perceived low level of threat to the UK, and the longer warning times that result, such an
insurance is not necessary.


-----

## VII Defence Procurement

### A. Policy

The SDR devotes considerable importance to achieving “faster, cheaper and better”
defence procurement as, in the Defence Secretary’s words, “too often in the past our new
equipment has been too expensive and delivered too late”.[155] As the SDR points out,
“The 1997 National Audit Office (NAO) report on major programmes reported an
average delay of 37 months, unchanged from 1996”.[156] The costs of the 25 major projects
identified in the NAO report have registered a 7.5-8.5 per cent overrun over original
estimates in each of the last three years.[157] One commentator has described this picture
more trenchantly:

The defence ministry’s capacity to waste money is legendary. Procurement is a
dismal story of delays and extortion. The defence contractors, assured their
prosperity is vital to national security, have a captive customer and no incentive
to cut costs.[158]

This situation may appear bleak but other countries also encounter problems in defence
procurement. The NAO reviewed procurement practices in 11 other countries in 1994
and concluded that "relatively, and particularly in terms of the pursuit of competition, the
Department was performing well".[159]

The main causes of procurement problems were identified by the MOD as:

– slippage due to technical difficulties, budgetary constraints leading to the
postponement of expenditure, the redefinition of requirements and difficulties
over collaborative programmes;

– cost over-runs due to programme changes, changes in equipment
specification, poor estimating and inflation of prices for defence equipment in
excess of inflation in the economy as a whole.[160]

155 Cm 3999, Introduction, Para 17
156 Ibid, Para 151
157 Essay Ten, Fig. 1
158 Philip Stephens ‘Short range target: Tony Blair’s defence review has taken the politics out of the issue
but has missed the opportunity to think 10 years ahead’, The Financial Times 25 May 1998
159 NAO, MOD Defence Procurement in the 1990s, HC 390, 1993-94, Para 6
160 Essay Ten, Para 4


-----

The SDR provided an opportunity to examine the procurement process from first
principles, drawing on best practice from the private sector.[161] One of the study’s main
conclusions was that the MOD should no longer operate the same acquisition process for
all items purchased, but instead should use different means of procuring three separate
categories of items, each valued at around £3bn. The first category or ‘Tier’ comprises
low-tech and low cost civil and military items, which are readily available ‘off-the-shelf’.
Tier 2 includes items which do require some development work and an associated active
MOD role, but are relatively low cost and low risk, such as components of a weapon or a
weapons upgrade. Finally, Tier 3 includes the most complex projects, such as ships and
aircraft, which will involve Tier 1 and 2 items, but are of high cost and risk with few
potential contractors. The acquisition of all ‘Tiers’ would retain certain common
characteristics, such as a military requirement, a competition, a contract, testing and
public accountability, but savings could be made in the way in which procurement was
managed. For example, Tier 1 items could be procured on much longer contracts.

The SDR also suggests other changes to procurement. This includes a new through-life
_approach to procurement decisions. During the Cold War, it was often felt necessary to_
rush equipment into development and production to meet a particular perceived Soviet
threat. In today’s threat environment, the MOD can spend more time assessing a concept
and a project before authorising development. Better project planning and estimating
may reduce the risks of later overruns and delays. Procurement may also now be
_incremental,_ that is, instead of waiting to introduce an item into service until optimum
performance has been achieved, equipment will initially be accepted with less ambitious
capability. Taking account of rapid changes in technology, the equipment will be
upgraded incrementally, rather than awaiting large mid-life upgrades. The MOD also
intends that future contracts will be less inflationary. Contracts will be fixed price for
agreements under five years duration. Contracts over five years will have variation
clauses based on general output indices, i.e. the general producer price index, rather than
input indices, such as labour and materials. Historically, general inflation has been less
than inflation in defence goods. The MOD wishes to pass greater risk and incentive to
control costs to the contractor.

Another feature of the new procurement policy is closer ‘partnering’, particularly in
situations where competition is no longer available. This approach will influence the
formation of integrated project teams, which, unlike the current position where functions
are conducted separately, will be responsible for both procurement and through-life
support. Project teams, under long-term and specially recruited leaders, will include
representatives from all the bodies with an interest in the particular programme including
the contractors. Project leaders will be given greater powers to take decisions. It is hoped
that the co-operation engendered by this team approach should, on US experience, lead to
earlier problem solving and more efficient development and oversight of a project
throughout its pre- and in-service life.

161 See Essay Ten, Paras 7 –27 for results


-----

In earlier efforts to control projects, the MOD introduced the Downey Cycle in the 1960s.
Projects had to pass a series of assessment hurdles on the way from concept to entering
into service. Formal approval for entering each new stage was required, often at senior
level, and the approvals often proved time-consuming. The new Acquisition Cycle will
reduce these hurdles to only two: at initiation of the project; and at approval for full
manufacture or the production of a demonstrator. Between these approvals, the team
leaders will be given greater authority to take decisions, but will be held accountable for
their actions. The Equipment Approvals Committee, which reports to ministers, will
remain the highest level equipment approval body in the MOD but will examine fewer
projects and normally only those in excess of £400m.[162]

The SDR also examined the position and role of the Procurement Executive, and whether,
the MOD needed a specialist procurement arm or whether its work could be done in the
private sector. Having decided that there was still a requirement for a civil service,
although more commercially minded, defence procurement body, the Review then
examined what the place of the PE should be within the MOD. It resolved that there
needed to be a clearer customer/supplier relationship. The Review decided that these
requirements could be best met by turning the PE into an Agency, with effect from April
1999, and establishing a new central defence customer in MOD HQ. Changes to the PE
are intended to cut its operating costs by around 20% by 2001/02. Much of this figure will
be gained by cutting the number of staff by 650.[163]

Important to these procurement reforms will be the establishment of a new specialist
stream of acquisition personnel in the MOD, a cadre of both civil and military staff, who
will be specifically trained and spend much of their careers in the procurement field.
Collectively, the above initiatives are intended to save £2bn over the next decade.[164] A
team of officials, industry representatives and external consultants, under ministerial
leadership, will see that the package of Smart Procurement measures are implemented.

The Defence Evaluation and Research Agency (DERA) has played an important part in
developing new defence technologies and in the procurement process. The SDR studied
five options for DERA’s future. These included: retaining the status quo; franchising its
capabilities to university/research sector and industry; limiting DERA to only those
activities which could not be carried out by industry, i.e. partial privatisation; allowing
DERA to expand into a wider range of non-defence activities; and seeking more private
investment via public-private partnerships. Although information on the outcome of this
particular part of the SDR is limited, it did decide to support public-private partnership

162 HC 138, Para 339. EAC is chaired by the Chief Scientific Advisor and includes the Vice Chief of the
Defence Staff, the Chief of Defence Procurement and the 2[nd] Permanent Under Secretary.
163 Factsheet 15 and HC 138, Para 340
164 Essay Ten, Para 21 and HC 138, Para 350


-----

initiatives in order “to strengthen DERA’s ability to continue to provide world class
scientific research well into the next century”.[165]

### B. Assessment

Smart Procurement is not the first initiative to try to tackle the cost overruns and delays
which plague defence projects. As the Defence Committee report demonstrates, such
initiatives stretch back to the Downey Cycle, introduced in the 1960s, and before. It was
not until the introduction of the Levene Reforms in the mid-1980s that they had any
significant impact.[166] The introduction of greater competition and fixed price contracting
in this period is said by the MOD to have led to a reduction of more than 10% in
procurement costs over the following decade, although the extent of this reduction has
been disputed.[167] Procurement mechanisms were most recently examined as part of the
Defence Costs Study in 1993/94. Recommendations arising included: among other
things, an examination of longer-term contracts; a reduction in the number of tenders for
a requirement; and the use of single-source suppliers.[168]

Although it draws on a less adversarial relationship with industry practised in the last few
years, the inclusion of industry in project teams in a ‘partnership’ approach is novel. It
may help to reduce the likelihood of delays and excess costs. However, there is at least
the potential danger of industry ‘capture’ of certain defence projects. The MOD has
sought to define a clearer customer/supplier relationship by separating a future
Procurement Agency from a new single, central defence customer in the Main Building.

Comment has also been made on the potential dangers of constant incremental change to
defence systems. Incremental upgrades will need to be managed very carefully to avoid
harming the availability of equipment to the front-line and are better suited to stand alone
subsystems of a macrosystem, such as air defence, where improvement of a part will
benefit the whole. The cost of the Tornado Mid-Life Update, albeit a major upgrade, has
been almost 70 per cent beyond original estimates and is an object lesson in how control
can be lost of upgrades.[169]

The procurement reforms may also create further instability for the Procurement
Executive. Staffing was reduced substantially following co-location of PE branches at
Abbey Wood on the outskirts of Bristol and then after implementation of the Defence
Costs Study. Further job cuts may have an impact on morale and destabilise the PE at a
time when experienced personnel are needed to implement many of the proposals. It is

165 Essay Eleven, Para 51
166 Named after the former Chief of Defence Procurement Sir Peter Levene (1985-1991).
167 HC 390, 1993-94, Para 11 and S. Schofield, 'The Levene Reforms: An Evaluation', Defense Analysis,
August 1995
168 _Frontline-First: The Defence Costs Study, 1994, Paras 402-412_
169 David Kirkpatrick, ‘Smart Procurement’, RUSI Newsbrief, August 1998


-----

notable, here, that the MOD aims to develop a special ‘acquisition stream’ of personnel,
perhaps along the lines of the European stream in the home civil service, who are trained
specifically for jobs in or dealing with the EU institutions. The new team projects may
also only work if such staff remain in post for five years or more, beyond the usual civil
service/military job cycle. Hanging on to skilled civil service procurement personnel may
prove particularly difficult, when they may well be in demand in the private sector.
Administrative grade salaries are already considerably below those payable in the private
sector. Contracting-in skilled procurement staff from industry is feasible, but could prove
divisive and demoralising to civil service team staff.

In sum, 'Smart Procurement' may not be a radical departure but rather a continuation of a
longer reform process where each new generation of procurement processes is built on
the foundations of the previous one. Due to the long-term nature of procurement, many
of the improvements introduced by the SDR will take time to bear fruit. It will not be
surprising if the NAO _Major Projects Report 1999, which will comment on defence_
procurement under the first year of the Labour Government, reveals the same litany of
cost-overruns and delays as its predecessors.

According to the Defence Committee, the savings target set for procurement by the MOD
is fairly conservative and therefore probably achievable. However, even this projection
may be optimistic. The MOD procures often complex defence systems, conceived,
produced and brought into service over perhaps a twenty-year period and these may
seldom proceed according to plan. The most common reasons for cost increases in
programmes are re-orientation and inflation. Whatever the dangers of gold-plating and
notwithstanding the new incremental approach to acquisition, the pace of technological
change and the shifting needs of the armed forces may require projects to be altered.
Similarly, longer-term levels of inflation and exchange rates are also unpredictable.[170]

Ultimately, although defence procurement may always be improved, it may never, due to
its very nature, become perfect and a certain degree of cost overruns and delays may
prove an inevitable part of the procurement process.

The Defence Select Committee has also expressed concerns about the use of PrivatePublic Partnerships in DERA and the manner in which this might compromise the
Agency’s role as an independent expert advisor.[171] The Committee stated that:

…we would regard the risks to DERA's impartiality and critical mass of even
partial privatisation, in the shape of Public Private Partnerships, as unacceptable
and against the public interest.[172]

170 See HC 238
171 Defence Committee, The Defence Evaluation and Research Agency, HC 621 1997-98, Paras 20-21
172 Ibid, Para 35


-----

## VIII Defence Industries

### A. Policy

The SDR makes a firm commitment to the maintenance of a strong UK defence industry:

The British defence industry is outstandingly successful and a vital national asset.
It provides jobs for over 400,000 people and earns the country around £5bn from
exports each year. From a defence point of view a healthy and competitive
industrial base is crucial to ensuring that we will be able to continue to procure
the right equipment for our forces at competitive prices.[173]

The issue of arms exports is only mentioned briefly in the Review and this is via a
commitment to:

support and promote defence exports within the strict criteria which the
Government laid down in July 1997 to avoid their misuse for aggression or
internal repression.[174]

The response from industry to the SDR has been favourable, particularly as almost every
major conventional defence equipment programme has been kept intact. John Weston,
Chief Executive of British Aerospace, said: “The SDR offers greater stability to the
defence industry, allowing for better planning of investments and organisational
structures.”[175] The Defence Industries Council, which represents defence manufacturing
associations, has commented that it was looking forward to “implementing ideas which
can produce cheaper, faster and better procurement.”[176]

While underlining the strategic importance of a healthy defence industry, the SDR does
acknowledge the problems that the sector has faced following the end of the Cold War.
The 1990s have witnessed a significant contraction of the global defence market as most
Western nations dramatically reduced their expenditure on defence equipment.
According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), world
military expenditure fell by around one-third in real terms over the period 1988-97.[177] At
the same time the dissolution of the Cold War power blocs has made the global arms
market much more competitive.

173 Cm 3999, para 162
174 Ibid, para 163
175 D Kemp, "UK companies relieved at review ", Janes Defence Weekly, 15 July 1998, p20
176 Ibid
177 SIPRI Yearbook 1998, page 191


-----

The SDR points to two possible ways of alleviating these problems.

Firstly, a greater emphasis on finding new ways of exploiting defence technology and
expertise in civilian markets is proposed. This proposal takes practical shape in the plan
to establish a Defence Diversification Agency within DERA, whose remit will be to
“foster, in partnership with industry, greater two-way technology transfer between the
military and civilian sectors.”[178]

Secondly, competitiveness could be improved, with the SDR pointing to greater
international industrial collaboration and restructuring as a means of achieving better
economies of scale. The main impetus behind this move has been the increased
competition from huge US defence conglomerates, such as Boeing and Lockheed Martin,
that have emerged from the intense US defence consolidation that has taken place over
the past five years. Concerns have been expressed that European industries will lose the
capability to design and manufacture defence systems independently and become mere
outstation sub-contractors of the US defence giants. Such a scenario would have serious
implications for national and continental defence capabilities and national sovereignty.
The SDR underlines the Government’s commitment to assisting the UK and European
defence industry in achieving greater efficiency through restructuring by its involvement
in international initiatives to facilitate this process. A key event in this process was the
tri-lateral statement issued in December 1997 by the UK, France and Germany calling on
their defence industries to present a clear plan for possible restructuring of their aerospace
and defence electronics industries. This process has now been joined by the governments
of Italy, Spain and Sweden.

In addition to industrial restructuring, the SDR suggests that efficiency in procurement
could be improved through the harmonisation of the requirements of the various
European Armed Forces. Such harmonisation would reduce duplication of development
and production costs and would, according to the Review, make "sound operational
sense."[179] The creation of the multinational common procurement organisation, OCCAR
(Organisme Conjointe de Co-operation en matière d'Armament), involving the UK,
France, Germany and Italy, is regarded by the SDR as an important factor in this
harmonisation process. The SDR also points to its forward equipment procurement plans
as evidence of its commitment to a "strong and healthy British and European defence
industry."[180] These future equipment plans involve a number of European collaborative
projects including Eurofighter, Horizon frigate, and the Multi-Role Armoured Vehicle
(MRAV). Moreover, the Review states that the Government will attempt to ensure that
there are realistic European options for consideration regarding "our longer term
requirements such as the replacement for the Tornado bomber and improved strategic air
transports."[181]

178 Cm 3999, para 164
179 Ibid, para 167
180 Ibid, para 168
181 Cm 3999, para 168


-----

### B. Assessment

There are some contradictions and potential pitfalls evident in the Government's defence
industrial policy as presented in the SDR. Firstly, the Review begins by emphasising the
importance of a "healthy and competitive industrial base" but then proceeds to highlight
the need for greater international collaboration and industrial restructuring. As industrial
restructuring often results in company mergers, this approach, if taken to US levels, will
result in a subsequent loss of competition. How effective competitive pressures will be
maintained, should a pan-European defence company emerge, is not made clear. Indeed,
the recent abandonment by Lockheed Martin of its bid to purchase Northrop Grumman
was the result of US Department of Defense (DOD) concerns about vertical and
horizontal integration. Secondly, further rationalisation of the defence industry and
greater international collaboration will make the preservation of the strategic role of the
industry more problematic and expensive:

The key to retaining access to strategically important technologies and
manufacturing capabilities, in an era of an increasingly rationalised industry and
collaborative programmes, is to ensure mutual inter-dependence. The risks of
dependency are high, however, and the Government must take a hard-nosed and
critical look at our ability to keep open such access, and where there are doubts
we must still be willing to fund the necessary capabilities single-handed.[182]

While the SDR makes several references to greater co-operation and harmonisation
within the European defence industry, little mention is made regarding the very close ties
between many UK and US defence companies.  The previous government's policy on
international defence industrial co-operation essentially followed a twin-track approach of
sanctioning European collaboration while simultaneously retaining links to US
technology and industry. The SDR does not clearly state how this balancing act will be
performed in future. Indeed, there is a danger that what emerges from the process of
European defence industrial consolidation is not a strong European defence pillar that is
better able to compete and collaborate with the large US conglomerates, but a "Fortress
Europe" where preference is given to European solutions for future equipment
requirements. Concerns over this issue have been expressed by the House of Commons
Defence Committee:

A careful balance is needed, with the UK government using its influence in
Europe to avoid any undue European-preference policy emerging while also
playing a full part in rationalising the defence equipment market in Europe.[183]

The future defence industrial relationship between Europe and the US will become a key
issue because, as the costs of developing new defence products escalate, then the trend
towards 'global' products, such as the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF), may become the norm.

182 Defence Committe/Trade and Industry Committee, _Aspects of Defence Procurement and Industrial_
_Policy, HC 675 1997-98, para 55_
183 HC 675 1997-98, para 55


-----

## IX Personnel Issues

### A. Policy

The SDR is notable in devoting, in comparison with predecessor reviews, considerable
space to Armed Forces and Civil Service personnel issues. Essay Nine starts with the
premise:

To have modern and effective Armed Forces, we must recruit and retain our fair
share of the best people the country has to offer. The quality of our people and
their readiness for the tasks entrusted to them are the true measure of our Forces'
operational capability. The skills and experience we have been able to give our
personnel, Service and civilian, their capacity for innovation and their morale and
motivation are fundamental to Britain's defence.[184]

The SDR recognises that the armed forces have suffered from overstretch and
undermanning. Overstretch is a result, in some cases, of having too few units to meet
certain commitments. In others, it is a product of having too few individuals, which
arises from undermanning, which in turn fuels further overstretch, causes dissatisfaction
and low morale, leads to retention problems and hence more undermanning in a vicious
circle.

As at 1 October 1997 the Army was undermanned by 4,500 trained personnel or around
four per cent,[185] and in the spring of that year the RAF and Navy were undermanned by
1,200 (two per cent) and 2,200 (five per cent) trained personnel respectively.[186]

The MOD proposes to respond to this key problem in two ways. Firstly, for the RN and
RAF forces are to be cut and the manpower released used to fill gaps elsewhere. For the
Army, manpower is being increased by 3,300 and a sixth deployable brigade and new
logistical and medical units, where overstretch is at its worst, are being established.
Secondly, the MOD will take a number of measures to improve recruitment and retention,
aiming to achieve full manning in the RAF by 2000, the RN by 2002 and the Army by
2004.

A major element of this second tier is the ‘Learning Forces’ initiative. This aims to
provide a range of educational measures and thereby to attract recruits and to persuade
them and existing Service personnel to stay in the armed forces for longer, while assisting
their passage with transferable skills into the civil labour market. All recruits will be
given the opportunity to gain six essential skills identified by the DFEE, including

184 Essay Nine, Para 1
185 HC Deb, 27 November 1997, c601w
186 Ministry of Defence Performance Report, 1996/97, Cm 3781


-----

competence in literacy, numeracy and IT and will be given the opportunity to gain
Scottish and National Vocational Qualifications (S/NVQs) Level 2 within three years of
engagement. Service personnel will given personal logs of their experience and
qualifications to assist their return to civil society, as well as the ability to earn ‘learning
credits’, which can be used to purchase education both during and after being in service.
More resettlement assistance will be given to Service leavers with over five years’
service.

Another initiative is to improve Service welfare. This includes improving single
accommodation, providing a common leave entitlement of 30 working days a year
irrespective of rank, increasing the telephone allowance for those on overseas
deployments from three to ten minutes a week and providing extra rest and recuperation
flights for those on more than 10 months deployments. A new Task Force will address
the needs of Service families and changes will be made to Service schools to reflect
recent reforms in the civil educational sector. For ex-Servicemen, the MOD will establish
a Veterans’ Advice Cell later this year as “a single point of contact” to “provide guidance
on where and how to obtain specific assistance”. [187]

In a further aid to recruitment and retention, the armed forces will continue to pursue an
equal opportunities policy. Women are currently allowed to serve in 96 per cent of posts
in the RAF, 73 per cent of the Navy and 70 per cent of the Army.  a further review 1300
specialist posts in the RM Brigade, manned by the Army and RN, will be opened to
female personnel. However, posts in RM, RAF and Army front-line combat units will
remain closed to women for the next two-to-three years to allow a recent increase in
female roles in the Army to be assessed. A review of whether women can serve on RN
submarines and diving teams will conclude later this year. In an agreement with the
Commission for Racial Equality, the armed forces intend to recruit 6 per cent of their
recruits from the ethnic minorities by 2002. Ethnic minorities currently comprise only 1
per cent of armed forces personnel. Equal opportunities training will become more
widespread, following the creation of a Tri-Service Equal Opportunities Centre at
Shrivenham.

The SDR also contains details of a number of longer-term initiatives. These include the
introduction of an overarching personnel and parallel overarching recruiting strategy.
Both will aim to establish common practices between the three Services in these areas,
whilst recognising the strengths of the single Service ethos. The Review also promises
better career management and the introduction of a common appraisal system for all the
Services. Further changes will be made to officer and NCO career structures. While
better use will be made of the experience of NCOs, more will be encouraged to gain late
commissions. A new pay system will be introduced in April 2000, in which individual
pay progression will be linked to experience, qualifications and performance.

187 Essay Nine, Para 34


-----

Changes will also be made to Service pensions and compensation for injury
arrangements. A review of compensation is underway, with a view to issuing a
consultation document. The Armed Forces Pension Scheme will also be reviewed.
Separately, the Government will introduce a tri-service discipline act, consolidating
Service law and replacing the current three single service discipline acts. In the
meantime, rules on the membership of courts-martial boards will be altered to allow
warrant officers to serve on them. The MOD promises a similar package of educational,
career management, consultation and equal opportunities initiatives for its civil service
staff. A total of 1,400 MOD civil service posts will be abolished under the Review. There
will be some compulsory redundancies.

### B. Assessment

The ‘Policy for People’ has generally been welcomed by commentators. Historically, the
UK has made up for its relatively small armed forces by the quality of its military
personnel. Recruiting and holding on to these personnel may prove to be the MOD’s
biggest challenge. The MOD has set itself targets for achieving full manning and the real
test of the personnel policy will be whether these targets are met. With its increase in
size, the Army may face the most difficult task, but all the Services may face particular
problems in attracting the increasing number of technically qualified or intelligent recruits
that they require to meet the demands of the advanced technology battlespace of the
future. Since the end of National Service, the armed forces have never succeeded in
being fully manned and traditionally the best recruiting officer has often been the dole
queue, rather than the attractiveness of Service life.

The improvements offered in education are in some cases novel and should assist with
recruiting. However, in another sense, the recent concentration on educational
qualifications in recruitment advertising could be seen as rather defeatist, since they
suggest what recruits can get out of the Services for when they leave, rather than on
enjoying Service life for its own sake. Although, as often stated, the armed forces require
the fit and the young, there is also a need to retain longer serving personnel, who provide
the senior NCOs and middle ranking officers. Here, the commissioning of more officers
from the ranks at a young age could be regarded as beneficial. However, the SDR’s
commitment to commissioning more late entry officers could result in weakening the
NCO caste. An alternative might be to give NCOs more responsibilities and pay, whilst
reducing the number of officers, leading to a more efficient and overall cheaper rank
structure along German lines.

There is also the danger that the Government has raised expectations that quantifiable
improvements will be made to Service life. The SDR Liaison Team was apparently
surprised by the extent of discontent in the armed forces and MOD.[188] Morale was

188 _The Independent 22 January 1998_


-----

described as between “good and adequate” and, although personnel were “keen to get on
with their work”, they found “a more deep seated pessimism about the long-term future of
the defence of the UK”. In particular, they found considerable scepticism about the then
continuing review and “cynicism about messages delivered from on high”.[189] The SDR
has been careful to state:

If some of the proposals in our Policy for People seem modest it is only because
we have promised what we can deliver. Addressing the personnel problems that
affect the Armed Forces will take time, trust, and money. Trust needs to be
earned and will only arise from the delivery of tangible improvements in
overstretch and undermanning. [190]

If the SDR fails to deliver on even its “modest” proposals then this may lead to
considerable disillusionment and could exacerbate retention problems.

The establishment of a form of Veterans Advice Cell has long been called for by exService organisations. It, of course, bears no comparison with the Veterans Affairs
Administration in the USA, for example, which provides not only ex-Service benefits but
extensive facilities for medical care. The modalities of the Cell are unclear. On the face
of it, it would seem to offer no more assistance than is currently available from such
organisations as the Royal British Legion. Many ex-Service complaints are material,
relating to levels of pensions and benefits. A small Advice Cell may be able to do little to
address their problems.

The Government’s commitment to the drafting of a Tri-Service Discipline Act to
consolidate and replace the existing single Service Acts appears to take no account of
previous work on this subject. Both the 1991 and 1996 Select Committees on the Armed
Forces Bill recommended that Service legislation be consolidated. Parliamentary
Counsel actually began work on such a new Bill in 1991 and had reached “an advanced
stage” before this work was abandoned in 1993.[191]

As in other areas and, indeed, as the SDR makes clear, the Policy for People builds on
work undertaken by the Conservative Government. In particular, it endorses work arising
from the Independent Review of the Armed Forces' Manpower, Career and Remuneration
_Structures (the Bett Report), published in 1995 and The Armed Forces of The Future - A_
_Personnel Strategy, published in January 1997.[192] It could be argued that the MOD has_
been remarkably slow in responding to some of Bett’s proposals. Many of these have
been controversial. In particular, Bett recommended far-reaching changes to the Armed
Forces Pension Scheme. Currently, officers can receive partial pensions on leaving after
16 years service from the age of 21 and other ranks after 22 years service from the age of

189 Dep 98/723
190 Essay Nine, Para 9
191 _Special Report from the Select Committee on the Armed Forces Bill, HC 143, 1995-96_
192 HINF 95/845 and Dep. 3S/4655


-----

18. These particular pension arrangements are very generous in comparison with others
and are costly to the MOD. Bett recommended that an immediate pension would only be
payable to those leaving over 50. Leavers before the age of 50 would not be able to
receive any pension until age 60.[193] The prospect of a new pay scheme being partly
related to performance has also attracted critics and could prove divisive. The
introduction of a tri-service appraisal system for officers means that the systems just
introduced for the RN and RAF will now be scrapped.

193 Bett Report, Ch. 8


-----

## X Defence Expenditure

### A. Spending

The incoming Labour Government accepted the first two years of the Conservative
Government’s November 1996 PES round i.e 97/98 and 98/99 but effectively cancelled
the third year’s estimates (99-2000). The November 1997 PES round did not take place,
being replaced by the Comprehensive Spending Review. The impact of the CSR on the
MOD was revealed in the Defence White Paper. Fixed expenditure plans for the next
three years are to be: £22,295m (99/00); £22,830m (00/01); and £22,987m (01/02). As a
result defence spending is expected to fall from 2.7 per cent of GDP or £22,250m in
1998/99 to 2.4 per cent in 2001/2.[194] This represents a real-term cut of £915m, although
due to one-off asset sales this will be reduced to £685m.[195] UK defence spending has
fallen from a recent peak of 5.3 per cent of GDP in 1984/5 to 2.7 per cent in 1998/9.
Defence spending has fallen by 23 per cent in real terms since 1989/90.[196] It is already at
its lowest level since the early 1930s.

Future defence spending merits only one page in the White Paper, although additional
limited financial information appears in other SDR documents For example, the Press
Notice released with the Review indicates that defence diplomacy will receive an
additional £15m per annum and the cadets an additional £1m. Extra spending on
logistical enhancements was to peak at an additional £100m per annum, with an up to
£40m on the Defence Medical Services by 2000/01.[ 197] In evidence, the Defence
Committee was told that the Policy for People and Learning Forces initiatives would cost
£30m per year and that an additional 3,300 regular soldiers would require £100m per
annum. Expenditure on equipment would rise from £6bn in 98/99 to £6.8bn in 01/02.[198]

On the debit side, savings will be made chiefly by asset sales and efficiency savings.

The MOD aims to double the value of expected surplus property sales over the next four
years to £700m. The most significant new item in the disposal programme is the sale of
the Duke of York’s HQ in Chelsea, mainly occupied by the TA. Other existing or new
proposals in London contained in an MOD study of property requirements in the capital
include: a public/private partnership project to replace Chelsea Barracks (not necessarily
on the same site); the sale of Millbank barracks; and a rationalisation of MOD HQ from
the current seven buildings to two by 2004. Future basing requirements in London,
including at RAF Northholt and Uxbridge, are under study. Outside London the following

194 HC Deb 10 December 1997 c 568-570w
195 Cm 3999, Para 198
196 Cm 4011, Para 14.1
197 MOD PR 8/7/98
198 HC 138, Para 385


-----

sites, in whole or in part, will be sold: Chilwell, Didcot, Malvern, Old Dalby and
Woolwich (Army); Cardington (RAF); Bromley, Chertsey and Farnborough (DERA);
Bath (MOD); and numerous TA centres.[ 199] The MOD will share with the Treasury an
additional £250m expected in 2001/02, arising from non-property sales and public/private
partnerships asset sales in DERA.[200] The latter may include sales of surplus ammunition
and supplies resulting from reduction of stocks (see below) and equipment. For example,
the decommissioned Type 22 frigates may be sold to various South American navies.

While operating costs will be reduced by cuts in the force structure, chiefly in the RN,
RAF and TA, other savings have been anticipated by raising the MOD efficiency target.
This was 2 per cent in 98/99, although the MOD achieved 3.2 per cent.[201] The efficiency
target for the next four years will be 3 per cent per annum, which the SDR sees as
“challenging” but “achievable”.[202] Savings will arise from the establishment of various
tri-service bodies and the more widespread use of commercial practices. The latter will
play a role in a major destocking programme, where stocks will only be maintained when
realistically required for operations or deployments. Stockholdings will fall by a book
value of 20 per cent or £2.2bn over the next three years.[203] Separately, the SDR identifies
savings of £2bn from Smart Procurement over the next decade, although, due to long
duration of many procurement projects, these are likely to fall towards the end of this
period.[204]

### B. Assessment

The future level of defence spending is central to the SDR. The SDR confirms an
expeditionary strategy and this is linked to the implementation of existing equipment
programmes and procuring some new items as well as rectifying manpower shortfalls.
The SDR ‘package’ is tightly costed and would seem to lose some credibility if it is not
broadly carried out as predicted. Analysis of the financial support of the SDR is limited
by the MOD’s long-standing practice of not publishing its ten-year long-term costings.

The SDR was concluded in March 1998 and then submitted to the Treasury as part of the
Comprehensive Spending Review. Press reports suggest that the SDR costings originally
included savings of £500m over three years. The Treasury apparently pressed for longterm cuts of £2bn (some 10 per cent of the current budget) or even £4bn (20 per cent),
although, as usual, these assessments may arise from propaganda and counterpropaganda.[205] The final MOD offering of £915m, reduced to £685m by one-off sales,

199 Essay Eleven, Paras 13-17
200 HC 138, Para 390
201 HC 138, Paras 393-397
202 Essay Eleven, Para 53
203 Essay Eleven, Para 21-23
204 Essay Ten, Para 21
205 _The Observer_ and The Sunday Times 1 February 1998


-----

may have been agreed by increasing the size of the property disposal programme and
boosting the efficiency target. The exact way in which the MOD CSR was carried out is
unclear.

The MOD budget is now fixed for the next three years. Although large extraordinary
overseas operations, such as the peacekeeping mission in Bosnia, may continue to be
wholly or largely funded from the reserve, if the MOD’s financial plans go awry then it
must make any necessary economies from within its own budget. Doubling the property
disposal programme could be described as ambitious, particularly as future disposals are
estimated against a notoriously cyclical property market. The MOD was recently
criticised by the NAO for its poor handling of property sales[206] Fears have also been
expressed that property sales will be influenced by potential value rather than operational
need. The SDR also admits that its three per cent efficiency target is challenging. One
commentator has said that this “would represent heroic efforts”.[207] Marrying the cultures
of the three Services in various new tri-service bodies may prove more time consuming
and costly than at first apparent. In addition, as discussed above, controlling procurement
spending is enormously difficult and has at least partly defied the best management
efforts of previous governments. The costs of collaborative projects with foreign
countries, which are given new favour in the SDR, can be particularly difficult to keep in
check.

If the MOD does not stick to its spending plans then it must fall back on the traditional
budgetary expedients. These include stretching existing procurement projects or
postponing/cancelling new ones; cutting support services; or general salami slicing in
which budgets are cut across the board. The difficulty here, and with the last two
measures in particular, is that they would run counter to the whole thrust of the SDR to
promote logistics and increase levels of readiness.

Even if the MOD can, or is allowed to, remain within its current budgetary plans, the fact
remains that the SDR has maintained existing commitments, but attempts to meet these
responsibilities with reduced resources. All of these commitments, whether they be to the
Overseas Territories, to NATO, or to allies in the Middle and Far East, are potentially
extremely costly. There is then, in the eyes of some commentators, a fundamental
distinction between the Government’s desire to continue to play an active global military
role and the ability of this country to pay for it.

Overall, the SDR commits the armed forces to doing more in operational terms,
with slightly fewer resources, and slightly less cash available. This is not a costcutting review, and it seeks to create a broadly stable base of spending for the
next three years up to financial year 2001-02. Nevertheless, if defence policy
was generally overstretched before the review by an increasing mismatch
between commitments and resources, it is hard to see what there is anything in
the review which structurally addresses this problem.[208]

206 NAO, Ministry of Defence: Identifying and selling surplus property, HC776 Sess 1997-98
**207 The Strategic Defence Review: How Strategic? How much of a Review?** London Defence Studies 46,
p. 32.
208 _The Strategic Defence Review: How Strategic? How much of a Review, p. 32_


-----

## XI The Longer Term

The Strategic Defence Review is the fifth major attempt to recast the UK's armed forces
since the Second World War. Although the SDR did not accept the institution of formal
periodic defence review, as, for example, is now practised in the USA, it is likely that it
will not be the last. Major reviews have occurred approximately every decade. Despite
the 20 year purview of the SDR, another major defence review may be expected before
2010.

The SDR draws what is widely regarded as rightful attention to the rapid pace of
technological change and the unpredictable ways in which new instabilities may impact
upon the United Kingdom and UK interests. However, these factors mean that some of
the assumptions made by the current Review could turn out to be incorrect. The Sandys
Review of 1957 was predicated on the superiority of nuclear weapons, but British forces
were embroiled in a series of conventional post-colonial conflicts in the succeeding years.
The Nott Review reshaped British forces to respond to what was then perceived to be the
most powerful threat to national security, that of the forces of the Warsaw Pact in central
Europe, and failed to anticipate threats to British dependent territories, such as the
invasion of the Falklands.

To some extent the White Paper resulting from the SDR insures against future uncertainty
by continuing to plan for a very diverse range of defence capabilities, the precise balance
of which could be reviewed and readjusted. It also attempts to keep future options open
by paying due attention to the need for a highly trained but flexible military workforce.

Indeed, it can be argued that the UK’s military power lies less in its equipment than in the
quality of personnel. In order to continue to attract recruits of quality and retain existing
personnel, Service pay and conditions may increasingly need to approximate to those in
the civilian private sector. However, in order to remain effective, the armed forces may
also need in some areas to remain distinct from civilian society. The Government desires
to “have terms and conditions of service which are both relevant to the 21st century and
balance the needs of the individual with those of the organisation”. Preserving this
balance may be one of the greatest challenges in the wake of the defence review.


-----

