-----

#### MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

## THE STRATEGIC DEFENCE REVIEW: A NEW CHAPTER

#### Presented to Parliament by The Secretary of State for Defence By Command of Her Majesty

 July 2002


#### Cm 5566 Vol I £7 50


-----

**© Crown Copyright 2002**

The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and departmental logos) may be reproduced
free of charge in any format or medium providing that it is reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading
context. The material must be acknowledged as Crown copyright and the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to the copyright in this document should be addressed to The Licensing Division, HMSO, St
Clements House, 2-16 Colegate, Norwich, NR3 1BQ.
Fax: 01603 723000 or e-mail: licensing@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk


-----

# Contents


##### Introduction 4

 Section 1 - The Background 6

 Section 2 - Countering Terrorism Abroad 9

 Section 3 - People 19

 Section 4 - International Organisations 21

 Section 5 - Home Defence and Security 24

 Section 6 - Resources and Next Steps 28

 Section 7 - Conclusion 29


-----

### THE STRATEGIC DEFENCE REVIEW:
## A NEW CHAPTER

##### Introduction by the Secretary of State for Defence


11 September 2001 is a day we will never forget.
The unprovoked attacks on New York and
Washington resulted in the loss of thousands of
innocent lives.

Following these attacks, and the potential they
demonstrated for the use by our adversaries of
asymmetric action to achieve strategic effect, I
announced that we would look again at the
United Kingdom’s defence posture and plans.

The work I set in hand was not designed to look
at all aspects of Defence: the attacks last
September did not require that. It has not, for
example looked closely at the full range of
personnel issues. That was why I said from the
outset that the work would be a New Chapter to
the Strategic Defence Review and not a new
review. We have undertaken to publish a full Defence White Paper in the course of each
Parliament and intend to publish such a paper in 2003 which will cover more comprehensively the
range of Defence issues.

Whilst the work has examined some fundamental issues, we have not been starting from a blank
sheet. The Strategic Defence Review, published in 1998, set us firmly on the right track, as borne
out by operations since then in the Balkans, Sierra Leone, East Timor and in and around
Afghanistan. The emphasis on expeditionary operations, usually working with our allies, has
enabled the UK to have a key role in shaping the international security environment.

The New Chapter, and the actions undertaken by our Armed Forces in Afghanistan and elsewhere
following the attacks on 11 September are, of course, just a part of the Government’s efforts to
eliminate terrorism as a force in international affairs. The Government has launched a range of
initiatives involving political, diplomatic, humanitarian, economic, financial, intelligence and law
enforcement, as well as military, measures. And we have worked closely with a wide range of other
countries and international organisations, as part of the overall international response.

Through the extensive involvement of other Government Departments – for example, the Foreign
and Commonwealth Office, the Home Office, the Cabinet Office (including the Civil Contingencies
Secretariat), the Treasury, the Department for International Development, the Department for
Transport and the intelligence agencies – we have sought to ensure that our New Chapter
conclusions take into account, and inform, cross-government thinking and initiatives.

The Strategic Defence Review was praised for its openness and inclusivity. It was important that we
carried this approach through to the New Chapter. In February we published a discussion paper
and sought contributions to our thinking from the public and a wide range of other interested


-----

parties. I am grateful to the many who responded and for the largely supportive nature of their
contributions. I can assure them that their ideas have informed our thinking.

Our proposals on the role of the Reserves in home defence and security – published on 12 June –
are an example of this. We developed these proposals in close consultation with the Home Office
and the Association of Chief Police Officers to best determine what types of capabilities they might
request in the future from the Armed Forces in an impending or actual crisis.

These proposals will also assist in preventing terrorists from tying down our Regular forces at home.
We must retain the ability rapidly to deploy significant, credible forces overseas. It is much better to
engage our enemies in their backyard than in ours, at a time and place of our choosing and not
theirs. But opportunities to engage terrorist groups may be only fleeting, so we need the kind of
rapidly deployable intervention forces which were the key feature of the SDR.

Our Armed Forces have shown particular strengths in these types of operations in high risk
environments - as recently demonstrated in Macedonia and Afghanistan. Such operations will
require the controlled, precise and rapid delivery of military effect particularly through what is called
“network-centric capability”, bringing together sensors and strike assets. The outcome of Spending
Review 2002, with the biggest sustained real increase in Defence spending plans for 20 years, will
enable us to make the investment necessary to acquire these sorts of capabilities. And we have
particular strengths in providing assistance to other countries to build their own capabilities,
through defence diplomacy activities.

Experience since 1998, and since the 11 September attacks, suggests that we may need to deploy
forces further afield than Europe, the Gulf and the Mediterranean (which the SDR identified as the
primary focus of our interests) more often than we had envisaged. The international response to
the attacks does not require the UK to undertake or participate in all operations, but we need to
take our share of the tasks and responsibilities which may present themselves. In particular, 11
September and its aftermath underlined the importance of the transatlantic relationship. From the
outset, we demonstrated by our actions our wish to work closely with our most important ally, the
US. Our ability to operate alongside the US (and with other partners, particularly in Europe but
also elsewhere) will be key to future success.

This White Paper is by no means the end of the story. Our work to date has been conducted against
a changing strategic and operational backdrop. The world changed on 11 September, but there are
no doubt more twists and turns to come to which we must be ready to respond.


-----

## SECTION 1
### The Background


**11 September 2001**

###### 1.1 Why a New Chapter? 

1. In the wake of the shocking attacks in New York and Washington last September, the Secretary
of State for Defence announced that work would be undertaken on a New Chapter to the Strategic
Defence Review (SDR) published in 1998. This work would look again at our defence posture and
plans to ensure that we have the right concepts, the right capabilities and the right forces to meet
the additional challenges we now face.

2. We were clear from the outset that the SDR provided a firm
foundation on which to build and that the direction which it
had set for Defence, together with lessons learnt subsequently
from, for example, the Kosovo campaign in 1999, continued to
be broadly right. That was why the work was deliberately
designed as a New Chapter rather than a new review.

3. The SDR focussed on capabilities and structures for
expeditionary operations, and the need to enhance them.
Experience since – in the Balkans, in Sierra Leone, in East Timor
and in and around Afghanistan – demonstrates how right that
was.

4. The SDR recognised the existence of asymmetric threats


-----

(defined as the threat of an attack by unconventional methods which would have a
disproportionate effect). It pointed out that “there are also new risks which threaten our security
by attacking our way of life … we have seen new and horrifying forms of terrorism … there is an
increasing danger from the proliferation of nuclear, biological and chemical technologies”. But,
whereas the SDR saw these potential asymmetric threats as one of a range of tactics that an
adversary might use, the attacks on the US on 11 September have shown that such action has the
potential for strategic effect. It is this development that has prompted the work we are now
undertaking.

###### 1.2 Cross-Government and International Framework

5. Our work is one part of a much wider effort across Government in the aftermath of 11
September, with the overall goal of eliminating terrorism as a force for change in international
affairs. And the UK’s efforts are part of a wider international response. The Government and, within
that, the Ministry of Defence, have already taken a wide range of steps, some of which are set out
in Section 3 of the Supporting Information and Analysis published with this White Paper. Political,
diplomatic, humanitarian, economic, financial, intelligence and law enforcement, as well as military,
measures have been and will continue to be deployed.

###### 1.3 Questions the New Chapter Has Addressed/ Responses to Discussion Paper

6. In February, we published a discussion paper which posed a set of questions, such as:

- how should we strike a balance between the defence role in helping to protect the UK, and
contributing to overseas operations?

- in the medium to long term, what balance should the UK seek to strike between contributing
Armed Forces, on the one hand, to help address the symptoms of terrorism and, on the other,
to assist in efforts to address the causes of terrorism?

- are there ways in which military support to the civil authorities could be improved?

- in terms of operations overseas, what is the right balance between operations to disrupt
potential threats, find-and-strike operations and stabilisation operations?

- do we need to be able to deploy more of our forces more rapidly to counter terrorism worldwide?

- should the UK aim to specialise in particular forms of capability or operations as a contribution
to operations with allies or concentrate on particular geographic areas?

- What are the roles of the United Nations, NATO and the European Union in tackling
international terrorism?

7. The discussion paper sought responses to these questions from the public and a wide range of
other interested parties. The responses we have received are summarised in more detail in Section
8 of the Supporting Information and Analysis, but some of the key themes running through them
were:

- support for the Strategic Defence Review and the work on the New Chapter;

- support for the Armed Forces’ focus on operating abroad, and a view that rapid effect and high
readiness are crucial;


-----

- support for the Armed Forces playing a role in preventing terrorist attacks in the UK and the
contribution that the Reserves could make to home defence and security;

- the importance of cross-Government co-ordination;

- and the role that international organisations such as the UN, NATO and the EU have in
combating international terrorism.

8. This White Paper gives some answers to the questions we posed, which fit with many of the
views and concerns expressed in response to the discussion paper.


-----

## SECTION 2
### Countering Terrorism Abroad


9. Experience shows that it is better where possible, to engage an enemy at longer range, before
they get the opportunity to mount an assault on the UK. Not only is this more effective than
waiting to be attacked at a point and timing of an enemy’s choosing, but it can have a deterrent
effect. We must therefore continue to be ready and willing to deploy significant forces overseas
and, when legally justified, to act against terrorists and those who harbour them.

10. Before looking at whether there are changes we need to make to the posture and capabilities
of our forces, we have sought to understand better what our Armed Forces can achieve in
countering threats abroad, and what sort of operations they might be engaged in. In assessing
potential roles, we recognise that we have a range of powerful non-military tools which will often
be the first choice to help achieve our aims, but that there will be circumstances where we need to
back these up with military forces.

11. Key conclusions from our analysis include:

- we must aim for “knowledge superiority” over international terrorists to anticipate their plans
and ensure the most effective combination of effects to counter their attacks;

- the main sorts of military effect we can bring to bear are to prevent, deter, coerce, disrupt or
destroy our opponents. These effects are described in more detail in Section 6 of the
Supporting Information and Analysis;

- these effects may be applied both against international terrorist organisations directly, and,
where necessary, against state regimes that support or sponsor them;

- we must now be ready to counter terrorists who acquire chemical, biological, radiological and
perhaps nuclear devices.

###### 2.1 Where Should We Focus Our Efforts in Countering Terrorism Abroad?

12. Of course, whatever action we take in response to a particular threat will depend on the nature
of that threat. Not all cases will require military or defence activity. In some of those that do,
defence diplomacy or peace support might be enough. In others, robust military action will be
required. We want to be able to contribute to the range of actions in the framework of effects we
have identified - prevent (including stabilise), deter, coerce, disrupt, destroy. But we are very
conscious of the need not to place unsustainable demands on the members of the Armed Forces
and their families, and we have considered where our particular strengths lie, and therefore where
we should place particular emphasis.

13. We have strengths in both find-and-strike operations (ie, in terms of the framework of effects,
operations to coerce, disrupt and, potentially, destroy) and prevention/stabilisation operations.
Although British forces must be ready for combat in a wide range of situations (including,


-----

**An RAF Chinook**
**inserts a Royal Marine**
**patrol on a mountain**
**top in Afghanistan**


potentially, in prevention/stabilisation
operations), find-and-strike operations in
particular require high intensity and
integrated warfighting capacity, and the
intelligence and politico-military decisionmaking capacity to act with speed and
decisiveness. Only a few countries have this
capacity at present. In the case of
stabilisation operations, our particular
strength is perhaps in the early and more
demanding phases as seen in Kabul this year
and Macedonia in 2001, although our other
Balkans commitments indicate clearly that –
when it is called for – we are far from being
short-term operators.

14. Recent US and UK operations in
Afghanistan illustrate the kind of
operations we may face in the future. They
have occasionally presented opportunities
for direct attack, but the cordoning and
searching of terrain, and the destruction of
hiding places and military equipment, also
help deny terrorists the opportunity to
organise and operate in Afghanistan. The
phasing, scale and tempo may all differ from those of operations against a more conventional
opponent. And the success of such operations may be measured more by our success in
exploiting fleeting opportunities and deterring and disrupting future terrorist activity than by
any decisive pitched battle.

15. Section 2.4 below examines in more detail the demands of operations abroad to coerce,
disrupt and destroy potential opponents, and some of the types of capability that operations
of this kind may call for. But first we consider how the Armed Forces can contribute to
prevention and deterrence.

###### 2.2 Prevention

16. Countering terrorism is usually a long term business requiring the roots and causes to be
addressed as well as the symptoms. The Government is well placed to help less capable states build
a society in which terrorism is less likely to emerge, through our conflict prevention (including
defence diplomacy) activities. By undertaking peace support operations, usually in coalition with
others, we can prevent instability or assist in stabilisation. And by training other states’ armed
forces, we can transfer our military skills so that they can eventually do the job themselves. Where
prevention has failed and we have engaged in coercive or destructive activities, we should be
prepared to assist in post-conflict recovery, to help create the conditions for stability, thereby
reducing the likelihood of the state supporting or harbouring terrorists in the future.

17. The Government has committed significant additional resources to improved conflict
prevention, management and resolution, and has established cross-Departmental budgets to enable
a more joined-up approach. Within this framework, the Government is developing strategies to
cover many of the key trouble spots or potential trouble spots in the world, and to support
measures such as security sector reform and promoting post-conflict recovery which will help
address some of the key underlying causes of international terrorism in regions such as the Middle
East, South Asia and Afghanistan.


-----

**A Gurkha Corporal**
**seen with some of the**
**large numbers of**
**weapons successfully**
**collected by NATO in**
**Macedonia**


18. For example, in 2002 the Government is funding a major programme of initiatives of security
sector reform in Afghanistan. The MOD will offer its expertise for a wide range of activities to be
carried out with Afghan and international partners, and in co-ordination with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

19. Our defence diplomacy activities have a key
role to play. For example, our provision of
training to other countries has already proved its
worth in terms of improving the effectiveness and
interoperability of other nations’ forces –
including the forces of countries at risk from
terrorism – and is also a highly effective
component in contributing to building long term
relationships. In future, in determining our
relative priorities in defence relations with other
countries, we will want to give higher priority
than hitherto to the potential demands of
operations to counter terrorism, and the potential
for particular countries to be partners, and to
provide support.


**The Parachute**
**Regiment on a security**
**patrol in the centre of**
**Kabul**


-----

###### Deterrence

20. Recent events have emphasised that attacks resulting in severe casualties or grave damage
may come from many directions and use many methods. We must seek to deter any use of
weapons of mass destruction against us, our interests, or our Allies, but also any other attacks that
cause (or intend) mass casualties or grave damage to the economy, the environment, government or
the fabric of society.

21. The UK’s nuclear weapons have a continuing use as a means of deterring major strategic
military threats, and they have a continuing role in guaranteeing the ultimate security of the UK.
But we also want it to be clear, particularly to the leaders of states of concern and terrorist
organisations, that all our forces play a part in deterrence, and that we have a broad range of
responses available. We must influence leaderships by showing that we are prepared to take all
necessary measures to defend ourselves. Where necessary, military and other action will be taken to
disrupt the political, economic, military and technical means by which aggression is pursued. We
want it to be clear that the UK, along with our partners, can reach into the way they operate, and
that they could lose their power, and see their organisations closed down.

22. We have made clear that our responses will be proportionate and in accordance with our
international legal obligations. But we will not let the less scrupulous think we do not mean
business, or simplify an aggressor’s calculations by announcing how we would respond in particular
circumstances. The only certainty we should offer is that we shall respond appropriately if we need
to, using any of the wide range of options open to us. It should be clear that legally the right to
self defence includes the possibility of action in the face of an imminent attack.

23. We must therefore maintain a wide and flexible range of military options, including
conventional weapons with a capacity for precision and penetration so as to minimise incidental
damage. We should focus too on more specialised capabilities, including, where legally justified, the
scope to detain persons and bring them to justice.

24. But, crucially, our deterrent extends well beyond the military dimension to a response coordinated across Government and with friends and allies. We should ensure that our preparedness
to deal with terrorism is understood and, more widely, be able to institute effective political,
financial, economic and legal sanctions on states and individuals. Creating the right international
climate will be important, fostering the view in all cultures that certain actions are to be condemned
as criminal acts. This will often mean acting through the UN Security Council, the European Union
or other appropriate international organisations.

25. The UK has a wide range of capabilities at home and abroad, including excellent military forces.
We will use all our resources to thwart the activities of aggressors, reduce their chances of success,
and make sure that the UK can take action to defend itself effectively against attacks on us, our
Overseas Territories, or our allies. The international community will co-operate in pursuing
aggressors, and bringing them to justice. Aggression against us will not secure political or military
advantage, but invite a proportionately serious response. Those, at every level, responsible for any
breach of international law relating to the use of weapons of mass destruction will be held
personally accountable.


###### 2.3 Operations Abroad: Some Planning Considerations

**(i)** **Geography**

26. It is likely that, if anything, the trend (which we recognized and planned for in the SDR)
towards expeditionary operations – such as those in recent years in the Balkans, in Sierra Leone, in
East Timor and in and around Afghanistan – will become even more pronounced. While the core
regions identified in the SDR of Europe, the Gulf and the Mediterranean are likely to remain the


-----

primary focus of our interests, it is increasingly clear that a coherent and effective campaign against
international terrorism – and indeed other contingencies – may require engagement further afield
more often than perhaps we had previously assumed.

27. We need to assess what share of the task we should take on. When we decide to be involved,
we will generally be operating alongside coalition partners, with the US often in the lead. But, in
other cases, our friends and partners in the region concerned will undertake operations, and there
will not be UK military involvement.

**(ii)** **Local Infrastructure Support**

28. Our analysis suggests that, while operating at greater range may have some implications for
our planning and expeditionary logistics capabilities, the availability and quality of local
infrastructure, and the speed of response needed, are more important factors than simple distance.
The future may see us engaged in a greater range of situations often with – at best – limited local infrastructure.

29. Our ability to operate in a particular theatre rests on a variety of factors:

- whether the theatre is close to the UK, or to UK Overseas Territories, or to allied countries, from
which we might be able to launch operations;

- the probability of securing the necessary infrastructure support in strategically positioned
countries within or near the theatre. This in turn is likely to rest on a number of factors,
including:

  - the defence relationship we have built up, over the long term, with the country or
countries in question;

  - the political context for possible military action;

- whether there is ready access to the theatre by sea.


**HMS Southampton**
**exercising with an**
**Omani patrol vessel**
**during Saif Sareea II**


-----

30. Diplomacy (including defence diplomacy) has a potentially important role here both in terms of
building and sustaining long term strategic relationships which increase the likelihood of countries
providing supporting infrastructure for our forces and those of allies in a crisis; and in terms of
increasing the numbers of allies and partners who are willing to make military contributions to the
resolution of crises, and in some cases to take a lead. Operations in and around Afghanistan have
demonstrated the practical military value of long-standing, as well as more recent, international
military relationships.

**(iii)** **Concurrency and Scale**

31. The capability of our forces is strained not just by the scale of operations, but by the number of
simultaneous or near-simultaneous operations. Since the SDR we have assumed that we should
plan to be able to undertake either a single major operation (of a similar scale and duration to our
contribution to the Gulf War in 1990-91), or undertake a more extended overseas deployment on a
lesser scale (as in the mid-1990s in Bosnia), while retaining the ability to mount a second
substantial deployment – which might involve a combat brigade and appropriate naval and air
forces – if this were made necessary by a second crisis. We would not, however, expect both
deployments to involve warfighting or to maintain them simultaneously for longer than 6 months.

32. But our analysis suggests that, in some respects – particularly for enabling assets like
deployable headquarters, communications and deployed logistical support – several smaller scale
operations are potentially more demanding than one or two more substantial operations. And there
are now signs that frequent, smaller operations are becoming the pattern. It may well be (as has
been the case in Afghanistan) that we will need to undertake find-and-strike operations at the same
time as prevention or stabilisation operations, and these operations may be (unlike in Afghanistan)
in widely geographically separated locations. So we need to take account of that, and ensure that
we have sufficient critical enabling assets to support anticipated levels of concurrency.

###### 2.4 Operations Abroad: Capabilities

33. We have analysed a set of plausible and realistic scenarios, to assess the demands we may face
in countering terrorism overseas. This has not been a dry academic exercise: we have borne in mind
the lessons being learned “in real time” from operations in Afghanistan, and other recent
operations. The specific implications of particular scenarios can be highly case-dependent and are
unlikely to be replicated precisely in real life. But we can draw general conclusions about the
capabilities that may be particularly important. These are generally capabilities with wider utility for
other operations as well. So, even if international terrorism turns out not to be an enduring
challenge, we will not be taking our forces and capabilities up a strategic “dead end”.

34. Our conclusions show that the SDR was generally taking our Armed Forces in the right direction
but reinforce the growing importance we already attach to what is called “network-centric
capability”. This concept (see Box below) emerged substantially in the 1991 Gulf conflict, which
demonstrated how precision weapons and shared information technologies could be linked together
to produce devastating military effects with unparalleled speed and accuracy. The pace of change,
led by the US, has continued to accelerate.


-----

###### Network-Centric Capability

35. Network-centric capability encompasses the elements required to deliver controlled and precise
military effect rapidly and reliably. At its heart are three elements: sensors (to gather information); a
network (to fuse, communicate and exploit the information); and strike assets to deliver military
effect. The key is the ability to collect, fuse and disseminate accurate, timely and relevant
information with much greater rapidity (sometimes in a matter of only minutes, or even in “real
time”) to help provide a common understanding among commanders at all levels.

36. The benefits include:

- greater precision in the control of operations;

- greater precision in the application of force, resulting from better targeting information and the
ability to update and disseminate it in near real time;

- greater rapidity of effect, through shortening the time required to assimilate information, take
decisions, and act upon them;

- greater force protection, resulting from better “situational awareness” as well as from specific
defensive measures.

37. Each of these aspects has particular salience in the context of operations to counter terrorism
overseas, and our thinking on each, including on how we might enhance and develop our
capabilities, is set out in further detail below.

38. Our capabilities, strongly supported by our science and technology programmes, are moving in
the right direction, but we will accelerate and want to increase our investment in network-centric
capabilities. We are already investing in a range of sensors, including airborne stand-off surveillance
(for example, Nimrod MRA4, ASTOR and RAPTOR); battlefield unmanned air vehicles; and battlefield
electronic warfare capabilities (SOOTHSAYER).

39. Similarly, we are already investing in the network, both in terms of communications assets
(including BOWMAN, FALCON, and tactical datalinks) and in terms of information processing. We
have, and are developing, information systems applications which collate, fuse, analyse and control
the distribution of information, and it is in this area that some of the most important advances can
be made.

40. The final pieces of a networked capability are those assets and capabilities that deliver the
desired effect. These may be precision attack capabilities (eg Tomahawk land attack missiles fired
from submarines, precision bombs from aircraft, Storm Shadow cruise missiles and further precision
air-launched and artillery weapons due to come
into service in the near future) or troop on the
ground. However, they may also, for example, be
information operations (designed to influence an
adversary’s decision-making in a favourable
direction), which now play an increasingly
important role in achieving the effect traditionally
delivered by force.

41. This means that, in future, it will be less
useful to try to measure combat power in crude
terms of numbers of platforms and people than in
terms of our ability to deliver specific effects, with
a robust network at the core, linking key
capabilities and enabling force multipliers.


**The FIST (Future**
**Integrated Soldier**
**Technology)**
**programme aims to**
**transform the**
**capabilities of the**
**individual infantryman**


-----

**Network-centric**
**capability**


**(i)** **Precision of Control**

42. Terrorist organisations are very difficult to identify, locate, quantify, monitor and target.
Whereas there is a considerable amount of reliable data on the armed forces of nation states, this
information about terrorists is much more difficult to acquire and evaluate. This presents particular
challenges in the management of operations at all levels – for those providing political and strategic
direction no less than for tactical commanders on the ground.

43. There is no magic solution to this problem. But it does reinforce the importance of maximising
our ability to acquire, process and disseminate information. Our capacity to absorb and exploit
large quantities of raw data and transform it rapidly into the direction of military action is a key
advantage that we hold over any terrorist group. We will therefore seek continuing improvements
in this area, in close co-operation with other Departments and agencies. We want to ensure that
we fully exploit the opportunities for synergy between different information collection systems, and
look for scope to accelerate the process of converting raw data into actionable intelligence that can
be relayed quickly to inform the decision makers and to commanders in theatre.


**The highly capable**
**new Apache attack**
**helicopter**


-----

**(ii)** **Precision in the Application of Force**

44. In post-Cold War conventional military operations there has been an increased emphasis on the
need for precision in the use of force, to minimise unintended casualties and accidental damage.
Counter-terrorist operations are likely to pose particular problems in this respect. Our opponents
may be few in number, and highly mobile, presenting difficult and fleeting targets. They may be
intermingled with a non-combatant population, possibly in areas of high population density; or they
may be holed up in inaccessible locations which make conventional military assaults especially risky.
In future they may have chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) devices. Equally, there
may be no clear “front lines” separating our opponents from our own forces or those of coalition
partners.

45. In these circumstances, the ability to conduct covert stand-off reconnaissance and surveillance,
the accurate pin-pointing of targets, the updating and communication of targeting information in
near real time, and the ability to strike hard with a high degree of precision, will all be important.
We are now evaluating additional enhancements to our target acquisition and strike capabilities.
Although it is not our practice to comment in detail on Special Forces’ capabilities, we can confirm
that we are also planning to enhance the capabilities of our Special Forces and their enablers to
maximise their utility and flexibility. We also plan accelerated investment in unmanned air vehicles
(UAVs) as set out in the Box below. And, while detailed techniques will have to remain secret, the
challenge posed by potential acquisition of CBRN devices by terrorists is now reflected in our
planning.


###### Unmanned Air Vehicles

46. A key element in network-centric capability involves the use of unmanned air vehicles (UAVs),
equipped with appropriate payloads and data links. The US demonstrated in Afghanistan how
effective such systems can be in providing persistent surveillance of the battlefield or theatre of
operations, without putting aircrew lives at risk. Our own Watchkeeper project has the same
purpose; and we intend to accelerate the programme.

47. UAVs offer huge potential for improving operational effectiveness, in a range of different
situations and environments. We cannot anticipate all their capabilities and uses – or indeed
limitations – ahead of putting them in the operators’ hands. Our own experience of the Phoenix
system in the Balkans was instructive. Designed and deployed as an observation system for artillery,
it rapidly proved its utility in a much broader surveillance role.

48. Accordingly, we have decided to establish a joint-Service UAV operational development unit, in
which personnel from all three Services will acquire early experience of exploiting such systems, in
different configurations and conditions and with different payloads. Details of the composition and
location of the unit are still being developed, but we expect to select next month the two consortia
to work with us on the next phase of the Watchkeeper project, and we shall invite each of them to
provide us with an appropriate prototype system in short order, to enable practical experimentation
to begin in the first part of next year. Lessons and experience can then be fed back into refining
our requirements and understanding of UAVs’ potential as the Watchkeeper programme develops.

**Unmanned air vehicles**
**are proving increasingly**
**valuable battlefield**
**tools**


-----

**The C-17 heavy lift**
**transport aircraft has**
**already proved**
**invaluable support to**
**operations in**
**Macedonia and**
**Afghanistan**


**(iii)** **Rapidity of Effect**

49. We must expect terrorist groups to avoid
pitched battles against modern armed forces,
and operations against them may often last
months or years rather than days and weeks.
Such operations may often consist primarily of
the harrying and disruption of our opponents
without producing a clear-cut outcome, in the
form of a recognisable military defeat or
surrender.

50. This does not mean, however, that we
should resign ourselves to a strategy of
containment. The successful engagement of
terrorists, even if only on a small scale, and
the destruction of their infrastructure, may
weaken and demoralise the opposition.
Tactical successes may also be important in
bolstering the confidence and resolve of local
populations or neighbouring states.
The challenge, therefore, is to be able to seize the fleeting and infrequent opportunities that may
arise for this sort of engagement. In part, this depends upon capabilities already discussed above –
the acquisition and rapid dissemination of information which can be used to cue precision strike
attacks.

51. But it also requires the ability to deploy and redeploy rapidly, and it has potential implications
for the mix of forces that are used. For instance, some theatres and scenarios, like Afghanistan, may
point towards the use of rapidly deployable light forces rather than armoured or mechanised forces
and artillery: and we are examining ways of providing such forces with improved mobility and
firepower. Operations in Afghanistan have again demonstrated the key role played by support
helicopters. And, as part of our move towards more rapidly deployable forces, we are also pursuing
the concept of a Future Rapid Effect System, a family of air-transportable medium-weight armoured
vehicles. We will also be accelerating the introduction of additional temporary deployed
accommodation for our troops, and further improving its hot weather capability.

52. We have also looked at how to improve the flexibility and responsiveness of support to naval
forces and are now establishing the Maritime Afloat Reach and Sustainability project. Current
thinking includes a fleet of new design ships, that are faster and more able to adapt to a number of
different roles than our current single role supporting shipping.

**(iv)** **Force Protection**

53. Since the capabilities of terrorist groups are often difficult to assess and quantify, there will be
some uncertainty about the types of threat that such groups may pose to our forces when they
deploy. Hand-held anti-air weapons may be a particular threat. So improvements to the defensive
aids available to our aircraft and helicopters are a high priority.

54. We also need to consider less conventional forms of threat. For instance, improvised bombs
have obvious advantages for hostile groups who cannot hope to prevail in an outright military
confrontation. We will examine how to enhance our ability to provide bomb disposal support to
deployed forces whilst maintaining the level of capability that we continue to require in the UK
itself. Similarly, we will want to ensure that deployed forces have the ability to maintain their
freedom of operation in environments where some form of CBRN threat cannot be ruled out.


-----

## SECTION 3
### People


55. In doing the New Chapter work, we have been very aware of the impact of operations on our
Armed Forces – and their families – and that we cannot ask or expect them to operate at an
excessive tempo. We need to ensure that we do not place unmanageable demands on our people,
many of whom are faced with very demanding commitments.

56. The availability of suitably trained and motivated personnel is key to operational success. A
vital element of the SDR itself was the ‘Policy for People’, which recognised that our defence
depends on our Armed Forces personnel, and their families, as well as the civil servants and others
who work alongside them. People are at the centre of our plans. In particular we are delivering,
through the Armed Forces Overarching Personnel Strategy, real and sustainable improvements to the
quality of life of our Service personnel and their families. We are also updating our civilian
personnel policies to ensure that, over the long term, Defence will continue to have the skilled and
committed civil servants it needs.

57. We have to accept, though, that we still face considerable challenges in this area. Most
importantly, despite significant efforts and some notable successes in the area of recruiting and
retention, fully manned and sustainable manpower structures are proving elusive. It is not simply a


**A Royal Marine**
**welcomed home from**
**Afghanistan by his**
**wife at Prestwick**


-----

matter of just improving recruiting or just improving retention – we need to work hard at both.
And in neither area does substantial improvement come easily.

58. On recruitment, we have to contend with the fact that too many young people simply do not
contemplate a Service career. The emphasis we place on recruiting people who wish to make a
career of the Services is also at odds with a workforce which moves increasingly quickly from
employer to employer. We face strong competition for the best, in the face of high levels of
employment, and increasing numbers of young people in higher and further education.

59. The challenge for us is to become “employers of first choice”. This means that we need to
continue to work hard to educate young people about what the Services have to offer and make
the Armed Forces an attractive proposition to them. We also need terms and conditions of service
that meet modern aspirations, together with employment patterns that allow us to retain
experienced personnel.

60. Evidence suggests that high operational tempo, high levels of separation and repeated
deployments to the same location have a cumulative effect on morale and are ultimately retentionnegative for many Service personnel, especially those with young families.

61. We recognise that many of our Servicemen and women have been working at or near, and in
some cases beyond, the boundaries of what was planned in the SDR for some considerable time
now. So, in our work on the New Chapter, we have been careful to avoid any suggestion that our
existing personnel might simply be required to do more.

62. In the normal course of events we need to ensure that our people have time both to attend to
their family and personal needs and to meet their own training and development needs between
one deployment and the next, although our plans recognise that there may be particularly
demanding short term circumstances which do not allow for this. But, over the long term, getting
the balance right between time at home and time away on operations is critical to ensuring that life
in the Services is sufficiently attractive to encourage our people to stay with us for as long as we
can employ them.

63. All of this means that, in the short to medium term, in considering how to respond to the
challenge of the new strategic context, we have to be realistic about the numbers we can recruit
and retain. We will need to continue to ensure that our operational commitments do not become
unsustainable in the long term. Also, in considering the right mix of front line and enabling forces
for the future, we need to take account of the pressures on individuals, particularly those in the
most heavily used specialisms.

64. Success in operations will also continue to depend on the contribution of civilians working for
the Ministry of Defence, and contractors providing support. This key role – with civilians both
increasingly being deployed to operational areas, and also performing a range of essential tasks in
the UK and elsewhere – has become more important as the Armed Forces have become more
heavily engaged in a range of expeditionary operations. This trend is set to continue.


-----

## SECTION 4
### International Organisations


**Members of the**
**Security Council meet**
**at the United Nations**


-----

**The National Flags at**
**NATO Headquarters,**
**flying at half mast**
**after 11 September**


-----

74. The European Security and Defence Policy encompasses stabilisation tasks, which are key to the
overall campaign against international terrorism. A wide spectrum of relevant military capability
improvements are being pursued as part of the EU’s Headline Goal work, for example airlift, sealift,
air-to-air refuelling, unmanned air vehicles and precision guided munitions. Some, such as nuclear,
biological and chemical self-protection capabilities, may need enhancing so that forces can operate
in more demanding environments.


-----

## SECTION 5
### Home Defence and Security


75. We assessed in the SDR that, while there was no direct military threat to the UK, there were
new risks to our security and way of life, including unconventional terrorist attacks, the threat of
which continues to grow. We need to readjust some of our priorities in response.

76. In the UK, the Home Office is responsible for counter-terrorism policy, and the lead for domestic
security lies with the civil agencies – and particularly with the police. The Government’s policy is to
seek intelligence on terrorist groups and to disrupt their activities, where possible, through
prosecutions, by the intelligence and security agencies working closely with the law enforcement
agencies. Any support provided by the Armed Forces, and especially the use of force, must be at the
specific request of the civil authorities. Our work has been and will continue to be undertaken
firmly within the framework of that principle.

77. Providing properly for the defence and security of the UK (and its Overseas Territories) is a key
responsibility of Government, and a properly secure home base is a prerequisite for successful
operations overseas. When deploying forces overseas, we ensure that military capability remains
available to the civil authorities in responding to a terrorist incident in the UK. But we have made
clear that we are not going to allow threats at home to tie up significant numbers of our high
readiness Armed Forces and prevent us from acting abroad. If we did so, those who threaten us
would have won. And, in any case, all our analysis shows that tackling the problem where possible
at a distance is preferable to waiting for problems to come to us: in that sense operations overseas
are often the best form of home defence.

78. Our work in this area has sought to build on the particular strengths of the Armed Forces: their
planning and co-ordination of operations; their command and control of forces; their nation-wide
footprint of people, infrastructure and communications; and their specialist capabilities. Some of our
initial proposals were outlined in a discussion document published on 12 June, and they are
summarised at Sections 5.1-5.3 below.

###### 5.1 Command and Control

79. We intend to develop further the machinery whereby the civil authorities can request
appropriate support from the Armed Forces, whether Regular or Reserves. In particular, there will be:

- a clearer role for the Headquarters of the Commander in Chief, Land Forces, as the principal
focus for the provision of military assistance to civil authorities in a wide range of operations;

- Joint Regional Liaison Officers within each region to provide a single focal point representing
all three Services. They will liaise between regional commanders and both local civil authorities
and Devolved Administrations, and will also co-ordinate Armed Forces’ participation in local
and regional civil emergency control centres during crises;

- more staff available in regional Brigade headquarters, both for contingency planning purposes
and in emergencies.


-----

###### 5.2 Communications

80. 2 Signal Brigade, a predominantly Territorial Army formation, already provides the deployable
element of a national communications infrastructure; thus the Volunteer Reserves can provide
communications support to military forces and other Ministry of Defence personnel engaged in the
response to home defence incidents. We propose to formalise 2 Signal Brigade’s role in supporting
operational continuity and equip them with modern communications equipment compatible with
that coming into service with the civil police and emergency services.

###### 5.3 Enhanced Roles for the Reserves

81. To provide the “force elements” that may be required to provide assistance to the civil
authorities for home defence and security purposes, we have looked in particular at the Reserve
Forces. Our work so far has led us to judge that there is a greater role for the Reserves to play.

82. The Reserve Forces, both Volunteer Reservists and Regular Reservists (former servicemen and
women with a continuing liability to be called into full time service) have contributed significantly to
operations at home and overseas in recent years. For example, they have consistently provided
volunteers to make up around 10% of personnel for our forces undertaking peace support
operations in the Balkans. In addition, we have recently called out Territorial Army and Royal
Auxiliary Air Force personnel in order to provide specialist intelligence, medical and movements staff
in the UK and overseas to support current operations in response to the threat of international
terrorism, and in the Balkans. This is in keeping with the main role for the Reserves set out in the
SDR: that they should be an essential reinforcement for the Regular Armed Forces when deployed
on operations.

83. We have now developed some proposals (summarised in the Box below and set out in more
detail in the discussion document we published on 12 June) to form Reaction Forces from the
Volunteer Reserves for home defence and security purposes. The discussion document sought views
on these proposals from the Reserves, their employers and others with an interest, by 13 September.
Once we have gathered these views, we will refine our proposals as necessary and begin
implementation as quickly as possible. We aim to have an initial Reaction Force capability in place
before the end of the year and then to build up to full capability as soon as possible thereafter, as
we purchase the necessary equipment and provided the additional training.

**Experts from 101**
**(London) Engineer**
**Regiment (Explosive**
**Ordnance Disposal)**
**(Volunteers), practice**
**dealing with an**
**unexploded bomb**


-----

###### Reaction Forces

- A Reaction Force of, on average, some 500 Volunteer Reserves would be established in each
region – in principle giving a total of some 6,000 or so Volunteer Reserves in Reaction Forces
nation-wide.

- We would use the Army’s regional brigade areas for this purpose, since this corresponds to the
system of Government Offices for the Regions and to the Devolved Administration structure.

- Reaction Forces would comprise only individuals who agree to take on this additional
commitment, drawn from all Volunteer Reserve units within the regional brigade area.

- The organisational framework for Reaction Forces would be provided by an existing major
Volunteer Reserve unit in each region – most probably a Territorial Army infantry battalion.

- The decision to deploy a Reaction Force would follow a request from the civil authorities for
military assistance. A recommendation to deploy a Reaction Force would then be made by the
regional military commander with responsibility for home defence and security, who would
exercise his judgement as to which of the forces at his disposal, including the Reaction Force
but also Regular Forces, best match the requirements of the situation.

- To avoid holding up the deployment of Reaction Forces pending the issue of an appropriate
mobilisation order, initial reporting would be on a voluntary basis. To give the Volunteer
Reservist the necessary employment protection, the Government would expect to initiate
mobilisation procedures after 36 hours, under the Reserve Forces Act 1996.


###### 5.4 Training and Education

84. Many of the skills required for the successful conduct of military operations are also applicable
to civil crises. But, to participate effectively in civil emergencies, the Armed Forces also require some
additional knowledge of civil structures and practices. Similarly, the civil authorities need to be able
to understand how the Armed Forces operate and to draw on their operational experience.

85. We have therefore built on existing links to form a partnership between the Defence Academy,
the Government’s Emergency Planning College and the Government’s Centre for Management and
Policy Studies to share experiences and teaching resources. This partnership will improve the quality
of the training and education available to both the Armed Forces and the civil authorities for civil
crisis management.

###### 5.5 Air Defence and Maritime Integrity

86. The events of 11 September have caused us to look again at some aspects of our air defence.
For many years the RAF has had measures in place to detect, deter and, if necessary, destroy aircraft
which threatened the UK. Like many countries, we have Quick Reaction Alert (QRA) aircraft at high
readiness to undertake these tasks. We made very clear, immediately after the attacks on the US,
that we would use this capability, if necessary, against rogue aircraft.

87. We will continue to refine our air defence arrangements as necessary. In particular, further
enhancements to our radar systems are in hand. We are also investing in the ability of airfields across
the UK (RAF Marham in Norfolk, RAF St Mawgan in Cornwall and RNAS Yeovilton in Somerset) to
support QRA aircraft when needed. These are in addition to the bases already able to operate QRA
aircraft and will give us greater flexibility in our air defence arrangements. We expect most of the work
to be completed within the next twelve months, although work to enhance facilities at RNAS Yeovilton
will take longer. There will be occasional increases in fast jet flights into and out of these bases.


-----

**Tornado F3 aircraft**
**provide a Quick**
**Reaction Alert**
**capability**

88. For maritime integrity we act in support of the civil authorities, in particular the police, HM
Customs and Excise and the port authorities. We do contribute certain specialist capabilities, in the
role of maritime counter terrorism. We will continue to keep under close review and, where
appropriate, make adjustments to, our arrangements to counter ship-borne threats.


-----

## SECTION 6
### Resources and Next Steps

89. As a result of Spending Review 2002, the Defence Budget will rise by £3.5 billion between
2002/3 and 2005/6, representing 1.2% average annual real growth over the next three years.
Within this is some £1 billion of new capital and £[1]/2 billion of new resources for the equipment
and capabilities needed to respond to the additional challenges described in this paper.

90. The conclusions we have reached so far are not the end of the story. For example, there will
continue to be further lessons to be drawn from continuing operations (which we will gather
through our well established operational audit process), and further refinement of our strategies
and techniques to defeat international terrorism and other asymmetric threats will be needed. And,
while the strategic context has obviously changed since 11 September, there will doubtless be more
developments to come. In the light of this changing context, policy work in various areas, including
missile defence has continued alongside the New Chapter work. Our policies, concepts, capabilities
and structures will need to continue to be agile and flexible and best suited to cope with the
unexpected.

91. Our conclusions also need to be seen against the changing strategic and operational backdrop.
On the strategic side, since the SDR was published in 1998 the risk of large scale conflict in Europe
has further reduced, and relations with Russia have seen a step change improvement. On the
operational side, we have routinely deployed our Armed Forces on more operations concurrently
than we envisaged in the SDR. That has created risks of overburdening particular units such as the
key “enablers” who are essential for all expeditionary deployments (for example, communicators,
engineers and movements personnel). But the scale of these deployments has been in some
respects smaller than we envisaged at the time of the SDR. We now need to factor these changes
in the strategic and operational environment more fully into our planning.

92. The capability priorities which have emerged from our work on countering international
terrorism are entirely consistent with the requirements generated by other likely demands on our
forces. They reinforce the thrust of our existing plans. Extra strategic lift and communications, for
example, have much wider utility across a range of operations beyond counter terrorism. So it
makes sense to think of these as components of all rapid reaction forces, rather than as dedicated
counter-terrorism capabilities.

93. While some enhancements to SDR military capabilities are needed, the scale of operations to
counter terrorism is unlikely to be large, so only relatively small quantities of the new specialised
equipment are likely to be needed. There is still further work to do to refine precise capability
options and choices, and we will be working closely with industry to translate our requirements into
equipment solutions.

94. In further work we shall need to look in detail at how our overall priorities might give
additional emphasis to rapid reaction. We need to consider how we might increase the
deployability of some units, while maintaining capability for combat. And, given the wider changes
in the strategic and operational environment outlined above, we need to continue the evolution of
our force structures away from the legacy systems more suited to the Cold War and towards the
capabilities that are optimised to meet the new threats and challenges.


-----

## SECTION 7
### Conclusion

95. Whilst the 1998 Strategic Defence Review recognised the existence of asymmetric threats, it did
not fully cater for threats on the scale which materialised on 11 September, and we therefore
looked again at our defence posture and plans. The Armed Forces can play a role as part of a
cross-Government and international effort to counter the threat from international terrorism at
home and to engage it overseas. Much of the capacity needed for key operations – such as
operations to stabilise, coerce or find-and-strike – will come from the new force structure the SDR
put in train.

96. But new elements and capabilities are needed to seize what may be fleeting opportunities to
engage terrorists, to deal with them in remote areas and cater for their possible acquisition of CBRN
devices. We need to look further into how we should allocate the investment which is needed,
including, for example, to intelligence gathering, network-centric capability (including enhanced
strike and Special Forces capabilities and unmanned air vehicles), improved mobility and fire power
for more rapidly deployable lighter forces, temporary deployed accommodation for troops, and night
operations. The significant additional resources made available to Defence in Spending Review
2002 will enable us to take this forward with the urgency that the 11 September demands.


-----

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:

**Online**
**www.tso.co.uk/bookshop**

**Mail,Telephone, Fax & E-mail**
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-call 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: book.orders@tso.co.uk
Textphone 0870 240 3701

**TSO Shops**
123 Kingsway, London,WC2B 6PQ
020 7242 6393 Fax 020 7242 6394
68-69 Bull Street, Birmingham B4 6AD
0121 236 9696 Fax 0121 236 9699
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester M60 8AS
0161 834 7201 Fax 0161 833 0634
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401
18-19 High Street, Cardiff CF10 1PT
029 2039 5548 Fax 029 2038 4347
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0870 606 5566 Fax 0870 606 5588

**TSO Accredited Agents**
(see Yellow Pages)


-----

