# The National Security Strategy of the United Kingdom

### Security in an interdependent world


-----

### The National Security Strategy of the United Kingdom

#### Security in an interdependent world

###### Presented to Parliament by the Prime Minister, by command of Her Majesty

 March 2008 Cm 7291 £13. 90


-----

**© Crown copyright 2008**

The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and departmental logos) may
be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing that it is reproduced
accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged
as Crown copyright and the title of the document specified.

Any enquiries relating to the copyright in this document should be addressed to
The Licensing Division, HMSO, St Clements House, 2–16 Colegate, Norwich NR3 1BQ.

Fax: 01603 723000 or email: licensing@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk


-----

## Contents

Chapter One: Introduction 3

Chapter Two: Guiding principles 6

Chapter Three: Security challenges 10

Chapter Four: The United Kingdom’s response 25

Chapter Five: Working together 58


-----

## Chapter One: Introduction


**1.1 Providing security for the nation and**
for its citizens remains the most important
responsibility of government.

**1.2 Since the end of the Cold War,**
the international landscape has been
transformed. The opposition between
two power blocs has been replaced by a
more complex and unpredictable set of
relationships. Economic trends, including
more open global markets, and technological
trends, particularly in communications, have
strengthened the connections between
individuals, businesses, societies and
economies. Travel is faster and cheaper than
ever, the flow of ideas and capital around
the world can be almost instantaneous, and
distances between people and events are
becoming less relevant. All those are positive
changes, empowering individuals and
creating new opportunities for businesses,
organisations and whole nations. But they
also create new challenges.

**1.3 If the international landscape as a whole**
is increasingly complex and unpredictable,
so too is the security landscape. No state
threatens the United Kingdom directly. The
Cold War threat has been replaced by a
diverse but interconnected set of threats
and risks, which affect the United Kingdom


directly and also have the potential to
undermine wider international stability. They
include international terrorism, weapons
of mass destruction, conflicts and failed
states, pandemics, and trans-national crime.
These and other threats and risks are driven
by a diverse and interconnected set of
underlying factors, including climate change,
competition for energy, poverty and poor
governance, demographic changes and
globalisation.

**1.4 The aim of this first National Security**
Strategy is to set out how we will
address and manage this diverse though
interconnected set of security challenges and
underlying drivers, both immediately and in
the longer term, to safeguard the nation, its
citizens, our prosperity and our way of life.

**1.5 The scope and approach of this strategy**
reflects the way our understanding of
national security has changed.[1] In the past,
the state was the traditional focus of foreign,
defence and security policies, and national
security was understood as dealing with the
protection of the state and its vital interests
from attacks by other states. Over recent
decades, our view of national security has
broadened to include threats to individual
citizens and to our way of life, as well as


-----

to the integrity and interests of the state.
That is why this strategy deals with transnational crime, pandemics and flooding –
not part of the traditional idea of national
security, but clearly challenges that can affect
large numbers of our citizens, and which
demand some of the same responses as
more traditional security threats, including
terrorism. The broad scope of this strategy
also reflects our commitment to focus on the
underlying drivers of security and insecurity,
rather than just immediate threats and risks.

**1.6 We need to maintain a set of capabilities,**
at home and overseas, to deal with those
threats and risks and the underlying drivers
– to understand them better, act early to
prevent them where we can, and ensure that
we minimise and manage any harm they
might cause.

**1.7 This is the first time the Government**
has published a single, overarching strategy
bringing together the objectives and plans
of all departments, agencies and forces
involved in protecting our national security.
It is a significant step, and the latest in a
series of reforms bringing greater focus and
integration to our approach.


###### National security reform since 2001

**Strategy**

- **2002: ‘New Chapter’ added to the**
Strategic Defence Review, setting out
the contribution of the Armed Forces to
counter-terrorism

- **2006: First cross-government counter-**
terrorism strategy, CONTEST, and
cross-government counter-proliferation
framework

- **2008: New strategic framework for**
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
(FCO), underlining how national security
depends on our work with other nations.

**Structures**

- **2001: Conflict Prevention Pools**
to improve joint working between
the FCO, Ministry of Defence,
and Department for International
Development; and new Cabinet Office
structures dealing with emergencies

- **2003: Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre**
bringing together expertise from the
police, intelligence agencies and 16
departments

- **2006: Serious and Organised Crime**
Agency

_(continued)_


-----

- **2007: Office for Security and Counter-**
Terrorism, to manage the crossgovernment counter-terrorism effort;
new UK Border Agency announced;
and new Cabinet Committee on
National Security, International Relations
and Development, bringing together
ministers from across Government.

**Resources**

- Funding on counter-terrorism and

intelligence increased from £1 billion in
2001 to £2.5 billion this year, rising to
£3.5 billion by 2010/11

- A new Single Security and Intelligence

Budget across different departments
and agencies

- The longest period of sustained real

growth in the Defence budget since the
1980s, as well as increased spending on
dealing with global conflict.

**Legislation**

- New powers to tackle terrorism and

secure successful prosecutions, including
control orders, extended stop and
search powers, new offences of acts
preparatory, encouraging and glorifying
terrorism, and training for terrorism;
extended pre-charge detention; and
extended proscription of terrorist
organisations

- New powers for both central and local

government to coordinate responses to
domestic emergencies


**1.8 This strategy is the next step in building**
on those reforms. It sets out the guiding
principles of our approach (Chapter Two);
our assessment of the major security
challenges and drivers of insecurity (Chapter
Three); our responses to them (Chapter
Four); and how we will work together in
taking the strategy forward (Chapter Five).

**1.9 Throughout, it draws on the wide**
range of knowledge and activity across
departments, agencies and forces which
contributes to our single overarching national
security objective of protecting the United
Kingdom and its interests, enabling its
people to go about their daily lives freely
and with confidence, in a more secure,
stable, just and prosperous world.


-----

## Chapter Two: Guiding principles


**2.1** Our approach to national security is
clearly grounded in a set of core values.
They include human rights, the rule of law,
legitimate and accountable government,
justice, freedom, tolerance, and opportunity
for all. Those values define who we are
and what we do. They form the basis of
our security, as well as our well-being and
our prosperity. We will protect and respect
them at home, and we will promote them
consistently in our foreign policy. At home,
our belief in liberty means that new laws to
deal with the changing terrorist threat will be
balanced with the protection of civil liberties
and strong parliamentary and judicial
oversight. Overseas, our belief in the rule
of law means we will support a rules-based
approach to international affairs, under
which issues are resolved wherever possible
through discussion and due process, with
the use of force as a last resort. We believe
that this set of core values is a potential
basis for broad agreement, not just in the
United Kingdom but everywhere – and that
the best way to spread not just well-being
and prosperity but also security, is to build
a progressive coalition of governments and
people in support of those values.


**2.2** We will be hard-headed about the
risks, our aims, and our capabilities. We
will adopt a rigorous approach to assessing
the threats and risks to our security, and
the options for tackling them. That means
being clear and realistic about our aims, and
about the capabilities we and others have
to achieve them. At home, our aim should
be that people are able to go about their
business without fear and with a reasonable
assurance of safety. Some risk is inevitable,
and the Government’s role is to minimise
and mitigate it. We must also continually
review where government can best focus
its efforts, and where other sectors or
countries or international institutions
should be encouraged to play their part.
In an increasingly interdependent world,
we cannot opt out of overseas engagement.
But overseas especially we need to be
realistic, and set realistic expectations,
about what we can achieve.


-----

**2.3** Wherever possible, we will tackle
security challenges early. We are
committed to improving our ability to scan
the horizon for future security risks, and to
developing our capabilities for preventive
action. The most effective way to tackle all
the major security challenges involves early
engagement. The most effective way to
reduce the long-term threat from terrorism
is to tackle the causes of violent extremism,
both at home and overseas. Similarly, the
most effective way to reduce the threat
posed by failed states is to support fragile
states in strengthening their governance,
their development and their security
capabilities, and to improve the capacity
of the international community to act to
stop states degenerating, like Afghanistan
and Somalia in the 1990s, or Zimbabwe
today. The most effective way to reduce the
potential security consequences of issues
such as climate change and rising energy
demand is to take the tough decisions now
to tackle them, both as global issues in their
own right and their implications for global
security.

**2.4** Overseas, we will favour a
multilateral approach. The ultimate
responsibility for our national security lies


with the United Kingdom[2], but collective
action – notably through the United Nations
(UN), European Union (EU) and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) –
remains the most effective way of managing
and reducing the threats we face, and the
only prospect of eliminating any of them
completely. The threats and drivers are
increasingly trans-national, and demand a
trans-national response. The preparations
for the September 11 terrorist attacks in
2001 spanned several continents, and so
did the effects: the World Bank estimated
the reduction of global GDP at almost 1%.
We believe that a multilateral approach – in
particular a rules-based approach led by
international institutions – brings not only
greater effectiveness but also, crucially,
greater legitimacy. And just as globalisation
exacerbates the challenges, it also creates
new opportunities for a multilateral
response, using trading, political, social and
cultural links to build wider cooperation.
We believe that the current international
institutions, from the UN Security Council
to the World Bank, need to become more
ambitious, effective and representative. We
will use our established position within those
institutions to work for further reform.


-----

We also recognise that sometimes the best
approach will be more flexible alliances,
coalitions or bilateral relationships tailored
to particular issues. The partnership with the
United States is our most important bilateral
relationship and central to our national
security, including through its engagement
in NATO. The EU has a vital role in securing
a safer world both within and beyond
the borders of Europe. We recognise that
encouraging a more positive attitude to the
United Kingdom across the world will bring
lasting benefits not just to our prosperity
but to our security, and that the best way
to promote that is engagement at every
level – government, business, civil society,
education, and individuals.

**2.5** At home, we will favour a
partnership approach. Traditionally,
the Government has been expected to
deal with the threats and risks to national
security through the Armed Forces, the
police, border staff, and the intelligence
and security agencies. Increasingly, the
changing nature of the threats and risks,
and our improved understanding of the best
way to respond to them, demand broader
partnerships. We will build on the coalition
of public, private and third sectors already


involved in counter-terrorism. We will work
with owners or operators to protect critical
sites and essential services; with business
to improve resilience; with local authorities
and communities to plan for emergencies
and to counter violent extremism; and
with individuals, where changing people’s
behaviour is the best way to mitigate risk.

**2.6** Inside government, we will develop a
more integrated approach. The distinction
between ‘domestic’ and ‘foreign’ policy is
unhelpful in a world where globalisation can
exacerbate domestic security challenges, but
also bring new opportunities to tackle them.
Similarly, the traditional contrast between
‘hard’ and ‘soft’ power obscures recent
experience of post-conflict stabilisation,
which shows how success in building
security depends on political and economic
development. More generally, the major
security challenges require an integrated
response that cuts across departmental
lines and traditional policy boundaries. This
National Security Strategy outlines some of
the ways in which our approach has become
more integrated, but also identifies where
we need to go further – indeed its existence
is a reflection of the Government’s ambition
to work more closely together at home and
overseas to achieve our security objectives.


-----

**2.7** We will retain strong, balanced
and flexible capabilities. Although we
accept the need to get better at predicting
future threats, we recognise that shocks are
inevitable. We believe that early engagement
is best, but we recognise that it will not
always succeed. While we believe that
we must work in partnership with other
sectors, we recognise that the Government
has the ultimate responsibility to protect
our security. And while we believe that a
multilateral approach is best, we recognise
that sometimes the United Kingdom has to
take a lead or deal with problems itself. So
we will retain strong, balanced and flexible
national capabilities. For example, in relation
to terrorism, although we are investing
in a long-term approach to tackling the
underlying drivers, we are also continuing
to invest in a wide range of capabilities for
dealing with the immediate threat, from
intelligence to policing to greater resilience.
In relation to defence, although we expect
our Armed Forces to operate in most
cases as part of NATO or in coalitions, we
recognise that there may be circumstances
in which we need the capability to respond
independently. In relation to post-conflict
stabilisation, we will work through the
UN, NATO and EU to strengthen their


capabilities and decision-making. We will
also continue to develop our own worldleading capabilities in this area, including a
more integrated civilian–military approach.
Our worldwide network of diplomatic posts
will continue to perform a crucial role.

**2.8** We will continue to invest, learn and
improve to strengthen our security. We
believe that we have a sound approach to
national security, which is stronger than
a decade ago. But we recognise that we
need to continue to invest and improve, to
monitor the effects of our policy and actions
and to learn from our experience – and
we are committed to increased external
engagement and public and parliamentary
scrutiny to help us do so.


-----

## Chapter Three: Security challenges


**3.1 However insecure we might sometimes**
feel in today’s fast-changing and complex
world, in many ways we are more secure
than most countries and more secure
than at most times in our history. There
is a very low risk of military attack on the
United Kingdom in the foreseeable future.
Our ability to forecast emergencies and
catastrophic events, and reduce their impact,
is improving. But the security landscape is
increasingly complex and unpredictable,
and we face a diverse and interconnected
set of challenges. This chapter sets out our
assessment of the major threats and risks,
both immediate and longer term, and the
trends and factors which drive them. Our
responses are set out in Chapter Four.

##### Threats and risks

###### Terrorism

**3.2 The United Kingdom faces a serious and**
sustained threat from violent extremists,
claiming to act in the name of Islam.
Although they have very little support among
communities in this country, and their claims
to religious justification are widely regarded
as false, the threat is greater in scale and


ambition than terrorist threats we have faced
in the past.

**3.3 Since August 2006 we have published**
the terrorist threat level, based on a new and
more transparent assessment system. The
threat has remained at the second-highest
level, ‘severe’, except for two short periods
during August 2006 and June and July 2007,
when it was raised to the highest level,
‘critical’.[3]

**3.4 At any one time the police and the**
security and intelligence agencies are
contending with around 30 plots, 200
groups or networks, and 2,000 individuals
who are judged to pose a terrorist threat.

**3.5 Many of those networks and individuals**
share an ambition to cause mass casualties
without warning. Some are willing to use
suicide attacks, and have aspirations to
use chemical, biological and radiological
weapons. Those tactics are quite unlike
terrorist threats we have faced in the past.

**3.6 Terrorists also aspire to attack our critical**
national infrastructure; and to use new
methods, including electronic attack.


-----

**3.7 Recent attacks and attempted attacks**
in the United Kingdom and on our citizens
and interests overseas reflect a wider transnational trend. Since the 1990s there have
been high-profile attacks in the Middle East,
north and east Africa, south Asia, east Asia,
mainland Europe, and the United States.
There is no single chain of command or
entity behind this pattern of activity. The
Al Qaeda leadership, who had pretensions
to fill this role, have been under pressure
from international military, intelligence
and police action since 2001, including the
disruption of their safe havens, notably in
Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iraq. It is also in
the nature of the new terrorist threat that
it is not a single organisation but a wider
network of affiliated groups, often sharing a
common ideology and outlook. The degree
of structure and level of professionalism
exhibited by those groups vary, but they
very often work together, exploiting modern
travel and communications (especially the
internet) to share information, personnel and
training, and to spread a common ideology
– working together in ways that were not
possible for terrorist groups in the past.

**3.8 Other groups, including dissident Irish**
republican activists, animal rights extremists


and others, also continue to require attention.

**3.9 While terrorism represents a threat to**
all our communities, and an attack on our
values and our way of life, it does not at
present amount to a strategic threat. But
it is qualitatively and quantitatively more
serious than the terrorist threats we have
faced in the past, and it is likely to persist for
many years.

###### Nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction

**3.10 Sixty years after their invention and**
almost 40 years after the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty (NPT), nuclear weapons
remain potentially the most destructive
threat to global security. While the global
stockpile has reduced since the Cold War,
large arsenals remain. The number of
nuclear-armed states has also increased,
even if the NPT has helped ensure that fewer
states have acquired nuclear weapons than
many predicted, and some (for example
South Africa and Libya) have abandoned
their programmes. North Korea has
conducted a test of a nuclear device and
tests of ballistic missiles, and Iran continues
to pursue nuclear activities in defiance
of United Nations (UN) Security Council


-----

obligations. Both North Korea and Iran are of
particular concern because of their attitude
to international institutions and treaties,
and because of the impact of their activities
on stability in regions crucial to global
security. But we oppose all proliferation, as
undermining our objectives of de-escalation
and multilateral disarmament, and increasing
the risk of instability in the international
system and ultimately the risk of nuclear
confrontation.

**3.11 We judge that no state currently has**
both the intent and the capability to pose a
direct nuclear threat to the United Kingdom
or its vital interests. But we cannot rule out
the risk that such a threat will re-emerge
over future decades.

**3.12 We also monitor: the possibility of**
nuclear weapons or material or technology
(including commercial) falling into the hands
of terrorists, who we know have ambitions
to acquire it; and the proliferation of the
technology behind ballistic missiles, which
increases the chance of either new states or
non-state actors being able to threaten the
United Kingdom directly in the future.

**3.13 A number of states retain the ability to**
produce chemical and biological weapons.
Again, we do not judge that they currently


pose a direct threat to the United Kingdom,
but we will continue to monitor their ability
to produce weapons, the development
and proliferation of potential delivery
mechanisms, and the possibility of material
falling into the hands of terrorists.

###### Trans-national organised crime

**3.14 Organised crime involving fraud, the**
trade in illegal drugs and illegal weapons,
illegal immigration and human trafficking
(especially of women and children),
is increasing across the world. Where
those activities thrive, they threaten lives
and legitimate livelihoods; undermine
and corrupt economies, societies and
governments; help cause or exacerbate state
failure, in some cases leading to civil war and
violent conflict; and can directly or indirectly
support terrorism.

**3.15 Those phenomena are not new, but**
they are taking new forms and exploiting
new opportunities, including revolutionary
changes in technology and communications,
and increased global movements of goods,
people and ideas. While the effects reach
down into our neighbourhoods, for example
through the trade in illegal weapons and
drugs, the groups and networks involved are
increasingly trans-national. Governments and


-----

international institutions are still adjusting to
this shift in scale and focus.

**3.16 At national level, the potential effects**
include: undermining legitimate crossborder trade; threatening the integrity of
financial markets through large-scale moneylaundering; and threatening business and
individuals through cyber-crime. But to
most people, the most visible manifestation
of organised crime is the trade in illegal
drugs. That remains a serious problem in
the United Kingdom, as in most countries,
despite significant progress over the last 10
years in disrupting drug networks, seizing
drug shipments, expanding and improving
drug treatment and educating young people
about the dangers of drugs.

**3.17 While the threat to the United Kingdom**
from serious and organised crime is assessed
by the Serious and Organised Crime Agency
to be high and causing significant damage to
the United Kingdom, it is not the pervasive
threat which it is in some parts of the
world, where it has effectively undermined
legitimate trade and government and the
rule of law. However, even in the United
Kingdom it is a serious and fast-moving
threat. Organised crime groups are becoming
more complex and professional and


increasingly operate a portfolio approach,
switching focus to wherever risk is lowest
and profit highest. It is a threat which
requires constant vigilance and a continuing
effort to stay ahead of the criminals in
adapting to new developments, both inside
the United Kingdom and across the world.

###### Global instability and conflict, and failed and fragile states

**3.18 In the last two decades, there has**
been a significant decline in the level of
violent conflict between states. But violent
conflict and serious instability persist, both
between and especially within states. We
are improving our ability to assess the risk of
violent conflict and to act early to prevent
and mediate it, but we will never be entirely
successful. Prevention and mediation are
not guaranteed to work, and even the best
horizon-scanning will not predict every
shock or conflict. Some of the major violent
conflicts in recent decades, including the
Falklands Conflict and Iraq’s invasion of
Kuwait, were not adequately predicted by
either the United Kingdom or any other
government.


-----

**3.19 Some regions in the wider Middle East**
and Africa suffer from the distinct problem
of violent conflicts that are individually
unpredictable but collectively frequent,
persistent and self-reinforcing, fuelling the
proliferation of conventional weapons and
preventing the progress in governance and
economic development that would build
long-term stability.

**3.20 All violent conflicts are humanitarian**
catastrophes, and the United Kingdom has
a moral responsibility to work with other
countries and the international community
to prevent, mediate and mitigate conflict,
as well as contribute to post-conflict
stabilisation and peacebuilding. But violent
conflict overseas has implications that are not
confined to the area or region in question
and can directly affect national security.
That is especially true of regions which are
pivotal to global security, such as the wider
Middle East, or which directly affect British
interests, such as the Pashtun Belt straddling
the border between the sovereign states of
Afghanistan and Pakistan.

**3.21 In the past, most violent conflicts and**
significant threats to global security came
from strong states. Currently, most of the
major threats and risks emanate from failed


or fragile states. A failed state is one whose
government is not effective or legitimate
enough to maintain the rule of law, protect
itself, its citizens and its borders, or provide
the most basic services. A fragile state is one
in which those problems are likely to arise.
Failed and fragile states increase the risk
of instability and conflict, and at the same
time have a reduced capacity to deal with
it, as we see in parts of Africa. They have
the potential to destabilise the surrounding
region. Many fragile states lack the capacity
and, in some cases, the will adequately to
address terrorism and organised crime, in
some instances knowingly tolerating or
directly sponsoring such activity. That was the
situation in Afghanistan, where the Taleban
regime sheltered terrorist training camps
before the terrorist attacks in September
2001, and with narcotics networks in several
parts of the world, for example Southern
Afghanistan and West Africa.

###### Civil emergencies

**3.22 We monitor closely the risks of**
infectious disease, extreme weather,
and man-made emergencies. We assess
that the highest risk is an influenza-type
pandemic, like the outbreak in 1918
which killed 228,000 people in the United


-----

Kingdom and an estimated 20–40 million
worldwide. Experts agree that there is a high
probability of a pandemic occurring – and
that, as the SARS (severe acute respiratory
syndrome) outbreak showed, the speed
at which it could spread has increased
with globalisation. We estimate that a
pandemic could cause fatalities in the United
Kingdom in the range 50,000 to 750,000,
although both the timing and the impact are
impossible to predict exactly. The secondhighest risk is coastal flooding on a scale that
last took place along a thousand miles of the
east coast in 1953, killing 300 people. Even
with today’s improved defences, a repeat
of coastal or tidal flooding on that scale
could result in the flooding of hundreds of
thousands of properties, and the need to
evacuate and shelter hundreds of thousands
of people.

**3.23 Additional risks include: other forms**
of infectious disease (epidemic rather than
pandemic); river flooding similar to during
the summer of 2007, which seriously
damaged or disrupted over 50,000 homes
and businesses; and other forms of extreme
weather, which we expect to become more
frequent and more severe, as a result of
climate change.


**3.24 Because of the scale and speed of**
the risk they pose, those phenomena have
similar potential to other security challenges
to threaten our normal way of life across
significant areas of the country with little
warning. Moreover, our approach to them
– to assess and monitor the risks, to learn
from experiences at home and overseas, to
develop capabilities to minimise the risks
and the potential harm, and to absorb
whatever harm does occur and then return
to normality as soon as possible – is similar
to our approach to other national security
challenges, including terrorism.

###### State-led threats to the United Kingdom

**3.25 Our assessment remains the same as in**
the 1998 Strategic Defence Review: for the
foreseeable future, no state or alliance will
have both the intent and the capability to
threaten the United Kingdom militarily, either
with nuclear weapons or other weapons
of mass destruction, or with conventional
forces.

**3.26 The United Kingdom does, however,**
remain subject to high levels of covert
non-military activity by foreign intelligence
organisations. A number of countries
continue to devote considerable time


-----

and energy to trying to obtain political
and economic intelligence, and trying to
steal sensitive technology on civilian and
military projects. They increasingly combine
traditional intelligence methods with
new and sophisticated technical attacks,
attempting to penetrate computer networks
through the internet.

**3.27 We also continue to monitor the**
possibility of state-sponsored terrorism.

**3.28 The overall international security**
landscape has become more complex and
unpredictable, and although the probability
remains very low, over the longer term we
cannot rule out a possible re-emergence
of a major state-led threat to the United
Kingdom. That could come about through a
wider breakdown in the international order,
or through the development of, for example,
missile technology which rendered irrelevant
the distance from a potential enemy, or
other forms of threat which render distance
irrelevant, for example state-sponsored
cyber-attack.

##### Drivers of insecurity

**3.29 In the second half of this chapter,**
we consider a range of factors which are
not in themselves direct security threats to
the United Kingdom, but which can drive


insecurity, instability, or conflict. They are
major global issues with implications beyond
national security, and security may not even
be the primary reason for tackling them. In
many cases the risks to global well-being and
prosperity would be sufficient in themselves
to demand action. This strategy, however,
focuses on the security implications.

###### Challenges to the rules-based international system

**3.30 As Chapter One set out, the**
international landscape has been
transformed, and the opposition between
two power blocs replaced by a more complex
and unpredictable set of interests, groupings
and relationships. Alongside that shift in the
geopolitical landscape, a range of economic,
technological and social trends, often
grouped under the heading ‘globalisation’,
are increasing the interconnectedness and
interdependence between economies,
societies, businesses, and individuals. That
generates new opportunities to work
together to build not just a more prosperous
world but a more secure world, based on
shared economic interests and a shared
commitment to strengthening international
institutions and a rules-based approach to
dealing with disputes.


-----

**3.31 Overall, there is a good case for saying**
that international institutions are stronger
than ever. The UN has adapted to many
changes in the international landscape
since it was set up 60 years ago. Since
the end of the Cold War in particular, its
membership has acted with greater vigour
in discharging its responsibilities for security.
Observers have attributed a significant part
of the reduction in global conflicts over this
period to greater UN engagement: there
was a six-fold increase in UN-led preventive
diplomacy missions between 1990 and
2002, and there has been a seven-fold
increase in the number of UN peacekeepers
in the field over the last 10 years, with over
100,000 peacekeepers now deployed in an
expanded range of situations. There are also
positive signs at the regional level, with the
emergence of security communities where
strong, rules-based regional institutions,
often built on shared economic interests,
are increasingly playing a role in regional
security and reducing the risk of violent
conflict. The most obvious examples are
the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation and
the European Union, both of which have
expanded their membership and their role in
recent years, but there is potential in other
areas, including the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and, over the longer term, the
African Union.


**3.32 Despite those positive signs, the**
international security architecture has yet to
adapt satisfactorily to the new landscape.
The UN Security Council has failed to adapt
to the rise of new powers. Across all the
key institutions, the level of ambition in
the face of new challenges remains too
low, and the response to crises too slow.
As well as notable successes, there have
been high-profile failures, including Rwanda
and frustration over Darfur. The pressure
on international institutions is likely to
grow, most acutely with new challenges in
the areas of climate change and resource
competition. Pressure will also grow
because in a multi-polar world, international
institutions will be expected to bear more
of the weight in responding to security
challenges, at the same time as demands for
reform will increase.

**3.33 How the international system responds**
to those pressures, and in particular how
well it succeeds in entrenching the rulesbased approach to resolving disputes and
dealing with states that violate international
laws and norms, will be one of the most
significant factors in both global security and
the United Kingdom’s national security over
the coming decades.


-----

###### Climate change

**3.34 Climate change is potentially the**
greatest challenge to global stability
and security, and therefore to national
security. Tackling its causes, mitigating
its risks and preparing for and dealing
with its consequences are critical to our
future security, as well as protecting global
prosperity and avoiding humanitarian
disaster.

**3.35 The impact of climate change is already**
being felt, in higher global temperatures and
changed weather patterns. Climate impact
models will increasingly help us understand
the likely path of further change over coming
decades, at regional and national level.

**3.36 Rising sea levels and disappearing ice**
will alter borders and open up new sea lanes,
increasing the risk of territorial disputes. An
increase in the frequency and intensity of
extreme weather events – floods, droughts,
storms – will generate more frequent and
intense humanitarian crises, adding further
stresses on local, national and international
structures. Rising temperatures together with
extreme weather will increase pressures on
water supplies.

**3.37 Many of those changes will affect the**
United Kingdom directly, but the direct


effects are likely to fall most heavily on
those countries least able to deal with
them, and therefore most likely both to
suffer humanitarian disaster but also to
tip into instability, state failure, or conflict.
That further increases the responsibility
of the international system to generate
collective solutions. While the possibility of
disputes may increase, climate change also
presents new opportunities to strengthen
international cooperation; but if the
international system fails to respond, the
effect on its credibility would have further
knock-on effects on security.

###### Competition for energy

**3.38 Global demand for energy is likely**
to continue increasing, especially with
the growth of emerging economies such
as China and India. Barring revolutionary
developments in alternative energy, the
competition for energy supplies will also
increase. On present projections, global
energy demand will be more than 50%
higher in 2030 than today, at the same
time as the supply of oil and gas becomes
increasingly concentrated, much of it in
regions with potential for political instability.
Increasing urbanisation will put much of the
developing world in the same position as the


-----

developed world, with large cities relying on
energy supply from far away. The premium
attached to energy security, and the rising
risk of energy shortages, will increase the
potential for disputes and conflict. Countries
including China and Russia are already
making control of energy supply a foreign
policy priority.

**3.39 Like climate change, competition for**
energy is a global challenge in its own right,
but also one with potentially serious security
implications. Along with climate change and
water stress, it is one of the biggest potential
drivers of the breakdown of the rules-based
international system and the re-emergence
of major inter-state conflict, as well as
increasing regional tensions and instability.

###### Poverty, inequality, and poor governance

**3.40 Poverty, inequality, lack of economic**
development and opportunity, and poor
governance are all highly correlated with
insecurity and instability, both in individual
countries and across regions.

**3.41 Worldwide levels of absolute poverty**
are falling, helped by economic growth,
increased trade and overseas aid. These
welcome trends are set to continue. But


there are still over two billion people living
on less than a dollar a day, with the biggest
challenges for poverty reduction being in
sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. Poverty
in turn increases vulnerability to infectious
disease: the incidence and death rates of
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria are all
highest in sub-Saharan Africa. The picture
on inequality within states is mixed, and
inequality between states is increasing.
Together, poverty, disease, and inequality
can undermine political and economic
development, fuel instability, increase the
risk of violent conflict, and create grievances
which can be exploited by violent extremists.

**3.42 The single biggest positive driver of**
security within and between states is the
presence of legitimate, accountable and
capable government operating by the rule
of law. Its absence – because of dictatorship,
state-sponsored violence, weak, ineffective
or corrupt government, or civil war – both
exacerbates the immediate threats outlined
above, and undermines the capacity to
respond to them.

**3.43 Recent decades have witnessed**
the further spread of democracy, with
authoritarian regimes being replaced by
democratically elected governments across


-----

southern and eastern Europe, east Asia, parts
of Africa, and Latin America. Over the long
term, we can expect that, with the support
of the United Kingdom and other countries,
and institutions such as the European Union
and the UN, democracy will continue to
spread, and governance to improve, with
resulting benefits for global security as well
as for well-being and prosperity. But it will
be a long and uneven path, and dictatorship,
corruption, weak or absent government,
and civil war will remain a feature of the
landscape over the coming decades.

**3.44 In a number of countries in the wider**
Middle East and Africa, the prevailing
political system remains autocratic, with
strong internal security agencies but
poor governance and limited popular
participation. In some, the political system
is facing the new challenge of the entry
into politics of militia movements associated
with violence and violent extremist ideology,
including Hezbollah and Hamas. These
movements have combined violence with
being the de facto providers of welfare to
large parts of impoverished populations.

###### Global trends

**3.45 Globalisation brings huge benefits,**
to security as well as prosperity. Ensuring its


continued development, and a more equal
distribution of its benefits, is – alongside
strengthening the rules-based international
system – the best route to future peace and
security. As a trading nation committed to
remaining at the forefront of technological
advances, the United Kingdom is well placed
to benefit from globalisation, but has a clear
interest in monitoring and addressing the
related challenges and vulnerabilities.

**3.46 The first set of challenges and**
vulnerabilities is economic. Last year, total
United Kingdom imports and exports were
over £750 billion (or about 55% of GDP),
and 95% of our visible international trade is
reliant on shipping. Business and consumers
increasingly benefit from global supply
chains, and from our status as a global
hub for business and travel. Our success in
exploiting those opportunities contributes
to high levels of employment and standards
of living, and to international influence. But
it relies on a relatively benign international
environment, and requires us to consider our
vulnerability to risks to open markets and
global financial stability, and potentially to
physical threats to global supply chains.

**3.47 The second set of challenges and**
vulnerabilities is technological. As


-----

economies and societies grow increasingly
dependent on national and global electronic
information and communication systems, it
becomes even more important to manage
the risk of disruption to their integrity and
availability through cyber-attack, whether
terrorist, criminal, or state-led. Diversity
of systems can provide resilience, but can
also lead to increased complexity and
interdependence, making the whole more
vulnerable to attacks or accidental shocks.

**3.48 The internet in particular offers**
individuals, business, third sector groups,
and governments a wide range of new
opportunities ranging from fast and reliable
financial transactions to new ways of
keeping in touch with friends. The internet
is itself a trans-national, fast-changing and
loosely-governed entity, but is also part of
our critical national infrastructure. It is both a
target and an opportunity for hostile states,
terrorists and criminals. Some are intent on
destroying the infrastructure itself; others on
exploiting the internet’s trans-national, fastchanging and loosely-governed nature to
conduct illegal activity.

**3.49 The third set of challenges and**
vulnerabilities is demographic. The world’s
population is expected to grow from


6.2 billion today to 9.5 billion in less than
50 years. The trend towards urbanisation
is set to continue, with the proportion of
the global population living in cities rising
from under 50% in 2000 to over 60% in
2030, accelerated by the pressures of climate
change and the pull of employment in cities
linked to the globalising world economy.

**3.50 A growing and increasingly urbanised**
global population will increase demand
for food and water, at the same time
as climate change and other trends put
greater pressure on their supply. Already
well over a billion people suffer from water
shortages, and 30 countries get more than
a third of their water from outside their
borders. With climate change, those figures
are likely to grow, increasing the possibility
of disputes. Climate change will also add
to the pressure on food supplies, through
decreased rainfall in many areas, and climaterelated crop failures. Increasing wealth will
further increase demand for food: the United
Kingdom is leading international efforts to
reduce the numbers of people living on less
than a dollar a day, but we must recognise
that this will increase the global demand
for meat and dairy products, and further
increase overall demand for grain. We should


-----

therefore plan for continued pressure on
grain prices and on food reserves. Global
grain supplies, measured by the number of
days’ supply per head of population, are
currently at their lowest historical level (40
days), and are increasingly dependent on
international shipping.

**3.51 A rising and increasingly urbanised**
population can also have more immediate
effects on stability. The largest-ever
generation of teenagers is reaching working
age in poor countries where unemployment
is already high. When this development
is combined with factors such as rapid
urbanisation, political exclusion, and a lack
of basic services and economic opportunity,
they present risks of increased political
instability, disorder, violent conflict and
extremism. Over the next decade these
conditions will come together in countries
in the most fragile regions of the world:
the wider Middle East, south Asia, and
sub-Saharan Africa.

**3.52 Global migration is driven both by wider**
demographic pressures, and by the economic
aspects of globalisation. According to UN
statistics, the number of people living outside
their country of birth more than doubled
from 75 million to 191 million between


1960 and 2005. The number continues to
increase, particularly in developed countries.
Migration brings major economic benefits.
In destination countries, it supports economic
growth and labour market flexibility. In
source countries, it generates remittances
from migrant workers, which the World
Bank estimates are now twice the total
of global aid. The openness of economies
and societies is one of the major drivers of
long-term stability and security. A negative
global reaction to migration and a move
towards closed economies and societies
would increase overall risks. But the global
movement of people also brings challenges
for security: including identifying, among
these increasing flows, those individuals who
are security threats; and managing the effects
on infrastructure and social cohesion of large
and relatively rapid inflows of people.

###### The interdependence of threats, risks and drivers

**3.53 There are a number of common strands**
running through the threats, risks and drivers
outlined in previous sections. The first is
their trans-national nature; the second, the
prominence of non-state actors. In part those
result from the absence of an immediate
state-led threat to the United Kingdom,


-----

which leads us rightly to focus elsewhere;
and in part they reflect wider trends,
including globalisation. The third theme is
their interdependence. Understanding those
interdependencies is critical to adapting our
responses, for example: the potential links
between terrorism and organised crime (for
example in Afghanistan); the ability of both
to subvert governments or economies and
cause state failure; the links between state
failure and regional conflict, or between
nuclear proliferation and regional conflict;
and the link between the strength of the
rules-based international system and the
potential re-emergence of a major state-led
threat to the United Kingdom.

**3.54 That interdependence also applies**
to the underlying drivers of insecurity;
and it is highly complex and dynamic.
Economic shocks can tip fragile societies
and economies into state failure. Regional
conflicts can exacerbate tensions over energy
supply. The combination of demographic
pressures, such as urbanisation and the
growing proportion of young people, with
political exclusion and a lack of economic
opportunity, can create a vicious circle of
economic crisis, food insecurity, political
crisis, and violent extremism – feeding


through into state failure or increased
migration, and reinforcing continuing
poverty. Poverty increases instability and the
risks of conflict, increases both the likelihood
and the effect of acute resource competition,
and can be a driver of migration. Finally,
climate change and related effects on water,
energy and food security will multiply other
threats and interact with other drivers of
insecurity, including demographic pressures
and the spread of disease.

**3.55 The complex and unpredictable**
interaction of those multiple stresses will
increase the pressure on social, economic
and political structures, particularly in those
countries least able to cope, and therefore
most likely to tip into instability, conflict
or state failure. That is likely to apply most
acutely in parts of Africa and the wider
Middle East, where so many of the stresses
identified above are present together.

**3.56 The constructive implication to be**
drawn from the close relationship between
the threats, risks and drivers of insecurity, is
that there are important synergies between
our policy responses. Our investment in
responses to new threats, such as cyberattack, will potentially help us in responding
to a wide range of different hostile actors


-----

– from terrorist networks to trans-national
crime networks, and from non-state actors
to foreign states. In development policy,
those parts of Africa and the wider Middle
East which have suffered from a vicious circle
of poverty, poor governance, and conflict,
need integrated international engagement
across security, governance and economic
development. The interdependence between
different drivers means that some of the
policy trade-offs we seem to be faced with
are in fact false choices: for example, just
as it is wrong or short-sighted to talk of a
choice between economic development
and environmental protection, so too it is
wrong to talk of a choice between security
and economic development, or security and
good governance.

**3.57 The complex interdependence of the**
threats, risks and drivers of insecurity, in an
increasingly interconnected world, is in itself
a powerful argument for a single overarching
strategy for national security. This strategy
focuses on the full range of issues, pulling
together expertise and experience across
government to produce a coherent response
to the global security challenges of the
twenty-first century. That is what Chapter
Four addresses.


-----

## Chapter Four: The United Kingdom’s response


**4.1 This chapter follows the same structure**
as Chapter Three, outlining our response
across government to each of the major
security challenges.

##### Counter-terrorism

**4.2 Since 2001, we have significantly**
enhanced our capability to deal with the
terrorist threat to the United Kingdom and to
our citizens and interests overseas. We have
worked to integrate our approach across
Government, to develop partnerships outside
government, and to enhance cooperation
overseas – with the United States, Europe,
and the Commonwealth, with governments
across the Islamic world, and with
multilateral organisations.

**4.3 Chapter One summarised recent**
changes to bring greater integration to
our approach, through the establishment
of the Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre, the
multi-departmental Research, Information,
and Communications Unit, and the crossgovernment Office for Security and CounterTerrorism, which has responsibility for
implementing our cross-government counterterrorism strategy, CONTEST.


**4.4 CONTEST is an integrated approach**
based on four main workstreams each with a
clear objective:

– Pursue: stopping terrorist attacks

– Protect: strengthening our protection
against attack

– Prepare: mitigating the impact of attacks

– Prevent: stopping people becoming
terrorists or supporting violent extremism

**4.5** Pursue includes: covert intelligence
and police work to detect and disrupt
the current terrorist threat, continuing to
work to strengthen our legal framework to
ensure successful prosecutions of terrorist
crimes through our criminal justice system
– or, where appropriate, deportations;
proscription of terrorist groups and exclusion
of dangerous individuals; informationsharing with our allies and partners to
support counter-terrorist operations
overseas; capacity-building with our allies
and partners; and our work as part of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO)
in support of the legitimate government in
Afghanistan to deprive terrorist networks
of their sanctuaries.


-----

**4.6** Protect includes: work with partners
in the private sector and local government,
and others to improve the protection of our
critical infrastructure, hazardous sites and
materials, and crowded places (including
cinemas, theatres, pubs, nightclubs,
restaurants, hotels and commercial centres,
hospitals, schools and places of worship);
work with architects and planners to ‘designin’ safe areas, and blast-resistant materials
and enhanced physical protection against
vehicle bomb attacks; and work at our
borders and with international partners to
improve our ability to track and intercept
foreign terrorist suspects, and British
suspects travelling to terrorist training camps
overseas.

**4.7** Prepare includes: work to improve
resilience at national, regional and local
level – with the Government, the police and
emergency services operating in partnership
with the private sector, local government,
and others to ensure that our communities
are prepared for a terrorist attack and able
to mitigate its consequences and return to
normal life as quickly as possible; as well
as capabilities to handle attacks on British
citizens and interests abroad.


**4.8** Prevent includes: work to challenge the
ideology behind violent extremism and to
support the voices of the peaceful majority;
action to disrupt those who promote violent
extremism, and to support communities and
institutions (for example, mosques, colleges,
universities, and prisons) in developing
strategies to resist it; giving advice and
support to young people and their families to
resist recruitment to violent extremism; and
addressing grievances exploited by those who
promote terrorism, for example highlighting
our positive work overseas, including support
for the Middle East peace process, to
challenge the violent extremist narrative.

**4.9 The work of Prevent will only succeed**
with the active participation of the widest
cross-section of society, including central
government, voluntary and community
groups, regional and local government,
policing, the education and youth sector,
faith groups, and the arts and media. It
means ensuring that we empower local
authorities, institutions and communities to
deliver local solutions to local issues.

**4.10 Like all parts of CONTEST, Prevent**
applies at home and overseas, including
co-operation with individual countries to
challenge and resist violent extremism, to


-----

reduce its impact on communities in the
United Kingdom, and to address grievances.
In taking the strategy forward we will focus
on those countries and regions which have
the most influence on the ideology behind
violent extremism and which have the most
connections to communities in the United
Kingdom. We will also encourage the United
Nations (UN), the European Union (EU), and
Commonwealth to do more in this area.

**4.11 Across all four strands of CONTEST,**
we will continue to learn, adapt, and
invest. As set out in Chapter One, the
resources dedicated to counter-terrorism
and intelligence have more than doubled,
from £1 billion in 2001 to £2.5 billion today,
generating a major increase in our capability,
including new regional police counterterrorist units. Resources will continue to
grow, with planned increases up to £3.5
billion by 2011, including a further £240
million for counter-terrorist policing, and
additional growth in the Security Service
taking its strength to double 2001 levels;
improvements to our ability to monitor and
analyse violent extremism; and additional
investment in the long-term challenge of
tackling violent extremism and promoting
greater understanding – with
£70 million at home and £400 million
overseas over the next three years.


**4.12 Our work to strengthen our borders**
and related work on the National Identity
Scheme will also help in disrupting terrorist
travel and restricting the use of false and
multiple identities by terrorists. The Armed
Forces will maintain their contribution to
counter-terrorism at home and overseas.
We will continue to build closer links
between our counter-terrorist effort and
related programmes, including military and
civilian activities in Iraq and Afghanistan; our
approach to proliferation; protection against
electronic attack; and work to address poor
governance, poverty and inequality, which
can combine with other factors to become
drivers of extremism, and which terrorist
groups exploit in their propaganda.

**4.13 Our approach to tackling terrorism is**
hard-headed about our aims and capabilities.
Given the nature of the terrorist threat,
success requires more than effective security
and intelligence work, vital though that is.
In particular the work of Prevent, to stop
people becoming terrorists or supporting
violent extremism, requires challenge to
deep-seated ideas and grievances as well as
immediate threats, something that cannot
be done by the Government alone, though
we will continue to coordinate, drive, and
fund it.


-----

**4.14 Our overall response to terrorism seeks**
to preserve both our security and the core
values on which our society depends –
values that are shared by the overwhelming
majority living in the United Kingdom. The
current terrorist threat can itself be seen as
an attack not just on us but on those values,
including human rights, the rule of law,
justice, freedom, tolerance, and opportunity
for all. We need to respond robustly, bringing
those involved to justice while defending our
shared values, and resisting the provocation
to over-react. At home, we will continue
to prosecute terrorists through the criminal
justice system wherever possible, updating
our legislation where necessary to take
account of the evolving nature of the threat.
Overseas, where we detain terrorist suspects,
our treatment of them will be subjected to
the most demanding level of scrutiny by the
International Committe of the Red Cross. We
have made clear that we are committed to
working with the United States to close its
detention facility at Guantánamo Bay.

**4.15 The threat from terrorism is real and, as**
noted in paragraph 3.9, more serious than
those we have faced in the past, and likely to
persist for many years. But we must also keep
it firmly in perspective. While we will continue
to make the necessary changes to respond to
the evolving terrorist threat – in strategy and
policy, structures, resources, and legal powers


– we are also determined to maintain the
balance of security and liberty, and above all
to maintain normal life, whether at airports,
on the train or underground networks, or in
our communities.


###### Countering terrorism – future priorities include:

- delivering the Government’s Public

Service Agreement – to ‘reduce the risk
to the United Kingdom and its interests
overseas from international terrorism’;

- continuing to build our capability to

detect and disrupt terrorists, in the
United Kingdom and overseas, through
investment in the police and the
security and intelligence agencies;

- enhancing the protection against

terrorism provided by new border
technology and the new UK Border
Agency;

- increasing our capacity to deal with the

consequences of a terrorist attack;

- delivering the improved range of

projects and programmes to tackle
violent extremism, including working
with partners overseas; and

- addressing grievances and challenging

the violent extremism narrative, for
example highlighting our active support
for the Middle East Peace Process.


-----

##### Countering the threat of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction

**4.16 Our approach to the threat of nuclear**
weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) is fully integrated across
Government, with cooperation across
departments and agencies including the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO),
Ministry of Defence (MOD), the Home Office,
the security and intelligence agencies, the
Department for Business, Enterprise and
Regulatory Reform (BERR) and Her Majesty’s
Revenue and Customs (HMRC). It links to
other national security activity, including
our wider foreign policy efforts to reduce
tensions in regions where there is a risk of
conflict that could lead to the use of such
weapons, such as the Middle East and south
Asia; and to counter-terrorism. Terrorist
networks have made no secret of their desire
to acquire and use chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear (CBRN) weapons.
We have a comprehensive strategy to try to
stop them succeeding.

**4.17 Our approach to proliferation reflects**
our commitment to act early to reduce future
threats, our commitment to multilateralism
and the rules-based international system,


and our willingness to work with partners
beyond government, including the private
sector. It is based around four strands:

– Dissuade states from acquiring,
developing, and contributing to the
spread of WMD, and related materials and
expertise.

– Detect attempts by states, and terrorists,
to develop or acquire this capability.

– Deny access to WMD and the necessary
materials, equipment, technology,
and expertise to develop them, while
promoting commerce and technological
development for peaceful purposes.

– Defend our country, our citizens, our
Armed Forces and our strategic interests
from the threats posed by proliferation.

**4.18 In all those strands, we will focus**
especially on failed and failing states,
countries that pose a direct threat to our
core values, and regions facing security
challenges.

**4.19** Dissuade includes: continuing to
support and enforce targeted UN and EU
sanctions against states not complying with
their obligations, while holding out the
prospect of improved economic and political


-----

relations if those obligations are met.
Specifically, we will continue to support the
‘E3+3’ process (France, Germany and the
United Kingdom plus China, Russia and the
United States) in relation to Iran, and the
Six-Party Talks in relation to North Korea. We
will press for early entry into force of the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, including
completion of its verification system; seek
agreement to start negotiations without
pre-conditions on a Fissile Material Cut-off
Treaty; and continue to support the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) as the
cornerstone of the international community’s
approach. In the run up to the 2010 NPT
review conference, we will lead the
international effort to accelerate
disarmament among possessor states, in
pursuit of our objective of a negotiated
elimination of all nuclear weapons. We have
offered to host a technical conference for the
five NPT Nuclear Weapons States on the
verification of nuclear disarmament. We will
also continue to encourage the United States
and Russia to see their current bilateral
discussions as an opportunity for further
reductions. Our own plans to make a further
20% reduction in our operationally available
warheads to fewer than 160, less than half
the planned level in 1997 – which we


announced alongside our 2006 decision to
maintain our deterrent – are now complete.

**4.20** Detect includes: identifying, collecting
and assessing information on attempts
by proliferator states and terrorists to
develop, acquire or use CBRN weapons;
supporting the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
other relevant international agencies, and
their inspection regimes; and using our
security, intelligence and law enforcement
capabilities to target proliferation networks
and financing. An important element of our
ability to deter state-sponsored terrorism is
our capability to determine the source of
material employed in any nuclear device.
We will retain and strengthen our worldleading forensic capability in this area and
we will also continue to work to strengthen
international expertise in this field.

**4.21** Deny includes: working to strengthen
control regimes on proliferation-sensitive
materials, principally through the tightening
of international export controls, but
also strengthening the effectiveness of
IAEA safeguards, and ensuring universal
implementation of relevant conventions
such as the International Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials;
strengthening the capacities of the IAEA


-----

Nuclear Security Fund; and pushing hard for
early agreement on a new IAEA-led system
including a uranium enrichment bond to
help states secure fuel for new civil nuclear
power programmes, while minimising
the risk of proliferation. We will continue
to provide assistance through the Global
Threat Reduction Programme to the most
vulnerable countries where nuclear material
is held, notably in the former Soviet Union.

**4.22** Defend includes: maintaining our
independent nuclear deterrent, based on
our 2006 assessment that we cannot rule
out a nuclear threat to the United Kingdom
re-emerging over the next 50 years. We
will continue to equip our Armed Forces to
operate in a CBRN environment, and maintain
our capability to deter states from directly
sponsoring terrorists.

**4.23 We adopt a similar integrated,**
multilateral approach to tackling chemical
and biological weapons. We will work
to strengthen international conventions
and to press possessor states to meet the
agreed 2012 deadline for the destruction
of chemical weapons; strengthen the
international verification regime; work with
experts to minimise the risk of misuse of
commercial material; and seek to reduce the
risk of CBRN material, including commercial
material, falling into the hands of failed


and failing states or terrorists, through
strengthening codes of conduct and
export control regimes, and improving the
international monitoring architecture.


###### Countering the threat of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction – future priorities include:

- continuing to address international

concerns about Iran’s nuclear
programme, notably through support for
the E3+3 process; and supporting the
Six-Party Talks in relation to North Korea;

- achieving a positive outcome from the

2010 NPT Review Conference;

- pushing hard for early agreement on

a new IAEA-led system to help states
secure fuel for new civil nuclear power
programmes, including through a
uranium enrichment bond, in return for
firm commitments to non-proliferation;

- starting negotiations on a Fissile

Material Cut-Off Treaty and securing the
entry into force of the Comprehensive
Test Ban Treaty;

- working with domestic and international

partners to reduce the risk from nuclear
terrorism; and

- maintaining the effectiveness of the

Chemical Weapons Convention.


-----

##### Tackling trans-national organised crime

**4.24 Trans-national organised crime poses a**
challenge to traditional policing approaches:
it crosses borders; it links up the local, the
national and the trans-national; it requires
close cooperation between policing and
intelligence; and it cuts across traditional
departmental boundaries between policing,
transport, security, and finance.

**4.25 With over 14,000 more police officers**
than 10 years ago, we have a policing
capability with the strength to deal with
organised crime at the national level,
through the regional and force level, down
to the neighbourhood level. The formation
of SOCA in 2006 and the introduction of the
new UK Border Agency, both working closely
with the police, reflect our commitment to
an increasingly integrated approach. The
25,000 staff in the agency will have new
powers to address a wider range of risks
and threats, together with new capabilities
including fast-response patrol craft for
intercepting illegal activity in territorial
waters. Freight, including lorries and sea
containers, will continue to be screened by
the United Kingdom’s border staff at home
and at selected ports overseas, to prevent


clandestine entry of goods or people. In
conjunction with our strengthened border
capabilities, the National Identity Scheme
will provide a robust defence against those
who seek to use false identities to conceal
criminal as well as terrorist activity.

**4.26 We are also working with the EU and**
member states to ensure effective crossborder cooperation to tackle international
organised crime, strengthening Europol
and Eurojust, the European bodies that
facilitate cooperation between police and
judicial bodies; developing new systems to
ensure the rapid and secure exchange of
information including DNA records, vehicle
information, foreign criminal records,
stolen goods, and passenger data; and
speeding up the extradition of criminals,
and the identification, tracing, freezing and
confiscation of their assets.

**4.27 We are shifting the emphasis to tackling**
problems at source, building the capacity of
overseas governments to tackle organised
crime. For example, we deploy customs
officers to the Caribbean and West Africa
to stop drug ‘mules’ boarding flights to
the United Kingdom; and our worldwide
network of airline liaison officers targets
trans-national organised crime as well as


-----

terrorism and immigration fraud. Current
multilateral projects include the Serious
Organised Crime Agency (SOCA) and
the Royal Navy working in the Maritime
Analysis and Operations Centre in Lisbon
with six other partner countries, to interdict
drug-trafficking from South America. The
Centre pools the intelligence and naval and
coastguard assets of the European countries
on the Atlantic seaboard and has intercepted
large shipments of cocaine bound for
the United Kingdom and other European
countries.

**4.28 We are focusing our resources better,**
mapping the activity of organised crime
groups more systematically to understand
the scale, cost and impact of their activities,
and to provide an improved basis for
targeting them. We are adapting MultiAgency Public Protection Arrangements –
first developed to deal with dangerous sexual
and violent offenders – to target organised
crime. Finally, we are alert to new threats,
including cyber-crime, and wider effects,
including the guns that are brought to the
United Kingdom and end up in the hands of
young people in our cities, or the organised
trafficking of women and children into the
sex industry.


##### Tackling global instability, conflict, and failed and fragile states

**4.29 Our response to global instability,**
conflict, and failed and fragile states brings
together a wide range of government
activity, from diplomacy to development
to overseas military operations. We favour
early engagement, to prevent conflict
developing or spreading and to tackle threats
to our national security at source. Wherever
possible we will adopt a multilateral
approach, ideally through international


###### Trans-national organised crime – future priorities include:

- giving law enforcement bodies the

powers and support they need to make
the United Kingdom an increasingly
hostile environment for organised crime;

- increasing our recovery of organised

criminal assets;

- enhancing our targeting of transnational organised crime at our borders;
and

- improving data-sharing through the

EU, UN, and G8 to identify and pursue
trans-national criminal networks.


-----

institutions. And we are committed to a
more integrated approach including the
links to other areas of our National Security
Strategy, including counter-terrorism and
counter-proliferation.

**4.30 The United Kingdom accepts a**
responsibility to contribute across the full
range of activity, and we have capabilities
and experience to offer in each area. As
a permanent member of the UN Security
Council, and a member of the EU, NATO and
the Commonwealth, we often play a key role
in shaping immediate international responses
to instability and conflict. We support a wide
range of interventions, with funding and
military and civilian staff. As part of our
long-term commitment to these challenges,
we are building our own national capabilities,
and encouraging and supporting regional
partners and the international community
to do the same.

**4.31 Our approach can be separated into**
the following three broad areas. First,
political support. By its nature, political
support is not available or measureable
as military or financial support: it is often
discreet and generally intangible. But it
is also highly effective in identifying and
tackling emerging problems, and it is an
area where the United Kingdom has a


strong international reputation. It includes
monitoring human rights problems, and
mediating political grievances which can
prefigure conflicts; promoting the role of
women in building peace and reconciliation
(including through UN Security Council
Resolution 1325); conflict mediation and
management, including behind-the-scenes
engagement with parties, brokering talks,
using international levers to bring parties
towards agreement, and securing peace
agreements; and, giving political support and
direction to post-conflict stabilisation and
reconstruction, including working towards
political inclusion and more permanent
resolution of grievances. In Kenya, for
example, that means supporting reforms
to help move beyond the ‘winner takes
all’ politics that was a major contributory
factor in the recent violent crisis. More
widely it means advocating and helping
deliver the ingredients of long-term healthy
societies, from the rule of law, civil society
and legitimate, accountable and effective
government. In the Middle East, it means
making clear that political participation by
militia groups must be based on a clear
direction of travel away from violence.
And where the situation requires peace
enforcement or military intervention, it
means recognising that this will only deliver


-----

long-term peace and stability as part of
a wider political strategy to stabilise and
rebuild the country or region in question,
with neighbouring countries playing a
constructive role, and with the support of
the international community (this is discussed
further below).

**4.32 Second, economic support. As leading**
supporters of the World Bank, and other
development-focused international financial
institutions, as well as through our own
development programmes, the United
Kingdom helps to support the processes
of economic and social development that
are critical to the long-term prevention of
violent conflict. We also recognise the crucial
role played by economic development in
an integrated approach to post-conflict
stabilisation.

**4.33 Third, security support. Wherever**
possible, international peacekeeping and
peace enforcement should be carried out in
partnership with local forces, both because
this is the likeliest route to success, and
because local consent for international
forces taking a security lead is likely to be
time‑limited. In Afghanistan, for example,
we are currently playing a leading role in
international efforts to increase the capacity
of the Afghan security forces.


**4.34 The longer-term challenge of security**
sector reform – building up the capacity of
other countries to deliver their own security in
a more effective, accountable and sustainable
way – is often a prerequisite for political and
economic progress out of conflict or state
failure, and an insurance against regression.
It includes a specific focus on trans-national
and organised crime, which is a particular
challenge in many countries emerging from
conflict, but it also requires a broad focus on
building national and local security capacity,
including armed forces, police, and border
forces, providing security for citizens as well
as for the state, and helping to build effective
and accountable justice systems, from courts
to prisons.

**4.35 The United Kingdom is a leader**
in promoting and supporting security
sector reform, and we are making a
substantial investment in this area as part
of our capacity-building in a wide range of
countries and regions. In Sierra Leone, we
have supported the development of the
Office of National Security, which played a
vital role in ensuring a free, fair and peaceful
political transition in the recent Presidential
elections. We support the African Union
(AU), and advocate joint training exercises
with the EU or NATO. We run military


-----

exchange programmes and support military
training colleges, and we will build up a
similar approach in policing by identifying
and deploying more officers to act as
mentors, advisers and leaders in international
police assistance missions, and supporting
exchange programmes and mentoring of
police colleges.

**4.36 The final element of security support is**
countering the proliferation of conventional
weapons, which is a major driver of conflict
and instability. We are committed to effective
implementation of export controls at national
level, and recently announced an extension
of controls to cover brokering of small arms
by British citizens overseas. We will also assist
other states to develop and implement the
governance mechanisms needed to ensure
tough controls on arms transfers, and we will
continue to play a leading role in pressing
internationally for a legally binding Arms
Trade Treaty, including by supporting the UNconvened Group of Governmental Experts.
We have taken a leading role in working
towards a ban on cluster munitions that
cause unacceptable harm to civilians, last
year withdrawing our two types of dumb
cluster munition with immediate effect.


**4.37 As well as continuing to drive activity**
and capacity-building across all three areas of
political, economic, and security support, we
recognise the common themes. In particular,
the best chance of success in tackling and
managing the linked challenges of instability,
conflict, and failed and fragile states comes
from acting early, wherever possible in
a multilateral way, and as part of a fully
integrated approach.

**4.38 Early engagement limits the spread of**
instability and conflict, addresses threats
to our national security at source, and
ultimately saves both lives and money. Early
engagement will not always be enough. Not
all security problems are predictable. Even
where they are, action will not always be
possible, either because of conditions on
the ground or because of a lack of available
resources. Where action is possible, it will not
always be successful. So we need the ability
to respond swiftly and decisively across the
full range of intervention scenarios, not just
to prevent or mediate violent conflict, but
also to stabilise situations in or emerging
from violent conflicts, and to support
recovery and reconstruction. In all those
scenarios, we need to recognise that there
are no quick fixes; that strategic patience


-----

is essential; and that we must be clear and
realistic about what success looks like – we
must not be too ambitious, and we must be
sensitive to local needs and local solutions.

**4.39 Across all those scenarios, we also need**
to recognise the extent to which success
depends on early and continuing analysis
and understanding. Intervention without
sufficient preparation can be unsuccessful or
even counterproductive. We will continue to
strengthen our national analytical capacity
for early warning and strategy development,
enabling us to focus on building regional
and country expertise where and when it is
most needed. We will work with allies and
international security institutions to do the
same. We will also strengthen our capacity
to monitor the effects of our actions, and
more systematically learn the lessons of our
experience in recent years in the Balkans,
Iraq, Afghanistan, the Middle East, Africa
and elsewhere, to improve our capacity to
make a constructive contribution to future
challenges.

**4.40** Multilateral engagement, ideally
through international institutions, is crucial
both to allow the international community
to draw on the full range of political,


economic, and security resources at the
disposal of different countries, and to
provide the legitimacy on which effective
action demands. Multilateral working brings
its own challenges, including issues with
burden-sharing (for example in Afghanistan)
and speedy decision-making (for example in
Darfur). We advocate a clearer set of criteria
for a range of international interventions,
and a clearer and faster system for agreeing
UN-assessed contributions. We will work
with the EU to make continued good use of
the EU’s Africa Peace Facility and to create a
predictable and sustainable EU mechanism
for funding UN-authorised AU missions,
including their ability to deploy quickly.

**4.41 Finally, as our experience in Iraq**
and Afghanistan has shown, building
stability out of conflict or state failure is
a complex undertaking which requires
concerted, sustained, and integrated effort
across security, politics and governance,
and economic development. Economic
development cannot happen in the absence
of basic security or effective governance,
but nor can improvements in security and
governance be sustained without broadbased economic development.


-----

**4.42 That was set out clearly in the United**
Kingdom’s new strategy for Afghanistan
announced in December 2007. To ensure
that longer-term political and economic
objectives are the guiding force behind the
security campaign, we have brought British
civilian and military personnel together into
a co-located headquarters – and we will
continue to strengthen their integration,
working together and with the Afghan
government on security, the rule of law,
tribal reconciliation, and basic services
such as roads, wells, schools and hospitals.
We have set out clearer and more realistic
objectives, and we are building closer
partnerships between NATO and Afghan
security forces.

**4.43 In Iraq, unlike Afghanistan, our forces**
are no longer in a leading security role,
but they continue to contribute to security
by training and mentoring Iraqi security
forces, and maintaining ‘overwatch’.
That is explicitly designed to support the
political and economic efforts on national
reconciliation and development, and
our priority of working in partnership
with the Iraqi government, Iraqi business
and international business to unlock the
economic potential of Basra.


**4.44 The operations in Iraq and Afghanistan**
have demanded extraordinary courage from
individuals and great commitment from a
wide range of units across the three Services.
Their ability and readiness to carry out this
difficult work, the professionalism they have
shown and the international regard in which
they are held, are rightly a source of national
pride. Our experience in Afghanistan in
particular has reinforced our view that
security threats, including terrorism, are best
tackled early, at source. It has also reinforced
the premium on forces that are deployable
and flexible, able to move rapidly between
different environments and different types
of operations; and our belief that the most
demanding expeditionary operations are
likely to be conducted alongside US forces,
either in coalition or in a NATO context,
and that if we wish to be able to continue
to make a significant contribution to such
operations, our Armed Forces will need to be
capable of operating closely with US forces.

**4.45 Some aspects of our operational**
experience since 2003 were not fully
predicted, including the enduring nature of
the operations and the particular premium on
certain kinds of capability, including protected
patrol vehicles, battlefield support helicopters,


-----

and surveillance. In the last two years, we
have strengthened those capabilities.

**4.46 Elsewhere in the world, the United**
Kingdom’s military forces and civilian
stabilisation staff have a less visible and
front-line role, but we are part of an
international effort pursuing the same
objectives and encouraging the same
integrated approach. For example, as part
of our commitment to supporting security
and economic stability in the Occupied
Palestinian Territories, we have committed
up to £243 million over three years, linked
to tangible progress in peace negotiations,
including progress on reform and the easing
of movement and access restrictions.

**4.47 To improve integration at the**
multilateral level, we will work to ensure
that the UN delivers its commitment to
genuinely integrated missions, and support
the UN Peacebuilding Commission, which
works to ensure integrated effort by all
donors on strategy and delivery, and
to provide immediate support for postconflict reconstruction. We advocate the
development of a stronger international
capacity, including through the EU and
UN, to deploy civilian stabilisation experts,
including judges, lawyers and police, at
short notice and in larger numbers and


to make them available for multilateral
deployment. To support greater integration
on the ground, we have established a new
£269 million Stabilisation Aid Fund and the
Stabilisation Unit, jointly owned by DFID, the
FCO and the MOD. The British Embassy in
Afghanistan, our largest, embodies the new
joint way of working, with an integrated and
inter-agency approach – with diplomatic,
political, governance, economic and
financial, developmental, cultural, security,
military and British Council staff co-located
and working together on agreed objectives.
We are looking at increasing the number
of civilian staff in Afghanistan, and at
strengthening the capacity within the armed
forces to work alongside civilians for certain
specific, short-term reconstruction and
development tasks in hostile environments,
and to provide a stabilisation presence in the
immediate aftermath of a military operation
while sufficient security is put in place to
enable civilians to deploy. Our review of
Reserve Forces will include an examination
of how reservists might contribute most
effectively in those situations.

**4.48 We are increasing spending on**
addressing global conflict through pooled
funding arrangements managed jointly
by the FCO, DFID and the MOD, recently


-----

establishing a single Conflict Prevention Pool
with £327 million funding over the next
three years.

**4.49 In summary, we will continue to fulfil our**
responsibilities to contribute to the full range
of international efforts to prevent, mediate,
and manage violent conflict, and to recover
and rebuild after conflict. We will develop our
national capabilities to do so; we will ensure
that all these capabilities – military and
civilian, security and development – are fully
integrated to deliver effect in risky or hostile
environments; we will work to encourage
partners and allies to invest in the same
capabilities; and we will work for greater
effectiveness in the UN, EU and NATO to
enable more timely and integrated responses
to the linked challenges of conflict, instability
and failed and failing states.

**4.50 We recognise that we have finite**
resources and capabilities to achieve our
aims. We are, therefore, committed to
a clearer focus and more hard-headed
prioritisation, bringing together our defence,
diplomacy and development resources in a
unified approach, and focusing on countries
or regions where the United Kingdom has a
particular ability to help (for example through
historic links, or close links between diaspora


communities and countries overseas), where
the opportunities to make a difference are
most apparent, where the humanitarian
needs are greatest, or where our national
interest is most clearly at stake.

**4.51 Based on those criteria, our current**
national security priorities overseas are:

– Pakistan and Afghanistan: key priorities
for regional conflict prevention as well as
domestic counter-terrorism;

– those parts of Africa suffering from
conflict, including Darfur, or extremism,
including North Africa;

– the Middle East, including Iraq, because of
its key role in global security and stability,
and its totemic status among violent
extremists; and

– Eastern Europe, where we support
enlarged European structures.


-----

###### Global instability and conflict, failed and fragile states – future priorities include:

- delivering the Government’s Public

Service Agreement on conflict to
“reduce the impact of violent conflict
through enhanced United Kingdom and
international efforts to prevent, manage
and resolve it”;

- building the capacity of weak states and

regional organisations to prevent and
resolve conflicts;

- building international capacity for

peacekeeping and security sector
reform;

- strengthening British and international

ability to deploy civilians;

- increasing civilian–military integration;

and

- continuing international action towards

the Millennium Development Goals.


scanning and effective risk assessment, so
that we are not caught unawares; in seeking
to prevent emergencies arising in the first
place; and when they do, in minimising harm
and then returning to normality as soon as
possible, working in partnership with all who
have a role to play, across the public, private,
community and third sectors; as well as
working internationally to address the
underlying causes.

**4.53 Since 2001, the Government has**
mounted a sustained effort to improve
the resilience of the United Kingdom to all
types of risks. The Civil Contingencies Act
2004 set out the responsibilities of frontline responders to assess local risks and
publish them in community risk registers;
to prepare plans; to make arrangements
to warn and inform the public in the event
of emergencies; and to promote business
continuity. We provide guidance to local
responders and emergency planners on how
to carry out their duties under the Act, for
example on how to plan for a flood or an
evacuation, and how to identify vulnerable
groups. We have set up a nationwide
network for resilience, coordinated by the
Cabinet Office.


##### Planning for civil emergencies and building resilience

**4.52 Our response to the various kinds of**
emergencies described in Chapter Three
emphasises early action – in horizon

-----

**4.54 We will continue to strengthen those**
capabilities across the country, as well as
devoting additional effort to a number of
specific priorities identified in paragraph 3.22.

**4.55 On flooding, we are investing in better**
weather forecasting, including forecasting
of precise local impact, and increasing
expenditure on flood management from
£600 million in 2007/08 to £800 million
in 2010/11. The scale of the risk posed by
coastal or tidal flooding has the potential to
exceed even that posed by the fluvial and
surface water flooding of last summer. So we
will consider carefully the recommendations
of the Pitt Review, as part of a programme
to reduce the risk and impact of all sources
of flooding, working with the private sector
to reduce the vulnerability of critical sites
and services.

**4.56 On pandemics, the World Health**
Organization (WHO) has recognised the
United Kingdom as being in the vanguard
in preparing for a pandemic and we will
continue to improve our capacity to minimise
the potential effects of a pandemic including
ensuring that effective planning is in place at
regional and local levels across the country.


**4.57 We will also work closely with**
international bodies to reduce the risk
of a pandemic and build the capacity to
respond if it materialises. That will include
engaging WHO and other global health
bodies, the UN, the EU, the World Bank, and
individual countries, on the coordination of
international surveillance requirements and
on early warning systems; on analysing and
preparing viruses for vaccine and research
purposes, on increasing vaccine supply; on
planned responses; including coordinated
travel restrictions; and on support to
vulnerable countries to help them develop
their capabilities, where the United Kingdom
has already pledged £37 million.

**4.58 The Government alone cannot protect**
people from all the consequences of natural
disasters. Human and social resilience, often
at the community level, will continue to be
crucial to ensuring British citizens’ future
security and well-being.

**4.59 The British people have repeatedly**
shown their resilience in the face of severe
disruptions whether from war, terrorism,
or natural disasters. Communities and
individuals harness local resources and
expertise to help themselves, in a way that
complements the response of the emergency


-----

services. That kind of community resilience is
already well organised in some parts of the
United Kingdom, and we will consider what
contribution we can make to support and
extend it, building on the foundations of the
Civil Contingencies Act and on the lessons of
emergencies over the past few years.

**4.60 Wider knowledge of the risks described**
in Chapter Three will enable communities
to prepare better. We will therefore publish
in summer 2008, and on a regular basis
thereafter, a national-level risk register
setting out our assessment of the likelihood
and potential impact of a range of different
risks that may directly affect the United
Kingdom, and the safety and well-being of
its citizens. That will help local authorities,
communities, businesses, and others
in preparing for emergencies. It will be
updated annually and informed by longerterm national assessment of related climate
change effects and risks.

**4.61 The Civil Contingencies Act 2004 will**
continue to provide the framework for all of
this work, and the Government will review
whether the Act needs strengthening,
drawing on lessons identified in its first
three years of operation and, looking ahead,
examining whether there are areas where


the legislative or regulatory framework can
be improved.


##### Defending the United Kingdom against state-led threats

**4.62 While for the foreseeable future no**
state or alliance will have both the intent
and the capability to pose a major and direct
threat to the United Kingdom, we cannot


###### Planning for civil emergencies and building resilience – future priorities include:

- continuing to increase expenditure on

flood management in England, from
£600 million in 2007/08 to £800 million
in 2010 /11, and taking forward the
recommendations of the Pitt Review;

- continuing to build domestic capacity to

respond to an influenza pandemic;

- continuing to build the extensive

network of organisations engaged
in preparing for and responding to
domestic emergencies;

- publishing a national-level risk register

covering the full range of risks; and

- reviewing the Civil Contingencies Act

to ensure an effective legislative and
regulatory framework.


-----

rule out a possible re-emergence of such a
threat in future decades.

**4.63 We will need to safeguard the United**
Kingdom against the re-emergence of such
a threat, to defend the territory of the United
Kingdom, its sea and air approaches, its
information and communications systems,
and its other vital interests, including our
Overseas Territories.

**4.64 The foundation of our strategy for**
preventing the re-emergence of such a
threat, or deterring it should it re-emerge,
is our continued commitment to strong
bilateral defence and security relationships,
our leading role in NATO and the EU and
other key alliances, a strong counterproliferation regime, and reformed global
institutions, including the UN.

**4.65 Ultimately, we must also continue**
to guard against the re-emergence of a
state-led threat through maintaining strong
national capabilities.

**4.66 On intelligence, in addition to the**
major effort required to tackle the current
level of terrorist threat, the security and
intelligence agencies will continue to
protect the United Kingdom against covert
activity by foreign intelligence organisations


aimed at political, economic and security
targets, including cyber-attack. The agencies
are committed to working with the FCO
and MOD, and other relevant parts of
government, to monitor the nature of
this threat.

**4.67 On defence, in 2006 we decided**
to maintain our independent nuclear
deterrent because, while we are strongly
committed to multilateral nuclear
disarmament and to the global elimination
of nuclear weapons, we cannot rule out
a threat to the United Kingdom involving
nuclear weapons re-emerging over the next
50 years.

**4.68 To help mitigate the threat of weapons**
of mass destruction, we welcome US plans
to place further missile defence assets in
Europe to provide cover for allies. We already
contribute to ballistic missile early warning
and regularly discuss continuing support
with the United States. We are also working
closely with allies on the development of
NATO missile defence options. We strongly
support efforts to include Russia through a
joint regional missile defence architecture,
not least to provide reassurance on the
defensive nature and intent of that capability.


-----

**4.69 We remain committed to maintaining**
strong conventional forces capable of
deterring and responding to a range of
state-led threats. The challenge is to invest
in the right capabilities to safeguard the
United Kingdom’s security for the long term,
while at the same time – as set out above –
continuing to give priority to supporting our
forces currently on overseas operations.

**4.70 We will continue to favour capability**
over quantity. The proportion of the United
Kingdom’s defence spending dedicated
to high-technology equipment is high by
international standards. As a result, the
capability of a given aircraft, ship, or infantry
unit far outstrips that of even 10 years ago,
and that of most conceivable adversaries.
We are determined to shift the overall
balance of defence procurement towards
support of current operations, building on
recent additions to strategic airlift, support
helicopters, protected patrol vehicles,
surveillance and personal equipment. But
we will also continue to invest for the
long term in a broad range of military
capabilities. Those include assets such as
the recently announced aircraft carriers, and
capabilities related to the defence of the
United Kingdom, including air defence and


anti-submarine warfare – capabilities that
would be difficult to rebuild from scratch
if the relevant threats should re-emerge
in the future. We retain this broad range
of capabilities and this high-technology
approach to safeguard our ability to prevent
and deter aggression, reinforcing our
membership of NATO and our commitment
to the international system.


###### The Armed Forces

The operations in Iraq and Afghanistan,
and in particular their enduring nature,
have stretched the Armed Forces
and placed great demands on service
personnel. Their resilience and capability
to meet current and future challenges is
not in doubt: they continue to perform
superbly in both Iraq and Afghanistan,
and demonstrably retain the capacity to
deal with emerging crises, such as the
evacuation of Lebanon, and the ability
to deploy to Kosovo if required. But we
are entering a phase of overall reduced
commitments, recuperation of our
people, and regrowth and reinvestment
in capabilities and training as much as
equipment.

_(continued)_


-----

A crucial element of this will be improving
the support we give to members of the
Armed Forces and their families. We have
made significant improvements over recent
years, including improved pay, a new
tax-free operational bonus paid from the
Reserve, greater access to home ownership
schemes, and an extension of priority
treatment to all veterans in the NHS. But
we are determined to do more, and the
Command Paper announced in November
2007 will set out proposals for a new
cross-government effort to improve the
support we offer in education, healthcare,
accommodation, and the treatment of
injured personnel. We will also set out new
retention measures to help bring military
numbers back into balance.

Those longer-term objectives must be
combined with the immediate imperatives
of safety and success on current
operations; and – as with every area
of national security – these competing
priorities have to be reconciled within
finite resources. The Defence budget
has had the longest period of sustained
growth since the 1980s, and will see
further real growth to 2010-11. We have
the second-highest defence budget in the
world in cash terms, and the fifth-highest
in purchasing power terms (after the
United States, China, India, and Russia).
In the last year, we will have spent up to
£2.9 billion in addition to the defence


budget in Iraq and Afghanistan, of which
nearly £1 billion was for equipment. But
acute cost pressures remain in certain
areas. There are a number of factors
behind that including real pay increases
and rising fuel costs. But the primary factor
is the rising cost of defence equipment.The
Royal Air Force is currently taking delivery
of new generation Typhoon fast jets, which
cost over £50 million each – at least twice
the cost in real terms envisaged when
the programme began in the late 1980s.
Similarly, the new Type 45 destroyers, the
most capable ships ever fielded by the
Royal Navy, cost over £1 billion each –
again twice the cost in real terms envisaged
when the programme began in the late
1990s. The combination of the rising costs
of defence equipment, our commitment
to capability over quantity, and the recent
high operational tempo undeniably
presents a significant challenge, which is
shared with all developed countries with
major military commitments. As made
clear above, we are determined to shift the
overall balance of defence procurement
towards support of current operations,
while at the same time continuing to invest
in a broad range of capabilities for the
long term. To deliver that in a challenging
environment, we are reforming the
approach to defence procurement and
our relationship with the defence industry,
with more hard-headed prioritisation and a
greater emphasis on value for money.


-----

##### Strengthening and reforming the international system

**4.71 As set out in Chapter Two, we are**
committed to a multilateral, rules-based
approach to international affairs, where
issues are resolved through discussion
and due process, with the use of force as
a last resort. We also accept, as set out
in paragraph 3.32, that the rules-based
international system itself faces important
challenges which global and require effective
global responses. Too often, the existing
international system lacks that capacity.
A key element of our response is therefore
strong support for international institutions
and a rules-based approach, while also
actively supporting a wide range of reforms
to build open, credible, accountable and
effective global institutions, and equip them
with the capabilities they need.

**4.72 Stronger international financial**
institutions, particularly the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank, are
essential to deal with the changes brought
by globalisation, and to sustain a framework
for global economic stability, growth and
open markets, which is one of the most
important drivers of security and stability.
We will work within these institutions to
adapt their governance structures to the


new global economic realities, to provide
surveillance to prevent world economic
crises, and to enable fast economic recovery
and growth after conflict.

**4.73 We will continue to build close**
bilateral relationships with key countries,
including the United States, and the
emerging powers of India and China. The
partnership with the United States remains
our most important bilateral relationship,
and central to our national security. India is
the world’s largest democracy, and shares
with us in one of the most profitable
bilateral trade partnerships in the world.
Its political role is growing within its own
region and internationally. It is making an
increasing contribution to international
cooperation against terrorism, and continues
to contribute a large number of international
peacekeepers. China is already the fourthlargest economy in the world, a major trade
partner, and a growing world power. Many
of the security challenges we face will not
be solved without Chinese engagement: for
example achieving a durable settlement in
Darfur and reform in Burma, denuclearising
the Korean Peninsula, as well as issues such
as climate change, energy competition, food
and water pressures, and poverty and good
governance. Both bilaterally and at the EU


-----

level we are engaged in a dialogue with
China on a range of issues; in many of those
areas we have seen tangible recent evidence
of China exercising its influence in support
of objectives we share. We still have some
fundamental differences, including over
human rights, and we make these clear in
our dealings with China. But the new global
realities mean that engagement with China
is not an option but a necessity.

**4.74 We will continue to press for a more**
representative and credible G8, and for the
expansion of the permanent membership
of the UN Security Council to include
India, Brazil, Germany, and Japan, as well
as permanent African representation – to
enable both those bodies to provide stronger
and more credible leadership in world affairs.
If the deadlock over permanent reform
continues, we will consider an intermediate
solution.

**4.75 We will continue to press for further**
strengthening and reform of international
institutions to deliver the specific objectives
on conflict prevention, mediation,
peacekeeping and peace enforcement,
stabilisation, and peacebuilding. We are
committed to building a better rulesbased framework for intervention across


all those scenarios. In particular, we need
a stronger UN system for protecting
vulnerable populations, preventing state
breakdown and the descent into violence,
building peace, and laying the foundations
for longer-term development. In some
circumstances the international community
has a responsibility to help countries protect
their populations. In most cases, that involves
support for the countries’ own security
forces and agencies; but in some cases,
where a government is unwilling or unable
to protect its citizens from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing or crimes against
humanity, or is perpetrating these acts
itself, the international ‘Responsibility to
Protect’ ultimately requires the international
community to act.

**4.76 We will support reforms that build**
international capacity in this area, including
delivering the UN’s commitment to genuinely
integrated missions; ensuring that the
Peacebuilding Commission takes on an
effective leadership role in shaping longerterm peacebuilding; and developing a
stronger international capacity, in the UN and
EU, to deploy civilian stabilisation experts at
shorter notice and in larger numbers. We will
work for greater formal international support


-----

for developing the capacity of regional
organisations, including the AU.

**4.77 We will continue to work for a stronger**
NATO, capable of taking on a wide range of
challenging security and stabilisation tasks in
complex and demanding situations, building
on its experience in Afghanistan. That will
include improved mechanisms for burdensharing, to avoid NATO depending so heavily
on the military capabilities and political will
of a small number of its members.

**4.78 We will work for a stronger and**
more accountable European foreign and
security policy, and for more integrated EU
capabilities across politics, development,
and security – with a particular focus on its
potential to make a positive contribution
to security sector reform, building on its
experience in Bosnia.

**4.79 A strong EU and NATO inherently**
promote both European and regional
security, complementing the contribution of
global institutions, and we will support the
expansion of both and closer cooperation
between them.

**4.80 We will advocate and support the**
appointment on merit for key leadership
positions in international institution


getting people with the right skills, expert
capabilities and management abilities into
positions that will help the institutions
deliver effectively and efficiently against their
objectives.

**4.81 We will continue to promote and**
support the spread of democracy, and
improvements to make governance more
effective, legitimate, and accountable, by
working through international institutions
(including election monitoring), through
British and international aid and economic
policy (discussed below), and through broad
support for civil society and free media.

**4.82 This programme of reform is not**
something that can be achieved by the
United Kingdom or any other country acting
alone. It will require a broad coalition – a
broad range of actors in global society
working together, from international
organisations and states through to
businesses, non-governmental organisations
(NGOs), and global foundations. The United
Kingdom, with its open economy, innovative
business sector, and vibrant civil society is
well placed to play a key role in this new
kind of international coalition.


-----

###### Strengthening international institutions – future priorities include:

- leading further reform of the G8, UN

Security Council, IMF, and World Bank;

- strengthening NATO, including

enlargement and better arrangements
for burden-sharing;

- strengthening UN and EU capacity

to ensure better international
approaches to conflict prevention,
mediation, stabilisation, recovery and
peacebuilding;

- improving international peacekeeping

funding mechanisms; and

- building the capacity of regional security

institutions, including the AU.


##### Tackling climate change

**4.83 As set out in Chapter Three, climate**
change is likely to have serious consequences
for international stability and security, and
an integrated and international response is
urgently needed to tackle cause and effect.

**4.84 That includes defensive measures such**
as greater protection against flooding and
sea level surges; modifications to plans


for development and the management of
resources, such as increased water efficiency,
and changes to agricultural crops and
practices to mitigate water stress and food
insecurity; and changes to energy policy
to tackle the causes of climate change,
achieving a reduction in global carbon
emissions and meeting rising global energy
demand in a sustainable way.

**4.85 We are working at all levels – from our**
role in the international community and
the EU, to national level, local authorities
and communities, and in partnership with
businesses and citizens – to make the
technological and behavioural transition
to a low-carbon economy. The United
Kingdom has a leading role to play in
multilateral efforts to tackle climate change,
including helping to set binding, ambitious
commitments to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. We are working to develop the
global carbon market; to scale up the climate
change and clean energy frameworks of
the World Bank and other development
banks; to strengthen UN institutions
working on climate change; build capacity in
developing countries to introduce adaptation
policies at national and local level; and, in
the immediate future, to secure a global


-----

agreement by 2009 on a comprehensive
framework of climate change commitments
for the period after 2012.

**4.86 To address the effects on security,**
we are undertaking a systematic detailed
analysis, region by region, of how the impact
of climate change is likely to affect the
United Kingdom; analysing our water and
food security issues to ensure sustainable and
secure supplies; and increasing our overall
investment in climate change research to at
least £100 million over the next five years
to investigate the dynamics of long-term
climate change, the links to international
poverty and the impact of climate change on
conflict and other factors.

##### Tackling competition for energy and building energy security

**4.87 We have an integrated strategy**
designed to ensure secure and reliable
energy supplies; to reduce our vulnerability
to security shocks elsewhere; to reduce
our contribution to tensions arising from
competition for energy resources; and to
tackle climate change.

**4.88 That includes working through the EU**
and bilaterally to promote open, competitive
energy markets, and working closely with


other states to encourage clear, stable
and non-discriminatory rules and effective
regulation of the market, to ensure that
energy is produced in the most efficient way
and to encourage adequate investment.
We will work through the EU and global
institutions to develope a competitive global
gas market and thereby increase the security
of our gas supply. That will include specific
engagement with key countries, such as
Russia (the world’s largest producer of gas,
supplying half of EU imports), through the
range of international mechanisms. Holding
Russia to the G8 St Petersburg energy
commitments is crucial to ensuring that
it is a stable supplier and full contributor
to international efforts to tackle climate
change.

**4.89 Our energy strategy also includes**
diversifying the sources of primary fuels and
the routes by which they can be imported.
The United Kingdom gas market is in the
process of investing £10 billion in a new gas
import and storage infrastructure. It also
includes shifting to a low-carbon economy,
both in the United Kingdom and across
the world: promoting policies to improve
energy efficiency; increasing supplies from
renewable sources; and putting a value
on carbon emissions, enabling low-carbon


-----

technologies to compete with other forms
of energy production. At home, we are also
encouraging investment in nuclear facilities
(although this has security implications of
its own).

##### Tackling poverty, inequality, and poor governance

**4.90 We are committed to leading**
international efforts to tackle poverty, raise
living standards, and promote development
across the world. This reflects our core values
and has important benefits for national
security.

**4.91 We have increased our overseas**
development budget from 0.26% of gross
national income in 1997 to just over 0.5% in
2006, and are committed to meeting the UN
target of 0.7% (or over £10 billion a year) by
2013. We have brought greater transparency
and effectiveness to the way that money is
spent. British aid is now lifting three million
people out of poverty a year worldwide, and
we are significantly increasing expenditure
on education (£1 billion a year by 2010), and
on global health.

**4.92 As well as financial aid, we are**
supporting reforms to international trade
that open up markets to the poorest


countries, and using our position in the EU
and G8 to argue for a pro-development
outcome to the Doha round of world trade
negotiations. Along with international
partners, we are committed to delivering the
Millennium Development Goals by 2015.

**4.93 Those actions are based not just on**
our commitment to global justice, but on a
recognition that they also make an essential
contribution to building long-term security,
given the links between, on the one hand,
poverty, inequality, and lack of development
and, on the other, instability, insecurity,
conflict, and failed and failing states. With
the United Kingdom’s aid contribution
growing in size and effectiveness, we are also
looking at the ways in which our overseas
aid policy contributes to the security of the
citizens’ countries and regions concerned,
and also to our own national security. As
the development budget increases, and
our understanding of the long-term links
between development and security deepens,
we are increasingly using our development
resources to tackle poverty and raise living
standards in key regions, countries and
provinces at risk of instability, conflict or state
failure, including Pakistan and Afghanistan
(including assistance in delivering basic
services in the North West Frontier Province


-----

and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas),
parts of Africa, and the wider Middle East.

**4.94 Our approach includes long-term**
support for more effective and accountable
governance and security and justice systems,
complementing more immediate support. A
significant part of our bilateral development
assistance is channelled through national
and sub-national governments, and we
devote substantial resources to improving
the quality of governance in developing
states. In Afghanistan, we are working
with the Independent Directorate of
Local Governance and the Civil Service
Commission to help improve the planning
and financial management of provincial and
district governors. We also recognise the
importance of ensuring that political reform
does not lead to domination by any ethnonational or sectarian group, supporting
reform efforts that ensure that minority
groups and regions have an adequate
political voice.

**4.95 We will continue to play a leading**
role in wider international efforts to fight
corruption, having committed £120 million
over five years through the Governance and
Transparency Fund. Through initiatives such
as the Extractive Industries Transparency


Initiative, and in partnership with business
and NGOs, we are working to build new
multilateral regimes to help ensure that
mineral revenues contribute to economic
development, political stability and security,
rather than undermining them.

##### Responding to global trends

**4.96 We are committed to ensuring that**
the world as a whole, not just the United
Kingdom, can benefit from the opportunities
of globalisation and contribute to dealing
with the related security challenges.

**4.97 Our approach will be similar to**
that outlined throughout this strategy:
a commitment to acting early, scanning
the horizon for possible future threats;
to working with partners in business and
elsewhere; and to putting our effort and
assets – whether research, enforcement,
or diplomatic – behind a multilateral,
rules-based approach.

**4.98 In response to economic challenges,**
we recognise the links between financial
stability and security, and support broad
reform of international financial institutions.
Alongside other EU nations, we will continue
to push for operational improvements,
including better surveillance activities by the


-----

IMF to provide early warning of economic
turbulence, and better arrangements for
enabling economic recovery and growth
after conflict or in regions susceptible to
conflict. We are committed to multilateral
efforts to protect legal economic activity
against disruption or attack, whether
electronic attack, money-laundering, or
piracy. The Royal Navy maintains a presence
in the Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf, to
contribute to international work to protect
vital sea lanes and choke points against a
range of threats, from terrorism to piracy and
potential state-sponsored disruption.

**4.99 In response to the technological**
challenges, we are committed to working
with international, public, and private sector
partners to ensure that our government
systems and critical national infrastructure
are adequately protected against cyberattack. We are also investing, through the
interception modernisation programme, to
update our intelligence and law-enforcement
capability to meet the challenges of rapidly
advancing communications technology.
We are committed to maximising the
opportunities and benefits of the internet,
by protecting the freedom to develop and
host new services, while also reducing the
scope for terrorists and criminals to exploit


those opportunities and freedoms, and
ensuring that the internet itself is resilient
enough to withstand attacks and accidents.
Finally, we support international efforts to
monitor and protect the safety and security
of new technology including the internet
and communications networks, and the
space assets that are increasingly important
for communications. We will continue to
explore how new confidence‑building and
arms control measures might contribute to
international security in this area.

**4.100 In response to the demographic**
challenges and related pressures on food and
water, we will support international efforts to
manage global migration, to manage water
demand, and to liberalise agricultural trade
and increase water-efficient food production.
In our work with developing countries, for
example in support of good governance and
adapting to climate change, we will focus on
states and regions most likely to be affected
by the combination of rapid urbanisation,
high unemployment, demographic shifts,
instability, and a possible further growth in
violent extremism.


-----

##### The interdependence of threats, risks and drivers – an integrated response

**4.101 As set out in Chapter One, the overall**
objective of this National Security Strategy is
to anticipate and address a diverse range of
threats and risks to our security, in order to
protect the United Kingdom and its interests,
enabling its people to go about their daily
lives freely and with confidence, in a more
secure, stable, just, and prosperous world.
Chapter Three explains that those threats and
risks are not as great as at previous times in
our history, but they are real, and also more
diverse, complex, and interdependent than in
the past. The policy responses outlined in this
chapter are, therefore, not only individually
vital to our future security and prosperity, but
also wide-ranging, complex, and, crucially,
interdependent. They reflect an integrated
approach to developing policy and building
capability, intended to deliver results against a
number of linked objectives.

**4.102 Our development policy reflects our**
values – our commitment to global justice
– and our recognition that development
makes an essential contribution to building
long-term security, given the links between,
on the one hand, poverty, inequality, and
lack of development, and on the other,


instability, insecurity, conflict, and failed and
failing states. Over the next three years, we
will increase our development and security
assistance to fragile states and regions where
the links between insecurity, conflict, and
poverty are strongest.

**4.103 Our climate change and energy policies**
reflect the combined goals of mitigating
climate change, maintaining a secure and
reliable energy supply, and, in so doing,
contributing to greater security and stability
in international relations.

**4.104 Our approach to international**
institutions recognises the interdependencies
between financial stability and growth, and
insecurity and conflict; and our belief that
our response to all the challenges outlined
in this strategy requires an international
framework that is effective, representative,
and accountable.

**4.105 On capabilities, the programme of**
work to improve resilience – shared across
all levels of government, the emergency
services, the private sector, and the third
sector – will improve our ability to ensure
that we can minimise or absorb harm and
return to normality as soon as possible,
in the face of a wide range of risks and
emergencies.


-----

**4.106 The Centre for the Protection of**
National Infrastructure (CPNI) was established
in 2007 to act as an interdepartmental
organisation providing advice on
information, physical and personnel security
to businesses and organisations across
the national infrastructure. CPNI works
closely with the private sector, delivering
advice to reduce the vulnerability of critical
infrastructure to terrorism and other national
security threats.

**4.107 The flexible, global network of**
diplomatic posts will continue to play
a crucial role in delivering the United
Kingdom’s foreign policy. It provides and
supports essential cross-government
services, including security to the British
public and businesses. It also supports the
cross-government efforts described in this
strategy, including bilateral and multilateral
cooperation on counter-terrorism and
counter-proliferation, tackling trans-national
crime and dealing with conflict; reform
of international institutions; and work to
address the underlying drivers of insecurity.
Engagement with the public in other
countries is also crucial. Britain has a long
tradition of public diplomacy, and we will
build on that with new approaches, tailored


more to individual countries and to new
media.

**4.108 Our commitment to strong, balanced,**
flexible, and deployable Armed Forces
safeguards the future security of the
United Kingdom, and enables us to make
a significant contribution to international
efforts on peacekeeping and peace
enforcement. That capability, and our
demonstrable political will to deploy it,
also makes a wider contribution to global
security, reinforcing international pressure to
deter aggression and encourage participation
in mediation and dialogue.

**4.109 Strong borders are essential to**
protect against terrorism, crime, and illegal
immigration. Over the last five years, the
airline liaison officer network has stopped
nearly 180,000 suspect travellers boarding
planes to the United Kingdom. British
immigration controls in France and Belgium
prevent thousands of people entering the
United Kingdom every year, and we are
increasing support for the operational activity
of the EU’s border agency, Frontex. The UK
Border Agency will bring together, in one
organisation, the work of UKvisas, the Border
and Immigration Agency, and the border
work of HMRC, improving the protection


-----

that border and migration controls provide
against terrorism, trans-national organised
crime, and illegal immigration. Alongside the
new border force, electronic border controls
– which will begin to be rolled out later this
year – will create a modern, intelligenceled border control and security framework.
100% of visas to enter the United Kingdom
are already based on fingerprints. By 2011,
95% of those entering or leaving the
country, whether British or foreign, will be
electronically checked against watch lists for
terrorism, crime, and illegal immigration,
as well as being counted in and out of the
country; 100% coverage will be completed
by 2014.

**4.110 Within the UK, the National Identity**
Scheme will improve protection against
organised crime and terrorism. From late
2008, compulsory fingerprint biometric
identity cards will be introduced for foreign
nationals; and in the second half of 2009,
identity cards will be issued to people
employed in sensitive roles or locations,
starting with airport workers.

**4.111 From strong borders, to capable and**
flexible Armed Forces, a global diplomatic
network, focused security and intelligence
agencies, and a coherent approach to


policy development across government, our
efforts in all those areas are designed to
deliver against a wide range of complex and
interdependent security challenges, now and
in the longer term.

**4.112 In all those areas, we are committed**
to partnership working – across different
parts of government, with the private sector
and civil society, with increasing roles for
communities and individual citizens, and
through coordinated action with our allies
and through multilateral institutions.

**4.113 Together, that adds up to a balanced**
and coherent overall policy and capability
framework for addressing both the
immediate and longer-term threats and
risks, and for influencing the underlying
drivers of the security landscape in a
direction conducive to both national security
and global stability. It represents a truly
integrated approach to national security
which is grounded in our values, is realistic
and hard-headed about what our capabilities
can achieve and where they should be
targeted to make the most difference, and
is dedicated to the overarching national
security objective set out at the beginning
of this strategy.


-----

## Chapter Five: Working together


**5.1 The 2007 Comprehensive Spending**
Review set out the Government’s spending
plans for national security: continued
rising real-terms investment in the Armed
Forces; increased resources for diplomatic
engagement in key areas; more spending
on conflict prevention and stabilisation;
and more spending on security, intelligence
and counter-terrorism, where the budget
has doubled since 2001 and will grow to
£3.5 billion by 2011. This strategy sets out
the framework for targeting those resources.

**5.2 The recent improvements in national**
security structures summarised in
Chapter One have brought greater focus,
responsiveness and integration to our
approach. Given those reforms, this strategy
does not propose further radical structural
change. But our structures and processes will
be kept under review, and we will continue
to respond and adapt to new challenges.
We will, therefore, as Chapter Four states,
publish a national-level risk register in
summer 2008 which will be regularly
updated.


**5.3 We will continue to seek ways to**
work more effectively across government.
The Cabinet Secretariats are currently
being reviewed to examine whether
improvements can be made to the way
they are organised and work together, to
deliver greater coherence and effectiveness
across government, including support for
the Cabinet Committee on National Security,
International Relations and Development.

**5.4 We will consider: how to strengthen**
the Government’s capacity for horizonscanning, forward-planning and early
warning to identify, measure, and monitor
risks and threats; and our capacity for
strategic thinking and prioritisation, spanning
traditional boundaries between domestic
and foreign policy, defence and security,
and intelligence and diplomacy.

**5.5 Building on recent experience at home**
(for example on counter-terrorism) and
overseas (for example in Afghanistan, where
security, policy and development officials
now work together in joint teams), we will


-----

continue to seek greater integration and
responsiveness at the operational level. The
new Stabilisation Unit will have a key role.

**5.6 The Government is committed to a**
dialogue with experts, stakeholders, and the
public, to build a shared understanding of
the security challenges we face, and what
we are doing and need to do to tackle them.
We will encourage interested parties to
contribute to the debate on the strategy, and
will seek to encourage the participation of a
much wider circle of expertise in addressing
national security issues. We will establish a
national security forum, including people
from central and local government, politics,
academia, the private and third sectors, and
other bodies, as well as people with relevant
security experience We will also look for
opportunities to seek views from members
of the public. This strategy marks the next
step in a process of engagement designed to
ensure that government thinking on national
security constantly keeps pace with the
rapidly evolving global security environment.


###### The contribution of individuals and communities to national security

Individuals have an essential role to play
in national security. We can all contribute,
for example by being vigilant against
terrorism, and by planning for, and taking
a more active role in responding to, civil
emergencies, on the basis of new and
improved information on the risks we
face. We can also play our part in tackling
the longer-term challenges, such as
climate change. Through volunteering and
dialogue we can also make sure that the
values we share across society are upheld.

For more information about how
individuals can prepare themselves, see:

- www.mi5.gov.uk for the current threat

level;

- www.fco.gov.uk for travel advice; and

- www.preparingforemergencies.gov.uk

for information on emergencies.


-----

**5.7 We will publish an annual update on**
the challenges we face and progress on
implementing this strategy. We will consult
all Parties and the Parliamentary authorities
about how Parliament can play a stronger
role in overseeing the development and
implementation of this strategy. We have
recently concluded a consultation to consider
the ways in which Parliament should
be involved in decisions relating to the
deployment of the Armed Forces into conflict.

**5.8 This National Security Strategy shows that**
the Government is committed to working
with the whole of society, to build confidence
in our core values, our shared approach, and
our strong security capabilities. It sets out
a new and clearer understanding of what
security means and how we need to work
together in an integrated and coherent
national and international effort. That will
enable us to work together to manage risks,
harness the opportunities of globalisation,
and achieve the single overarching national
security objective set out at the beginning of
this strategy: protecting the United Kingdom
and its interests, enabling its people to
go about their daily lives freely and with
confidence, in a more secure, stable, just and
prosperous world.


###### Strengthening our national security structures – future priorities include:

- consulting on a joint Parliamentary

National Security Committee to help
monitor the implementation and
development of this strategy;

- strengthening the work of horizonscanning and forward planning;

- strengthening the capability to offer

a strategic perspective on security
priorities and improve connections
between defence, development, foreign
and domestic security strategies;

- creating a national security forum,

including representatives from
government, politics, academia
and others, to discuss strategy and
exchange ideas; and

- publishing the National Risk Register (as

set out in Chapter Four) and an annual
update on the security challenges facing
the United Kingdom and progress on
implementing the strategy.


-----

## Endnotes

1 The wider scope of issues to be addressed within this
strategy is not to be taken as affecting the legally
understood meaning of national security.

2 Although national security matters generally
are the responsibility of the United Kingdom
Government and Parliament, some areas of policy
covered in this document are the responsibility of
devolved administrations and legislatures. In these
cases decisions will ultimately be for the devolved
institutions concerned. In the European context,
the Lisbon Treaty makes it clear that ultimate
responsibility for our national security lies with the
United Kingdom.

3 There are five threat levels: low, meaning an attack
is unlikely; moderate, meaning an attack is possible,
but not likely; substantial, meaning an attack is a
strong possibility; severe, meaning an attack is highly
likely; and critical, meaning an attack is expected
imminently.

Printed in the UK for The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office

ID5732621  03/08

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum


-----

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:

**Online**
**www.tsoshop.co.uk**

**Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail**
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call: 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: customer. services@tso. co. uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701

**TSO Shops**
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
028 9023 8451 Fax: 028 9023 5401
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0870 606 5566 Fax: 0870 606 5588

**The Parliamentary Bookshop**
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square,
London SW1A 2JX

**TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents**


-----

