# NATIONAL
## SECURITY
### STRATEGY
**OFTHE**
**UNITED STATES**

**THE WHITE HOUSE**
JANUARY 1987

, _LLh-:CcJ_ S-t)... ·~l-'-.,- _\)iC',r_ _[l],(";,-!_

(1 q?, I.· :q'r.; '-7 _QC(?{(C'_ '}

"Freedom, peace and prosperity ...
that's what America is all
about. .. for ourselves, our friends,
and those people across the globe
struggling for democracy~'


-----

**Contents**

**I. An American Perspective ••. 1** **IV. U.S. Defense Policy ... 19**

_INTRODUCTION .. . 19_

**II. Fundamentals of U.S. National** _TAKING ADVANTAGE OF U.S. STRENGTHS AND_
**Security Strategy** **... 3** _SOVIET WEAKNESSES . .. 20_

_MAINTENANCE OF A STRATEGIC DETERRENT. .. 21_

_u.s. SECURITY IN A COMPLEX AND CHANGING_
_WORLD ... 3_

_ARMS CONTROL . .. 23_

_U.S. INTERESTS ... 4_

_MAINTENANCE OF A CONVENTIONAL_
_DETERRENT . .. 26_

_MAJOR OBJECTIVES IN SUPPORT OF u.s._
_INTERESTS . .. 4_

_SPACE SUPPORT OF NATIONAL SECURITY . .. 31_

_PRINCIPAL THREATS TO u.s. INTERESTS ... 6_

_INTELLIGENCE SUPPORT OF NATIONAL_
_SECURITY_ _... 31_

**III. U.S. Foreign Policy** **... 9** _LOW INTENSITY CONFLICT . .. 32_

_CONTINUITY OF BASIC GOALS .• . 9_

_INSTRUMENTS OF FOREIGN POLICY_ 9 **V. Executing the Strategy** **... 35**

_INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY_ _11_ _FOREIGN POLICY CAPABILITIES . .. 35_

_POLITICAL AND INFORMATIONAL ELEMENTS OF_ _DEFENSE CAPABILITIES . .. 36_
_NATIONAL POWER_ 13

_INTEGRATING NATIONAL SE(URITY_

_REGIONAL POLICIES_ 13 _CAPABILITIES . . . 40_

Western Hemisphere .•. 13

Western Europe ... 14

**VI. Looking Forward to the**

East Asia and Pacific ... 15

**1990's** **... 41**

Soviet Union and Eastern Europe ... 16

Middle East and South Asia ... 17

Africa ... 18

**iii**


-----

**I. An American Perspective**

not acted alone. During that war and in the succeeding

In the early days of this Administration we laid the

four decades, our strategy has been based on

foundation for a more constructive and positive

partnership with those nations that share our common

American role in world affairs by clarifying the

goals.

essential elements of U.S. foreign and defense policy.

As the world has changed over the years, the

Over the intervening years, we have looked objectively

differences between nations striving to develop

at our policies and performance on the world scene to

democratic institutions and those following the

ensure they reflect the dynamics of a complex and

totalitarian banner have come into sharp focus. As

ever-changing world. Where course adjustments have

future changes take place in human rights, advanced

been required, I have directed changes. But we have

technology, quality of life, and the global economy, our

not veered and will not veer from the broad aims that

example will continue to exert tremendous influence

guide America's leadership role in today's world: .

on mankind. The United States is on the right side of
this historic struggle and we have tried to build a

-  Commitment to the goals of world freedom, peace lasting framework for promoting this positive change.
and prosperity;

This National Security Strategy Report builds on the

-  Strong and close relationships with our Alliance

efforts of the Administration, Congress, and the

partners around the world;

American people over the past six years. But any

-  Active assistance to those who are struggling for strategy document is only a guide. To be effective, it
their own self-determination, freedom, and a must be firmly rooted in broad national interests and
reasonable standard of living and development; objectives, supported by an adequate commitment of

resources, and integrate all relevant facets of national

-  Willingness to be realistic about the Soviet Union, power to achieve our national objectives. It must
to define publicly the crucial moral distinctions provide a framework within which more specific and
between totalitarianism and democracy; and detailed objectives can be identified by those executive

branch agencies charged with stewardship over various

-  Seeking meaningful ways of working with the

elements of the nation's power. And it must guide the

Soviet leaders to prevent war and make the world a

creation of specific plans for attainment of those more

more peaceful place.

detailed objectives.

The foundation of a sound National Security Strategy,

For this reason, the annual presentations to the

laid in the early days of this Administration, has held Congress by the Secretary of State and Secretary of
firm and served us well. Our economic, political and Defense playa key role in supporting the objectives
military power is resurgent. The Western democracies outlined in this report. In their respective areas of
are revitalized, and across the world nations are turning Foreign and Defense Policy, they develop detailed
to democratic ideas and the principles of the free plans of action to sustain our National Strategy,
market. In all of this, the United States continues to advance U.S. interests and most importantly, reduce the
encourage those who seek the benefits of our risk to our nation and our allies.
democratic way of life.

What follows is this Administration's effort to articulate
the National Security Strategy of the United States-a

While the United States has been the leader of the free

blueprint for future freedom, peace, and prosperity.

world since the end of the Second World War, we have

1


-----

**II. Fundamentals of** **National**
#### u.s.
**Security Strategy**

_u.s. SECURITY IN A_ Western Europe·and Japan.leadership in establishing and managing It also required the U.S.

international monetary system, and encouraging

_COMPLEX AND_
_CHANGING WORLD_ regional and global free-trade agreements.

The third element, U.s. policy toward the Third World,
included both economic and security assistance. It also

In the years following World War II, the United States

had a profound political component: decolonization,

faced, for the first time, an inescapable responsibility

self-determination, and support for the evolution toward

for world affairs. No longer protected by nearly perfect

democracy. The Soviet Union opposed us in the Third

fortresses of oceans, allied with countries devastated by

World with a policy of "wars of national liberation;'

war, and presented with irrefutable evidence of Soviet

through which they sought to exploit the instability of

expansionist aspirations, the United States shouldered

emerging nations to establish Marxist-Leninist regimes

the dual burden of facilitating the restoration of a world

based on the Soviet model.

economic order and arresting the spread of the Soviet
Union's peculiar brand of totalitarianism and The three postwar decades witnessed important
**communism.** successes for our National Strategy. World war was

avoided. Europe and Japan regained their prosperity,

The United States responded to the threats posed by with the help of massive U.s. assistance, and most of
Moscow with a policy of containment. Containment, as the Third World was decolonized. Containment,
a strategy for world peace, entailed three distinct however, was an expensive policy. But because the
elements. United States had the lion's share of the developed

world's economic power, we could carry the burden.

The first element, U.S. defense policy, involved forward
deployment of military forces as necessary to deter and The postwar era came to an end during the 1970s. The
contain Soviet military expansion. In practice, this causes of its demise were threefold. First, the success of
meant keeping, for the first time in our history, large U.s. economic policies in Europe and East Asia
military formations on the soil of allies in Western dramatically changed the distribution of wealth and
Europe and East Asia. As Soviet nuclear weapons power within our alliance systems. The United States
delivery systems grew, it also required a large strategic no longer had an overwhelming economic position vis-
force, to augment the deterrence provided by the a-vis Western Europe and the East Asia rimland. And
conventional forces of the United States and its allies. our success in deterring Soviet military aggression in
Thus our military security system rested primarily on these two strategic zones created growing public belief
two strategic zones, Europe and East Asia, backed by that direct Soviet aggression in these two regions had
our nuclear deterrent forces. become less likely.

The second element, u.s. international economic Second, the Soviet military buildup and the projection
policy, involved economic recovery programs for of Soviet power into C~ba, Nicaragua, the Middle East,

3


-----

Southeast and Southwest Asia, and Africa required

**_MAJOR OBJECTIVES_**

changespolicy. Particularly significant was the Soviet Union's in strategy for implementing our containment **_IN SUPPORT OF_**
attainment of strategic nuclear parity with the United

**_U.s. INTERESTS_**

States.

U.s. national security objectives are statements of

Third, the political awakening in the Third World

broad goals which support and advance national

created civil wars and regional conflicts that threatened

interests. As such, they are not intended to be applied

to draw the United States and the Soviet Union into

mechanically or automatically, but constitute a general

direct military confrontations. And economic

guide for policy development in specific situations

developments, particularly in the energy area,

which call for the coordinated use of national power.

contributed to political instability and caused
destabilizing effects in the international monetary The principal objectives which support our national
system. **interests are:**

In such a significantly different world, the foundations 1. To maintain the security of our nation and our allies.
of strategic planning had to be reconsidered. U.S. The United States, in cooperation with its allies, must
military superiority in strategic forces no longer exists seek to deter any aggression that could threaten that
and the continued growth of Soviet military capabilities security, and, should deterrence fail, must be prepared
applicable to Europe, the Persian Gulf, and other to repel or defeat any military attack and end the
important areas, pose a continuing threat to regional conflict on terms favorable to the United States, its
security. interests, and its allies.

Today it is more important than ever before that our

Specifically:

National Security Strategy be based on a solid

o To deter hostile attack of the United States, its

understanding of U.S. interests and objectives and a

citizens, military forces, or allies and to defeat attack

realistic approach to dealing with the Soviet Union and

if deterrence fails.

other threats to U.s. security.

o To maintain the strength and vitality of u.s. alliance
relationships.

**_u.s. INTERESTS_** o To deal effectively with threats to the security of the

United States and its citizens short of armed conflict,
including the threat of international terrorism.

U.S. National Security Strategy reflects our national

o To prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.

interests and presents a broad plan for achieving the

o To reduce over the long term our reliance on nuclear

national objectives that support those interests. The key

weapons by strengthening our conventional forces,

national interests which our strategy seeks to assure

pursuing equitable and verifiable arms control

and protect include:

agreements, and developing technologies for

1. The survival of the United States as a free and strategic defense.
independent nation, with its fundamental values and o To assure unimpeded U.S. access to the oceans and
institutions intact. space.

o To prevent the domination of the Eurasian landmass

2. A healthy and growing U.S. economy.

by the USSR (or any other hostile power, or

3. The growth of freedom, democratic institutions, and coalition of powers).
free market economies throughout the world, linked o To force the Soviet Union to bear the brunt of its
by a fair and open international trading system. domestic economic shortcomings in order to

discourage excessive Soviet military expenditures

4. A stable and secure world, free of major threats to

and global adventurism.

U.s. interests.

o To foster closer relations with the People's Republic

5. The health and vigor of U.S. alliance relationships. of China.
4


-----

2. To respond to the challenges of the global economy. 4. To resolve peacefully disputes which affect U.S.
Economic interdependence has brought tremendous interests in troubled regions of the world. Regional
benefits to the United States, but also presents new conflicts which involve allies or friends of the United
policy problems which must be resolved. Since our States may threaten U.S. interests, and freguently carry
resource dependence has grown, the potential the risk of escalation to a wider conflict. Conflicts, or
vulnerability of our supply lines is an issue of concern. attempts to subvert friendly governments, which are
Although continuing U.s. economic growth is helping instigated or supported by the Soviets and their client

states, represent a particularly serious threat to U.S.

lift the world out of recession, economic slowdown
continues in many countries. We must devote interests.
attention to critical global problems, which if

Specifically:

unresolved or unattended, may affect U.S. interests in
the future. Many of these problems such as Third o To maintain stable global and regional military
World debt, the international narcotics trade, and balances vis-a-vis the USSR and states aligned with it.
growing protectionism are currently having an impact o To aid threatened states in resisting Soviet or Soviet-
on U.S. interests. sponsored subversion or aggression.

o To eliminate, where possible, the root causes of

Specifically:

regional instabilities which create the risk of

o To promote a strong, prosperous and competitive

major war.

U.s. economy, in the context of a stable and growing

o To neutralize the efforts of the Soviet Union to

world economy.

increase its influence in the world and weaken the

o To ensure U.S. access to foreign markets, and to links between the USSR and its client states in the
ensure the United States and its allies and friends Third World.
access to foreign energy and mineral resources.

o To aid in combatting threats to the stability of

o To promote a well-functioning international friendly governments and institutions from
economic system with minimal distortions to trade insurgencies, state-sponsored terrorism and the
and investment, stable currencies, and broadly international trafficking of illicit drugs.
agreed and respected rules for managing and
resolving differences. 5. To build effective and favorable relationships with all

nations with whom there is a basis of shared concern.

3. To defend and advance the cause of democracy, In the world today, there are over 150 nations. Not one
freedom, and human rights throughout the world. A of them is the equal of the United States in total power
foreign policy that ignored the fate of millions around or wealth, but each is sovereign, and most, if not all,
the world who seek freedom would be a betrayal of touch U.s. interests directly or indirectly.
our national heritage. Our own freedom, and that of
our allies, could never be secure in a world where Specifically:
freedom was threatened everywhere else. o To support the formation of associations of states

friendly to U.S. interests using the full range of

Specifically: diplomatic, political, economic, and informational

o To promote the growth of national independence efforts.
and free institutions throughout the world. o To make major international institutions more

o To encourage and support aid, trade, and effective in promoting peace, world order and
investment programs that promote economic political, economic and social progress.
development and the growth of free a·nd humane o To explore the possibility of improved relations with
social and political orders in the Third World. those nations hostile to us in order to reduce the

chance of future conflict.

o To encourage liberalizing tendencies within the

-  To strengthen U.S. influence throughout the world.

Soviet Union and its client states.

5


-----

Our National Security Strategy must be resolute in engaged in conduct in violation of international
supporting U.S. interests and objectives. It must also agreements.
take into account the many threats and instabilities of
today's complex and changing world.

The Soviets have undertaken an unprecedented military
buildup that poses a continuing threat to the United
States and our allies. The Soviet leadership clearly

**_PRINCIPAL THREATS TO_** attaches the greatest importance to its military strength,

which has been the most significant source of the

**_U.s. INTERESTS_** USSR's influence on the international scene. For

decades the Soviet Union has allocated a
disproportionate percentage of national income to the

The most significant threat to U.S. security and national

buildup of its military forces. It now has a uniformed

interests is the global challenge posed by the Soviet

military of more than five million (excluding more than

Union. While only a handful of people in the Politburo

one million border guards and other security forces). It

can claim with any confidence to know the Kremlin's

is estimated that military expenditures currently absorb

precise near-term, tactical plans, the long-term strategic

15-17 percent of the total Soviet GNP.

direction of Soviet foreign policy is clearer. Motivated
by the demands of a political system held together and
dominated by Marxist-Leninist ideology and the Soviet military power permits Moscow to provide a
political party which represents it, Moscow seeks to strong defense of the homeland while facilitating direct
alter the existing international system and establish and indirect participation in regional conflicts beyond
Soviet global hegemony. These long-range Soviet Soviet borders. Furthermore, Soviet military resources
objectives constitute the overall conceptual framework increasingly are used to influence and broker the
of Soviet foreign and defense policy. policies of other countries and to promote instability.

Fundamental differences in economic, social, and The evidence of the relationship between the Soviet
political beliefs and objectives lead to an essentially Union and the growth of worldwide terrorism is now
adversarial relationship between the United States and conclusive. Even though the Soviet Union does not
the Soviet Union. The two sides nevertheless share the have direct control over most of the terrorist groups, it
common goal of avoiding direct confrontation and supplies massive amounts of arms, money, and
reducing the threat of nuclear war. The real challenge advisory assistance to revolutionary forces engaged in
for American statecraft is how best to realize this terrorist activities. The Soviets attempt to disguise such
commonality of interests, so as to preserve peace, support by using middle men-radical governments
without jeopardizing our national security or such as Cuba, North Korea, Nicaragua, Syria, and
abandoning our commitment 1:0 the cause of freedom Libya, which deal directly with radical terrorists and
and justice. insurgents. Whether Moscow is providing support

directly or indirectly, the ultimate targets of radical

To execute its'expansionist policies, the USSR has terrorism are the United States, Western Europe, Japan,
perpetuated a domestic political system of centralized and other moderate, proWestern governments.
totalitarian control and mobili:zed and organized this
system to support its international objectives. The Soviet Union in recent years has become much
Internationally, the Soviets have continued to assist more sophisticated in wielding the instruments of
groups waging so-called wars of "national liberation:, national power. Despite significant weaknesses in the
sponsor with arms and militarv training international Soviet economy, the Politburo actively employs
terrorist groups, promote and ,~xploit regional economic instruments in its global strategy. It uses
instabilities and conduct an aggressive and illegal war trade with the West to obtain economic leverage,
in Afghanistan. In numerous other places around the technology, and foreign exchange. The acquisition of
globe, Soviet advisors and combat troops have also military-related advanced technology through legal and
6


-----

illegal means, is especially important to the Soviets, to While we remain properly concerned with the Soviet
shorten weapon development times, reduce costs, and threat, we must not neglect other destabilizing
to compensate for the weakness of the Soviet economy. international threats and problems which can seriously
Acquisition of production technology is equally damage U.s. interests if not properly addressed. These
important to the Soviets, to improve the efficiency of include non-communist nations with oppressive
their defense industry. Access to Western manufacturing governments and ideologies opposed to ours;
equipment, processes, and know-how has enabled international economic concerns of massive world
Soviet defense plants to introduce some advanced debt, trade imbalances, and shifts in comparative
weapons into production up to five years earlier than advantage in our interdependent global economic
would have been otherwise possible. The Soviets also system; the global population explosion and related
attempt to obtain long-term economic agreements food, water, and poverty problems; the proliferation of
which build relationships of dependency on the USSR nuclear weapons; drug trafficking; and human rights
(e.g., those relating to the supply of energy resources to violations, to name only a few.
Western Europe).

An additional, threat, which is particularly insidious in

In addition, the Soviets have established a massive nature and growing in scope, is international
political influence apparatus. This apparatus includes

terrorism-a worldwide phenomenon that is becoming

the world's largest propaganda machine, incorporating

increasingly frequent, indiscriminate, and state-

overt and clandestine activities in all types of media;

supported. Terrorism is likely to be a prominent feature

funding and 'support of foreign communist parties and

of the international landscape for the remainder of this

front organizations; political and ideological

century. It directly attacks our democratic values,

indoctrination of foreign students, government officials,

undermines our diplomatic efforts for peaceful

terrorists, and military personnel; and perceptions

solutions to conflicts, and erodes the foundations of

management of foreign visitors to the USSR. It includes

civilized societies. Effectively countering terrorism is a

separate efforts to conduct "active measures;' including

major national security objective of the United States.

disinformation, forgeries, the use of political agents of
influence, and other deceptive operations.

A solid understanding of our national interests and

While the Soviets cannot be branded as instigators of objectives, against the backdrop of major threats to
all revolutionary movements, their strategy clearly is to those interests, is essential to devising sound strategies.
exploit domestic vulnerabilities in foreign countries to The next two chapters will discuss the principal
promote the emergence of regimes under Soviet elements of our foreign and defense policies, and the
influence or control. All this is accomplished under the ways in which they contribute to the achievement of
rubric of "peaceful coexistence" with the United States national security objectives. The effective integration of
and the West, defined as a continuing contest in which our foreign and defense policies provides the
all forms of struggle are permissible short of all-out war. foundation for our National Security Strategy.

7


-----

**III. U.S. Foreign Policy**

_CONTINUITY OF_ European democratic parties significantly aided

the successful drives of democratic movements in

_BASIC GOALS_ Spain and Portugal.

Our foreign policy reflects the basic thrust of our We are interested in assisting constructive change
National Security Strategy-the promotion of our which can lead to greater political stability, social
democratic way of life. History has shown us justice, and economic progress. Change must come
repeatedly that only in democracies is there inherent from within, following a path dictated by national and
respect for individual liberties and rights. In the local traditions. 'In some instances, assistance and
postwar world, democracies have also exhibited guidance is better provided by other democracies or
extraordinary economic vitality. With their more multilaterally. Patience, respect for different cultures
flexible economies, democracies have continued to and recognition of our own limitations must guide our
demonstrate the efficiency and dynamism necessary to effort.
maintain strength in a complex and difficult
international economic environment.

If we are to achieve the kind of world we all hope to _INSTRUMENTS OF_
see, democracy must continue to prosper and expand.

_FOREIGN POLICY_

Today, in a number of countries in varying stages of
economic development, democracy is growing

The United States has an exceptionally diverse array of

stronger. The United States must be a beacon for

tools for protecting its international interests and for

democracy. Unfortunately, many in the world are

supporting the drive toward democracy across the

prevented from seeing our beacon. For many more, it

globe. It is possible that no other nation has ever been

has been distorted; and still others, who are able to see

comparably endowed. These instruments are normally

it and are inspired by it, need help in the form of

most effective when used in concert with others. All of

practical assistance.

them must be adapted to changing situations. The

We have provided assistance before-in postwar resurgence of our national strength in this decade has
Western Europe and Asia-and we must again. What been broadly based. It will endure into the next decade
we helped achieve in those areas constitutes one of the only if we protect this base and ensure that the tools
most remarkable, positive chapters of recent history. available to us are properly sustained and effectively
Our support for democracy should not be hidden; it used. The separate, but interrelated tools on which the
must be active and visible. Active support of success of our foreign policy depends are:
democratic forces in the past two decades has
demonstrated the value of this legitimate and important Moral and political example. American spirit and
activity. The substantial support provided .by West prosperity represents a critical challenge to the

9


-----

ideology and the practical record of our adversaries: American assistance. Adherence to the principles of an
free, pluralist societies work. This power of example open and fair world trading order ensures that
represents a potent advantage of American society, but countries acquire the economic strength to stand on
we should not leave its expression to chance. It is in their own feet, and contributes to our own well-being
our interest to spread this message in an organized through mutually beneficial trade. Security

w~. considerations Will sometimes require restrained trade

and allied cooperation to prevent enhancing the

Military strength and economic vitality. A strong U.S.

military capabilities of our adversaries.

military capability is essential to maintaining the stable,
secure environment in which diplomacy can be Science and Technology Cooperation. For most
effective and our adversaries are deterred. America's countries, access to advanced scientific and
economic power sustains this strength and fortifies our technological resources is critical to prosperity and
relations with the other countries that share our interest long-term economic growth. U.S. world leadership and
in a free and open international order.

vast resources in science and technology constitute
important strategic assets to strengthen existing ties

Alliance relationships. The pursuit of American goals

with friends and allies, and promote positive

depends on cooperation with like-minded international

relationships with emerging nations.

partners. This relationship enhances our strength and
mitigates the understandable reluctance of the

Private investment in developing economies. The free

American people to shou Ider secu rity burdens alone.

flow of international investment is as central to global

The predictable difficulties that arise from time to time

economic growth as an open trading order. U.S. private

in all alliance relationships must be measured against

investment in less developed countries contributes

the enormous value that these ties bring us and our

significantly to their economic growth and promotes

friends.

social stability. At a time when developing countries
are striving to meet their debt-servicing obligations and

Security assistance. By helping friends, allies, and

the resources of our national budget are under

those targeted by our adversaries acquire the means to

pressure, the contribution of private-sector investment

defend themselves, we limit the potential of our own

assumes increased importance.

involvement in dangerous conflicts. Security assistance
abroad is productive investment in our own security. It

Diplomatic mediation. In regions where conflict

aids deterrence, promotes regional stability, helps to

threatens our interests and those of our friends,

ensure access to vital overseas military facilities, and

political efforts are essential to ending Violence,

lessens our own military requirements. Resolute use of

promoting freedom and national self-determination,

this valuable foreign policy tool directly promotes our

and laying the foundations for future stability. The

security interests.

initiatives of American diplomacy take their strength

Economic assistance. In the decades since World War II, from effective and integrated use of the other tools
America has contributed nearly $200 billion to the already discussed, and from the ability of U.s.
economic development of other countries. These representatives to act credibly as mediators of disputes.
financial resources have played a vital role in ensuring Making clear the firmness of our commitments to
critical U.S. objectives are met. A well structured friends and allies will, in fact, increase the incentives of
economic assistance program provides essential their adversaries to negotiate seriously.
support for our world leadership position.

International Organizations. Multilateral diplomacy

Trade policy. The impact of economic assistance is and participation in international organizations provide
maximized when it is matched by a sound trade policy an opportunity to address common global problems
that facilitates the best use of our assistance. Moreover, and share the task of solving them. Skillful U.s.
a trade policy that aggravates the economic difficuIties diplomacy within these organizations has served to
of others may only increase the need for future enhance our overall goals on issues such as
**10**


-----

peacekeeping, promotion of human rights, and It is important to understand why we stress private
encouraging the development of free economic and enterprise as the basis of our international economic
political systems. policy. This is one of the prime areas in which the

United States-and the free world generally-differ in

**Support for Freedom Fighters. The tools of foreign**

all respects from the communist world. The Soviet

policy must encompass the special needs of those who

economic model is characterized by the ineffectiveness

resist the Soviet-style regimes implanted in Third World

of the centralized command economy, the failure of

countries in the 1970's and 1980's. America has a long

collective enterprises, and the inability to provide

history of private and government support to groups

adequate standards of living for the mass of Soviet

seeking national independence and freedom. This is a

citizens. The Soviet model of economic organization

vital and important effort, as aggressive Marxist-leninist

_does not work and will not work._

regimes clearly threaten international peace and
stability. We seek to advance the cause of freedom and Under the leadership of General Secretary Gorbachev,
democracy, and to demonstrate to the Soviets that their the Soviet Union has announced that it is attempting
actions aimed at spreading Marxist-leninist fundamental reforms in the management of economic
totalitarianism will bring them no enduring gain.

policy. Recently, Gorbachev invited the Western private
sector, and U.S. business leaders in particular, to

**_INTERNATIONAL_** develop a long-term stakeeconomy. In light of this Soviet initiative, we need to in the future of the Soviet

ask ourselves what kind of Soviet Union we wish to see

**_ECONOMIC POLICY_**

in the next twenty or thirty years. Clearly, we can affect

The United States supports market-oriented policies the outcome only at the margin. But we should not
that foster economic growth, both domestically and ignore new opportunities for increasing economic
internationally. The economic growth of the United interaction between our two societies. Greater
States is the cornerstone that ensures our strength and economic freedom for the Soviet people is in the
permits human potential to flourish. Our policies of interest of the West as long as it does not foster greater
economic growth have provided the underlying base of Soviet investment in military capability.
support for the most important element in our National
Security Strategy in the past six years-the revitalization But we must approach such interaction with a sense of
of U.S. military power. The dynamic growth of the u.s. realism. There are some areas where it would clearly
economy is the envy of much of the world. We are not serve constructive purposes. Soviet membership in
now working in this country to rebuild American the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GAD), for
productivity, sustain our scientific and technological example, would not be in the best interests of the West
leadership, make the most of our human potential, and at present. In addition to the danger of GAD
move into the 21st century with an even more efficient, politicization, the USSR's state-direeted trading system
capable and competitive American economy. Our is fundamentally incompatible with the free-market
nation will achieve these goals with hard work, orientation of the GAD international trading system.
determination, and a commitment to the revitalization Suggestions by Soviet officials about possible USSR
of American industry. membership in the World Bank or International

Monetary Fund should be treated with caution for

The United States places reliance on private enterprise similar reasons. \/lie would oppose such membership
and initiative. This philosophy leads to higher living under present circumstances.
standards and concern for the economic advancement
of the individual. Our National Security Strategy in the The USSR's effort to broaden its foreign economic
international economic area seeks to support and relations forms an integral part of Soviet national
promote market-oriented economic policies which will security strategy. In addition to aiding the Soviet
maximize economic opportunity and individual economy, it is designed to exploit dependence of
welfare. trading partners and enhance Soviet power and

**11**


-----

influence generally. Trade with the West can also We have encouraged market-based energy policies and
provide access to advanced technology which more open energy trade within the International Energy
facilitates the Soviet military buildup. Non-communist Agency. We have been the prime movers in laying the
governments need to display greater discipline in groundwork for a new round of negotiations in the
weaving security considerations into the fabric of East- GAIT that will open markets for our exports of goods
West commercial relations. and services and stimulate greater growth, efficiency

and worldwide job opportunities. We have forged

Specifically: stronger ties with our Asian partners by emphasizing

the future role of U.s.-Pacific economic relations.

-  As recognized in the Helsinki Accords, government-
to-government cooperation in the economic sphere
should be dependent on progress in other areas of

The industrial nations of the West have become

East-West relations, including Eastern observance of

increasingly interdependent. None of these countries

human rights.

acting alone can effectively resolve long-term economic

-  COCOM controls on strategic technologies should problems. The United States and its allies must work
be maintained, streamlined and enforced to restrain together if we, and the rest of the world, are to prosper
the ability of the Soviet Union and its allies to match and grow.
or overtake Western defense capabilities.

-  The International Energy Agency (lEA) should

Enhancing world economic growth, opening markets,

continue its efforts to reduce dependence among

and ameliorating the developing country debt situation

member countries on insecure energy supplies.

are long-term goals that can be met only through

sound economic policies, prudent lending, and direct

Early in our Administration, we laid the international

investment and aid strategies that will elicit the broad

economic groundwork for greater cooperation with our

economic development and growing markets needed to

allies. We have attempted to foster the view that the

sustain long-term prosperity. Significant contributions of

future belongs to those who allow free enterprise to

capital and know-how through aid, investment,

guide economic decisions and not to those regimes

technology transfer and training are as much an

which allow bureaucratic functionaries to set the

ingredient of regional peace and collective security as

course of economic development. Throughout these six
years, we have witnessed these principles move from are deterrent forces and defense alliances. This
concept into reality. In France, economic liberalization redefinition of the traditional concept of
is steadily progressing. In Japan, slowly but surely, trade "burdensharing" is in keeping with the capabilities of
and capital markets are being opened. In Germany and the United States and our allies and the evolving
the United Kingdom, new economic courses are being responsibilities of shared leadership.

set to sustain growth with low inflation.

In short, our international economic policy is built

We believe that market-oriented policies are key to

around the belief that economic freedom is not the

greater growth in America and throughout the world

sole possession of a chosen few, but the universal right

over the long-term. We have worked diligently to resist

of all people. We will use our economic power and

protectionist tendencies both at home and abroad,
since protectionism will harm all free nations. _ political will to preserve and nurture our vision of the

Immediate as well as long term costs would more than world's economic future, which belongs to free people,
offset any short-term benefits which might be gained. free governments and free economic enterprises.
**12**


-----

_POLITICAL AND_ deception and propaganda program, using a wide

range of techniques aimed not only at the Third World,

_INFORMATIONAL ELEMENTS_ but also at our alliance partners. The current Soviet

regime has increased the range and intensity of Soviet

_OF NATIONAL POWER_

public diplomacy and propaganda efforts. We must
actively counter Soviet propaganda and active

We are faced with a profound challenge to our national measures using the full range of U.S. informational
security in the political field. This challenge is to fight programs,
the war of ideas and to help support the political

Our political and informational strategy must also

infrastructure of world democracies. To accomplish this

reach to the peoples of denied areas, particularly the

we must be as committed to the maintenance of our

USSR and Eastern Europe-to encourage hope for

political defense as we are to our military defense.

change and to educate publics on the benefits of free
institutions. This is achieved through the electronic

Public opinion polls consistently find that two-thirds of

media, written materials, and the increased contact and

the American electorate normally take no interest in

exchange of ideas that come from such contact. The

foreign policy. Moreover, only a bare majority today process of gradual change will take place inside, but
believes that this country needs to play an active part the stimulant and the vision of "how things could be"
in world affairs-and that majority is eroding. There is must come from outside in a closed society. This is the
no natural domestic constituency for foreign policy- vision of a nation which believes that a world of
we must build one. democracies is a safer world, and one where the

respect for the dignity of all men has a better chance to

The instruments to implement such an approach be realized.
include a number of traditional foreign policy agencies
such as the Departments of State and Defense, Agency
for International Development (AID), and u.s. _REGIONAL POLICIES_
Information Agency (USIA), plus several less traditional
participants including the Departments of Commerce

Western Hemisphere. The defense of North America is

and Treasury, and the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR).

the nation's most fundamental security concern. Since
the Second World War this has entailed a hemispheric

Another actor in the field of political, informational security system, composed of a strong u.s. nuclear
and communications activity is the private sector. deterrent, greater cooperation with Canada, and the
During the past six years, th'e private sector has been promotion of collective security arrangements with
energized as a key element in the projection of U.S. latin America. New threats and new opportunities for
foreign policy goals. leading private citizens and democracy in the Western Hemisphere require that this
groups are taking steps to identify and organize the traditional approach be revitalized by building on the

interests we share with our democratic Caribbean,

many local forces throughout the United States that

North, Central and South American neighbors.

have a direct stake in the nation's relations with the rest
of the world. The private voluntary organizations in

Aggressive Marxist regimes in Cuba and Nicaragua

world affairs are doing an indispensible job of public

have made the Western Hemisphere, once considered

education. They have our strongest encouragement and indisputably secure for the United States, an area of

support. strategic opportunity for the Soviet Union. The fragility

of social and political arrangements in latin America

While we focus on the needs of an effective political and the presence of these two Soviet client states, with
and informational policy, we must keep in mind that their support for guerrilla movements in other latin
the Soviet Union has a most aggressive public nations and their ties to international terrorism,

**13**


-----

promise continued instability and conflict in the necessary to defend our vital interests with a readiness
region. This situation is compounded by continuing to work toward improved relations through a realistic
economic and debt-servicing problems, the ongoing dialogue with the Soviet Union.
problem of the drug trade and the growing political
strength of the drug traffickers who-often in collusion The Alliance has been measurably strengthened in
with local guerrilla groups-have begun to pose serious recent years. The United States has devoted special
challenges for the reborn Latin democracies. attention to rebuilding its Alliance relationships, and

our efforts to reinvigorate the American economy have
provided a major impetus for growth in Western

U.S. national security policy for the Western

Europe. Other milestones include the Spanish entry

Hemisphere seeks to address these problems within the

into NATO in 1982 and last year's Spanish referendum

broader framework of the promotion of democracy,

in support of continued membership. Through its 1983

fostering economic development, strengthening

and subsequent Intermediate-range Nuclear Force (INF)

dialogue and diplomacy within and among area

deployments, the Alliance demonstrated its resolve to

countries, and contributing to defensive capabilities

protect its basic interests in the face of Soviet

that allow progress without debilitating external

intimidation. In 1984, the Allies launched a program to

interference. Many of the current challenges for the

improve conventional defense capabilities, and more

United States fall outside of the formal collective

recently have focused increased attention on

security arrangements created in previous decades. Our

armaments cooperation. In 1985-86, Allied firmness

national security requires an emphasis on political and

and solidarity helped to bring the Soviets back to the

economic support for the hemisphere's democracies

negotiating table in Geneva and to promote progress in

and diplomatic initiatives to strengthen alliances.

the talks themselves.

Western Europe. The security of Western Europe

Despite the basic vigor and strength of the Atlantic

constitutes a vital interest of the United States. Shared

Alliance, NATO relationships have come under strain

values, the Soviet threat, and U.S.-European economic

from several quarters. The challenges include, for

interdependence underscore the importance of

example, protectionism and trade deficits, different

collective defense epitomized by NATO.

methods of dealing with terrorism;burdensharing, and
at times, differing assessments of the Soviet threat.

The two greatest dangers to Western Europe's security Moreover, the foreign policy priorities of Western
today are the proximity of massive Soviet conventional .European governments with respect to developments in
and nuclear forces, and the vulnerability of Western

Asia, Africa, the Middle East and Latin America do not

Europe's oil supply, some 60 percent of which moves always coincide with U.S. priorities, in part because the
by sea from the Persian Gulf. United States must adopt a global outlook.

The cohesion of the NATO Alliance remains strong in Doubts have sometimes been expressed, especially in
the face of these challenges, and is reinforced by an the late 1970's, over the continued validity of the U.S.
intensive process of consultation on the full range of commitment to Europe's defense. The successful
security issues. Over the past twelve months, there have implementation of NATO's 1979 INF dual-track decision
been almost thirty high-level consultations at NATO. thwarted the most recent Soviet attempt to decouple
This intense process, to which we remain fully the u.s. security guarantee from the defense of Europe,
committed, has contributed to the fundament and has served as a major incentive for the Soviets to
Alliance consensus on its approach to East-West engage in serious negotiations for real reductions in
relations on issues ranging from arms control to human intermediate-range nuclear forces. Whatever the
rights. The common Alliance approach, set forth in outcome of the INF negotiations, flexible response will
recent NATO Ministerial communiques, require the continuing pre.sence of U.S. nuclear
combines a commitment to preserving the strength weapons in Europe. Nonetheless, NATO has
**14**


-----

consistently worked to keep its nuclear arsenal at the same time, Japanese economic relations have become
minimum level necessary for deterrence and is a source of political tension. The Japanese trade
proceeding with the reductions in its stockpile surplus is the biggest in history. This surplus cannot be
mandated by the 1983 Montebello decision. sustained and must be brought into better balance. We

are working together on many fronts to do this.

The challenge before us is to maintain the momentum
we have achieved and continue to manage the Our alliance with the Republic of Korea remains of
inevitable strains in our Alliance relationships. With a exceptional importance. North Korea still has armed
common commitment to the values and interests forces that far exceed those of the South in quantity, are
which constitute the bedrock of the Alliance, newly strengthened by additional Soviet weapons, and
imagination, and political courage, the United States are in the hands of a government whose aggressive
and its Allies will succeed in building an even stronger demeanor and tendency to act unexpectedly is well
bulwark against Soviet aggression and intimidation. known. Our own military presence in the Republic of

Korea is of importance, both for regional stability and

East Asia and Pacific. The United States is a Pacific for local security, which is essential to that country's
power and a proud member of the area of the globe remarkable economic development. It now faces a
that has led the world's economies in growth. Soviet critical period of political development as well, as it
military power in Asia and the Pacific has grown moves toward a first-ever peaceful change of
dramatically, but the U.S. response goes far beyond government when President Chun's term will be
technical issues of relative military power. The goal is completed in 1988. In this process, the United States
to strengthen our natural political and economic hopes to use its influence to encourage Koreans in this
associations, while proceeding steadily with necessary democratic change. We do so, however, in careful ways
modernization of our military forces deployed in the that respect Korean traditions and political realities, and
area. are mindful of the constant security threat.

Cooperation with Japan is basic to u.s. relationships in China's importance speaks for itself. Its attainment of
the region. The U.s.-Japan Mutual Security Treaty rapid economic growth, while simultaneously making
formalizes our defense ties, proViding a security basic economic, social and political changes, is
foundation for the broad spectrum of economic, social another great achievement in its remarkable history.
and political associations which join us. The United States seeks a close, friendly, and

cooperative relationship with the People's Republic of

In the security area, Japan's recent redefinition of its China, outside any alliance, and without any illusions
self-defense goals-especially as they relate to sea lane that one is a political or strategic "card" for the other.
protection- is of particular importance. Japanese forces Simply put, both of us recognize the importance of
are developing capabilities that can make a significant each to the other in the many shared areas of
contribution to deterrence. At the same time, Japan's agreement, even as we appreciate the diversity of our
defense spending remains small as a share of its huge political systems.
economy, and more rapid progress is needed toward
Japan's defense goals. But the constant and substantial In the Philippines, the new government faces major
growth of that spending over the last fifteen years, and and inherited political, security and economic
particularly over the last five years, is significant. Japan's challenges. Through all of the tools available to us, we
recent decision to spend more than one percent of its are det, ""1ined to help this key Pacific ally to overcome
GNP on defense is especially noteworthy. these problems so it can once again achieve economic

growth, counter the threat of a serious insurgency and

Japan is now the world's second greatest economic strengthen democratic government.
power. This development is reflected in increased
Japanese expenditures on foreign assistance, which it Our second treaty ally in Southeast Asia, Thailand, is
continues to target on key strategic countries. At the the ASEAN frontline state bordering Cambodia, now

**15**


-----

occupied by the Vietnamese and the site of an active foundation for future friendship and cooperation. We
Cambodian resistance coalition struggling to gain self- believe that the package of U.S. assistance that is linked
determination for the Khmer people. In support of to the treaty will encourage development of the island
Thailand, which also shoulders the major refugee economies. We also were recently able to celebrate the
burden in Southeast Asia, we will continue our close creation of a new U.S. Commonwealth-The Northern
security cooperation to deter any potential aggression Marianas-and two new freely associated states, the
and maintain our support of eligible refugees. We will Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the
also continue our cooperative effort with Thailand to Marshalls. We welcome these new participants to the
suppress narcotic trafficking. Pacific Ocean community.

The United States views the continued occupation of **The Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. As mentioned**
Cambodia by Vietnamese forces as unacceptable as it earlier, the most significant threat to u.s. security and
undermines regional efforts towards development, national interests is the global challenge posed by the
peace and stability. We also oppose the return of the Soviet Union. There is no doubt that Moscow aspires
Khmer Rouge to power in Cambodia. We will continue to alter the existing international system and establish
our strong support of ASEAN's quest for a peaceful Soviet global hegemony. These Soviet long-range
political solution and for the non-Communist elements objectives are underwritten by Soviet concepts of
of the resistance coalition. Under our initiative on foreign and defense policy. Our policy for dealing with
regional problems at the United Nations, we are the Soviets rests on three guiding principles:
prepared to playa constructive role in the context of a
Cambodian settlement. -  Realism, which means that we must recognize the

nature of the Soviet system and deal frankly and

Despite acute and serious differences with Vietnam, forthrightly with problems in our relationship.
through bilateral discussions we have made more

-  Strength, which is more than military power, but

progress in accounting for our missing servicemen in

includes political determination, the strength of

the past two years than at any time since the end of the

alliances, and economic health as well. The Soviet

war. Similarly, our bilateral discussions on the

Union respects strength and takes advantage of

humanitarian question of refugees, reeducation of

weakness.

internees and Amerasians will continue with the
objective of a humane solution to these complex -  Dialogue, which means that we are prepared to
questions. We will not, however, resume normalization discuss all the issues that divide us, and are ready
of relations with Vietnam until Hanoi agrees to a to work for practical and fair solutions on a basis
Cambodian settlement involving withdrawal of its compatible with our own fundamental interests.
occupation forces.

Consistent with this approach, we are engaged in

We have seen a modest but welcome improvement in dialogues with the Soviets on four basic elements of
relations between Laos and the United States. Our our relationship: human rights; the reduction of
primary measure of their sincerity to improve relations regional conflicts; areas of mutually beneficial
is further, accelerated, cooperative efforts to account for cooperation; and arms control. In all areas, progress is
our servicemen still missing. slow.

In the South Pacific, our longstanding alliance with At the same time, through coordinated employment of
Australia under the ANZUS Treaty remains the keystone many elements of our national power, we seek to deter
of our foreign policy in the area. The United States has further Soviet direct and indirect aggression, and
been especially aware of the needs of the South Pacific .achieve a lessened Soviet reliance on the use or threat
independent states. We recently reached agreement on of force. We will continue to counter Soviet
the key elements of an historic fisheries treaty. We are expansionism worldWide.. No additional country has
pleased with this agreement which creates a solid fallen to Soviet aggression since 1981, and the Soviets

**16**


-----

have been more cautious in undertaking new military The Middle East and South Asia. Our principal
adventures in recent years, though they and their interests in the Middle East include maintaining
proxies remain active in such areas as Afghanistan, regional stability, containing and reducing Soviet
Angola, Cambodia, and Nicaragua. influence, preserving the security of Israel and our

other friends in the area, retaining access to oil on
reasonable terms for ourselves and our allies, and

In short, we have put in place a policy designed for

curbing state-sponsored terrorism. Those interests are

long-term management of U.SrSoviet relations in order
to pursue our interests without the rapid fluctuations or threatened by the continuation of the Iran-Iraq conflict,
unrealistic illusions which characterized some periods the existence of deep-seated Arab-Israeli tensions, the
in the past. The fundamental fact is that the u.s.-Soviet growth of anti-Western political movements in the
relationship is essentially adversarial, and will remain region, and the use of terrorism as an instrument of
so for the foreseeable future. But both sides agree that state policy, particularly by Libya, Syria, and Iran. Our
we have a responsibility to ensure that this relationship strategy in the region aims to safeguard our interests
remains peaceful. We are ready for the long effort and from those threats; to hasten negotiated settlements of
steady course required to pursue our national interests the Palestinian problem and the Iran-Iraq war; to
in this fashion. bolster the security and economic well-being of Israel

and moderate Arab regimes; to help our friends in the
Gulf protect themselves and international shipping

The United States has important political and

lanes; and to isolate and deter state sponsors of

economic interests in Eastern Europe. We have never

terrorism.

recognized .the division of Europe as either lawful or
permanent. There was no agreement at Yalta to divide
Europe into "spheres of influence:' Rather, the Soviet The U.s. Initiative of September 1982 remains the
Union pledged itself to grant full independence to cornerstone of our approach to the Arab-Israeli peace
Poland and to other states in Eastern Europe and to process. Our immediate goal is direct negotiations
hold free elections. Soviet failure to honor these between Israel and a Jordanian-Palestinian delegation,
commitments is one of the primary causes of East-West as part of a general effort to broaden the Egyptian-
tensions today. Our policy toward Eastern Europe seeks Israeli peace and bring about a just and lasting
to promote a positive role for Eastern European states resolution of the Palestinian problem. We remain firmly
in preserving European stability and exercising a committed to a prompt and honorable negotiated
moderating influence on the Soviet Union. settlement of the Iran-Iraq war. Current Iranian behavior

poses a serious threat to our interests and those of our
friends in the region. Until Iran ceases its efforts to

We believe the United States should deal with the East

prolong the senseless war with Iraq, we will work

European countries on an individual basis and vary our

actively to block the flow of arms and military material

policies depending upon our assessment of the

to Iran.

conditions in each nation. In keeping with this
principle, we differentiate our policies toward Eastern
Europe to achieve a variety of objectives. These include Despite severe budgetary constraints, economic and
the encouragement of domestic liberalization and security assistance, together with a prudent but
more autonomous foreign policies; promotion of responsive policy of arms sales within the region,
security through enhanced economic and political remains an essential part of our efforts to strengthen
cooperation; and the fostering of genuine and long- Israel and moderate Arab regimes. We cannot afford to
lasting improvement in human rights. Concurrently, we neglect the real needs of our friends. At the same time,
seek to promote increased dialogue through cultural we will continue to try to isolate and build interna-
and scientific exchanges, international forums, high- tional pressure against state sponsors of terrorism. Our
level visits, bilateral councils and people-ta-people recent actions against Libya were designed to
contacts. demonstrate the political, military and economic

**17**


-----

because of the continent's extensive natural resources;

costsof supporting terrorism. While we have no

its growing role in international forums; the threat

illusions about eradicating this menace easily or
quickly, we remain determined to combat it vigorously posed to regional security by the escalating racial

conflict in South Africa; and Soviet, Libyan, East

. in close cooperation with our friends and allies.

European and Cuban adventurism throughout the

U.S. objectives. in South Asia include reduction of region. The challenges to democracy are especially
regional tensions; development of cooperative strong in Africa, and we remain concerned about the
relationships between South Asian countries; widespread denial of basic human rights, whether by
prevention of nuclear proliferation; and restoration of Marxist-Leninst clients of the Soviet Union or through
the freedom of the Afghan people. apartheid in South Africa. The sources of conflict

within Africa are many: extreme poverty, great

U.S. policy also seeks a general improvement in

disparities of wealth, ethnic frictions, unsettled borders,

bilateral relations with all countries of the

and religion.

subcontinent. Important elements have been improved
India-U.S. relations and u.s. encouragement of better

U.s. policy must strive to encourage economic

relations between India and Pakistan. A new six-year

development and political stability in Africa. African

assistance plan of $4 billion for Pakistan has been

leaders have started to recognize that statist solutions

proposed by this Administration and is vital to that

are not the answer and are beginning to reform their

country's ability to withstand strong pressures

economies. We must work with other donor countries

generated by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

and the multilateral institutions to reinforce this trend

Pakistan is hosting nearly three million Afghan refugees

toward economic policy reform and private sector

on its soil. The United States remains the largest donor

development.

of humanitarian assistance to the refugees.

Economic growth will contribute to, but also requires,

For the first time, the United States has established

political stability. We must continue to encourage the

substantially improved relations with both India and

peaceful resolution of conflicts without foreign

Pakistan. This enables us to help support the regional

intervention. Deteriorating economic conditions and

desire for peace, despite periodic crises in Indo-

political instability have encouraged intervention by the

Pakistani relations.

Soviets, their surrogates, the Cubans, and maverick

Africa. African issues demand increasing attention troublemakers like Libya.

**18**


-----

**IV. U.S. Defense Policy**

The full range of u.s. military capabilities must be

**_INTRODUCTION_** suitably balanced among combat and support

elements, and contain an appropriate mix of active

The Defense Policy of the United States requires duty and reserve components. The United States must
military forces that are organized, manned, trained, and have specialized forces-ranging from those required
equipped to deter and, if necessary, defeat aggression for nuclear deterrence to forces configured to deal with
across the entire spectrum of potential conflict. Our terrorism; and must also have general purpose forces
National Security Strategy, global objectives, and the capable of sustaining high intensity conflict, while
nature of the threat require that we be prepared to maintaining an effective capability for lesser
defend our interests as far from North America as contingencies and special operations. At the same time,
possible. Accordingly, our strategy relies heavily on we must balance defense priorities among the
forward deployment of combat-ready forces, rei nforced competing needs of readiness, sustainability,
by strong alliance relationships. In 'support of those modernization, and force expansion.
relationships, we will continue to maintain in
peacetime major forward deployments of land, naval, U.S. military forces also must be supported by plans,
and air forces in Europe, the Atlantic and the Pacific; doctrines, and command relationships which provide
and other deployments in the Western Hemisphere and for effective integration and employment of all facets of
Indian Ocean. The overall size and composition of our our military power. While the possible use of nuclear
armed forces are strongly influenced by these weapons must remain an element in our overall
requirements, military strategy, nuclear forces should never be viewed

as simply a lower-cost alternative to conventional

The challenge we face is dynamic and complex. There forces. U.S. forces must be capable of rapid deployment
remains a significant imbalance of forces favoring the to deter wider crises or conflicts. They must also
Soviet Union in several important contingencies. In possess the capability, should deterrence fail, to expand
addition, Third World states are increasingly armed the scope and intensity of combat operations, as
with modern and sophisticated military equipment. necessary, to terminate the conflict on terms favorable

to the United States and its allies.

Comprehensive and imaginative integration of U.S. and
allied military capabilities is required to reduce risks to The United States must maintain effective and robust
our national security. Since our political and social Reserve and National Guard forces, trained and
heritage militates against raising and supporting large equipped at levels commensurate with their wartime
forces in peacetime, we are impelled to seek security missions, as well as Coast Guard and other capabilities
in America's national genius for technological which support the national security establishment. The
innovation; the breadth and diversity of our national United States must also continue to enhance its
economy; and alliance cooperation. The United States capabilities to surge or mobilize manpower and key
must pursue strategies for competition with the Soviets industrial resources, planning for the most effective use
which emphasize our comparative advantages in these of available strategic warning in the event of crisis or
areas. **war.**

**19**


-----

_TAKING ADVANTAGE OF U.s._ technology. Thus a vital element of our defense policymassive effort to acquire and exploit Western
_STRENGTHS AND SOVIET_ is to control technology transfer and protect classified
_WEAKNESSES_ information relating to military technologies. With this

in mind, we have undertaken a major effort to enhance
our National Counter-intelligence and Security
Countermeasures plans and capabilities, as I outlined

One of the central tenets of our defense policy is that

in my November 1986 report to Congress.

the United States will not seek to match the Soviet
Union weapon for weapon. Rather, we will work to Competitive Strategies. Competitive strategies are
overcome Soviet numerical superiority by taking aimed at exploiting our technological advantages in
maximum advantage of the inherent strengths of

thoughtful and systematic ways to cause the Soviets to

alliances composed of democratic, industrialized, free

compete less efficiently or less effectively in areas of

economy nations.

military application. Such strategies seek to make
portions of the tremendous Soviet military machine

Technology. The United States and its allies continue to

obsolete and force the Soviets to divert resources in

enjoy technological superiority over the Soviet Bloc in

ways they may not prefer, and in a manner that may not

most areas of military application. This technological

necessarily threaten our own forces. Low observable

advantage derives from the fundamental nature of the

(stealth) technology, for example, can render much of

two societies. The spirit of inquiry and the free flow of

the Soviet investment in air defense obsolete and

information which characterize the West will inevitably

requires the Soviets to divert resources from offensive

permit technology and innovation to flourish to a

forces to defensive forces. The contribution which new

greater degree than it will in a closed society. The

technologies can make to our competitive strategies is

United States and its allies enjoy an intrinsic advantage

an explicit consideration in making defense

not only in the creation, but in the practical
exploitation of advanced technologies. Competitive, procurement decisions.
free-enterprise societies consistently out-perform

Alliances. A third area of U.S. strength and Soviet

centrally planned economies in fostering innovation,

weakness is alliance relationships. While the Soviet

growth, and the application of new technology to a

Union presides over an empire that has seen several

wide variety of fields.

armed rebellions in the past forty years, the United
States is the leader of a voluntary coalition of equal

Technology affects our national security in two ways.

nations. U.S. allies, particularly our NATO partners,

First, the ability to exploit and adapt technology

contribute a major share of the West's total military

contributes to the overall economic health of the

strength. Recognizing this contribution, our defense

United States and its allies, which is a key element of

polity is based on the fundamental premise that we

national power. Second, the exploitation of a

will not seek to offset Soviet power alone, but in

technological advantage directly enhances defense.

conjunction with our allies throughout the globe, on a

Precision guided munitions, for example, help offset

basis of equitable burdensharing.

the large Soviet edge in tank forces. Stealth technology
helps counter the massive Soviet investment in air

In NATO, this means continuing our strong support for

defense. Advances in anti-submarine warfare Alliance efforts to improve the overall Western
technologies and in submarine quieting help preserve conventional balance, including appropriate economic
maritime superiority despite the Soviet Navy's and military assistance to allies on NATO's critical
numerical advantages. Perhaps most significantly, the southern flank. It means integrating the contribution of
U.S. edge in computer technology and software has our NATO partners into our strategy-indeed, the
military relevance across the entire spectrum of United States has no separate military strategy for the
warfare. defense of Europe, but is a partner in the NATO
The Soviets are, of course, conscious of the Western alliance strategy of deterrence and defense. Outside of
technological advantage and have undertaken a Europe, the United States seeks strong ties with nations
**20**


-----

strategic capabilities-and our will to use them, if

throughout the globe, assisting Iriendly and allied

necessary-never be in doubt.

countries in improving their military capabilities while
encouraging them to assume a greater role in their own
defense. In the interest of ensuring deterrence, the United States

maintains diversified strategic forces to hedge against a

**The Strength of the Individual. One of our greatest** disarming first strike, complicate Soviet attack plans,
advantages in competing with the Soviet Union is the and guard against technological surprise which might
character of our people. Western societies, with their threaten one element of our strategic forces. To this
stress on the importance of the individual, stand in end, we maintain a variety of basing modes, launch
sharp contrast to the repressive nature of the Soviet platforms, and attack vehicles, achieving diversity
state. The initiative, enterprise, and motivation of free through a triad of SLBMs, ICBMs and bombers.
people is a source of great strength when individuals Adequate and survivable command and control is an
are put to the supreme test of combat. While essential element of strategic force structure, and is
intangible, these qualities are an important asset, which critical to the credibility of our strategic deterrent.
the Soviets cannot match. Defense policy recognizes
this by stressing unit integrity and leadership, while our

Our strategic forces and the associated targeting policy

training and tactics place great value on individual

must, by any calculation, be perceived as making

initiative, and aggressive exploitation of opportunities.

nuclear warfare a totally unacceptable and unrewarding
proposition for the Soviet leadership. Accordingly, our
strategy:

**_MAINTENANCE OF A_**
**_STRATEGIC DETERRENT_** -  Denies the Soviets the ability to achieve essential

military objectives by holding at risk Soviet
warmaking capabilities. This includes the entire

Deterrence is the most fundamental element of our range of Soviet military forces, as well as the war
defense policy and the cornerstone of our alliance supporting industry which provides the foundation
relationships. Deterrence must not only prevent for Soviet military power, and supports its capability
conventional and nuclear attack on the United States, to conduct a protracted conflict.
but must extend such protection to our allies.
Deterrence can best be achieved if our defense posture

-  Places at risk those political entities the Soviet

makes the assessment of war outcome by the Soviets,

leadership values most: the mechanisms for ensuring

or any other adversary, so dangerous and uncertain as

survival of the Communist Party and its leadership

to remove any possible incentive for initiating conflict.

cadres, and for retention of the Party's control over

Deterrence depends both on nuclear and conventional

the Soviet and Soviet Bloc peoples.

capabilities, and on evidence of a strong will to use
military force, if necessary, to defend our vital interests.

This basic strategy of targeting those assets which are
essential to Soviet warmaking capability and political

While deterrence requires capabilities across the entire

control has been U.S. policy for many years. In

spectrum of conflict, its essential foundation is

implementing this strategy, the United States does not

provided by our strategic nuclear forces and the

target population as an objective in itself and seeks to

doctrine which supports them. Nuclear deterrence, like

.minimize collateral damage through more accurate,

any form of deterrence, requires us to consider not

lower yield weapons.

what would deter us, but what would deter the Soviets,
whose perceptions of the world and value system are

We cannot permit any President to be faced with a

substantially different from our own. Since we can

situation in which the only available responses to

never be entirely certain of Soviet perceptions, it is of

aggression are capitulation or massive destruction.

the utmost importance that the effectiveness of our

**21**


-----

Thus, in addition to holding at risk the full range of enhance deterrence by injecting great uncertainties into
assets important to the Soviet leadership, the United Soviet estimates of their ability to achieve their
States also requires flexibility in the employment of its essential military objectives in a first strike. "Leak proof"
strategic forces. It is essential that we have response defenses would not be reqUired initially in order to
options appropriate to the broad range of plausible deny the Soviets confidence that they could achieve
situations. This flexible response capability bolsters the meaningful military goals. Even less than perfect
credibility of our deterrent by making clear to the defenses could significantly increase stability by
Soviets that the United States has a variety of military eliminating plausible incentives for a Soviet first strike.
options with which to respond to aggression. In judging the suitability of systems for possible

deployment, we will continue to be guided by the

Finally, the United States also requires sufficient criteria of military effectiveness, survivability, and cost-
residual capability to provide leverage for early war effectiveness at the margin.
termination, and to avoid coercion in a post-conflict

By reducing the military value of ballistic missiles, and

world. For this reason, we maintain a nuclear reserve

ultimately rendering them obsolete, strategic defenses

force as an integral part of our strategic forces. We also

would also provide incentives for Soviet acceptance of

maintain Continuity of Government programs as an

significant arms reduction agreements. In a world with

essential element of deterrence to assure the Soviets

fewer ballistic missiles, however, Soviet incentives to

they cannot escape retaliation by a qUick,

cheat would be greater. Strategic defenses can

"decapitating" attack aimed at incapacitating U.S.

effectively negate these incentiV!!s by eliminating the

political and military leadership.

military utility of covertly stockpiled missiles. Thus,
they offer the prospect of a safer, more stable world in

These capabilities do not imply the United States seeks

which deep reductions in strategic offensive arms are

to fight a nuclear war. I have repeatedly emphasized

both negotiable and enforceable.

that a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be
fought. But we seek to deter an adversary with a very In short, the pursuit of strategic defenses has the
different strategic outlook from our own -an outlook potential to bring about the most significant change in
which places great stress on nuclear warfighting U.s. National Security Strategy since the end of World
capability. It is essential the Soviets understand that War II. By allowing us to move away from reliance on
they cannot gain their objectives through nuclear the threat of massive destruction to deter aggression,
warfare under any cqnceivable circumstances. To strategic defenses would change the entire U.S.-Soviet
achieve this we must ensure that they clearly perceive strategic relationship in a positive way, increasing the
that the United States has the capability to respond safety and security of the peoples of both nations and
appropriately to any Soviet attempt to wage a nuclear their allies. We will continue to try to persuade the
war, and that we have the means to do this in ways Soviets to join with us in working out a stable

transition to this sensible and attainable goal.

which will defeat Soviet military objectives without
necessarily triggering a massive nuclear exchange.

U.S. Strategic Modernization Program. Continuing U.S.
strategic modernization is essential to assure reliable

Strategic Defenses. Our policy of flexible response and

deterrence, enhance stability, and provide motivation

deterrence through the threat of offensive retaliation

for the Soviets to negotiate broad, deep, equitable and

has preserved the security of the United States and its

verifiable reductions in strategic offensive arms. While

allies for decades. At the same time, the Soviet strategic we are firmly committed to using arms control as one
force buildup has threatened the foundation on which component of our policy for enhancing U.S. and allied
deterrence has long rested. Looking to the future, the security, it would be exceptionally dangerous to
U.s. Strategic Defense Initiative offers an opportunity to _anticipate success in arms control. Indeed, neglecting_
shift deterrence to a safer and more stable basis strategic modernization in expectation of arms
through greater reliance on strategic defenses. Such reduction agreements would have the perverse effect of
defenses, which threaten no one, could substantially decreasing the likelihood of such agreements by
**22**


-----

reducing one of the principal Soviet incentives to To this end, in 1981 we undertook the Strategic
agreement Modernization Program in order to maintain the

essential survivability and effectiveness of our own

History shows that a demonstrated will to maintain a forces in the face of the continuing qualitative and
military balance with the Soviets and not allow them to quantitative upgrade in the Soviet threat. Current
gain a significant strategic advantage is an essential elements of that program, which remains our highest
foundation for serious arms control negotiations. It was defense priority, include:
U.s. action to rectify imbalances which brought the
Soviets to consider the major force reductions -  Improved strategic command, control and
discussed at Reykjavik. Even if we are successful in communications, to ensure timely warning of attack
achieving the agreements we seek, however, the United and an assured means of passing retaliatory orders to
States will continue to require modernized, mission- our strategic forces.
effective, and survivable nuclear forces to provide

-  ICBM modernization, centered on the PEACEKEEPER

deterrence, promote stability, and hedge against Soviet

(MX) and Small ICBM, both of which will have

cheating or abrogation during the transition to new,

enhanced survivability through mobility.

lower force levels.

-  SLBM modernization, including deployment of the

For their part, the Soviets continue to invest heavily in TRIDENT submarine and development and
strategic modernization, with emphasis on accurate, deployment of the TRIDENT II missile.
fast-flying ballistic missiles which can destroy hard

-  Bomber and cruise missile upgrades, including

targets. Their goal has been, and remains, attainment of

deployment of the 8-1B, and the exploitation of the

an effective disarming first-strike capability. They have

important U.S. lead in low-observable technology by

always sought to enhance their ICBM survivability

development of the Advanced Technology Bomber

through silo hardening. Recently they have also sought

and the Advanced Cruise Missile.

to do so through mobility, including continued
deployment of the road-mobile S5-25, and preparation -  Strategic Defense programs, including SDI and the
for deployment of the rail-based 55-X-24. Air Defense Initiative, to redress the long-standing

neglect of defensive programs generally, and to

At the same time, the Soviets continue to invest roughly capitalize on the potential which modern
the same amount in their strategic defense programs as technology offers for radically transforming the basis
in their offensive force modernization. They are for deterrence and laying the foundation for a far
expanding and improving the world's only deployed more safe and stable strategic relationship with the
ABM system. They continue to violate the ABM Treaty Soviet Union.
with their radar at Krasnoyarsk, enhancing their ability
to break out of the Treaty through rapid deployment of
a nation-wide ABM system. Their extensive civil

**_ARMS CONTROL_**

defense program includes a vast and growing network
of deep underground leadership shelters aimed at

Arms control is not an end in itself but an integral part

ensuring the survival of Communist Party control over

of our overall National Security Strategy. It must be

the Soviet nation, economy, and military forces in war.

viewed as only one of several tools to enhance our

Their strategic communications are highly redundant, national security and to promote our fundamental
survivable, and hardened against nuclear effects. Their national interest in the survival of the United States as
active and passive defenses, their unrelenting buildup a free and independent nation. Our arms control
of offensive forces, and their published doctrine all objectives are fully integrated with our defense and
provide evidence of the Soviet nuclear warfighting foreign policies to enhance deterrence, reduce risk,
mentality, and underline the absolute essentiality of support alliance relationships, and ensure the Soviets
maintaining the effectiveness of the U.S. strategic do not gain significant unilateral advantage over the
deterrent. United States.

**23**


-----

unverifiable in important provisions, it was inimical to

Based on this view of arms control as a complement to

the security interests of the United States and its allies,

a strong national defense posture, u.s. arms control

and to the stabi Iity of the U.S.-Soviet strategic

policy, since the beginning of this Administration, has
been guided by several fundamental principles: relationship.

Imperfect as these earlier arms control agreements

-  The United States seeks only those agreements
which contribute to our security and that of our were, their faults have been compounded by the

Soviets' failure to abide by key provisions-a failure

allies.

which persists today. They encrypt telemetry associated

-  The United States seeks agreements which reduce

with ballistic missile testing in a manner which

arms, not simply codify their increase.

impedes verification. They have deployed a prohibited

-  Achieving agreements on broad, deep and equitable second new type of ICBM, the S5-25, and exceeded the
**reductions in offensive nuclear arms is the highest** numerical limit on strategic nuclear delivery vehicles.
arms control priority of the United States. The Soviets have also violated the SALT I Interim

Agreement of 1972; and with respect to the ABM Treaty,

-  Within the category of offensive nuclear arms, the

as noted earlier, the Krasnoyarsk radar remains a clear

. United States gives priority to reducing the most
destabilizing weapons: fast-flying, non-recallable violation.
ballistic missiles.

As a result of both U.S. concerns with the SALT

-  The United States also seeks equitable arms control

structure and the poor Soviet compliance record, I

measures in the area of nuclear testing, chemical

determined in May 1986 that, in the future, the United

weapons and conventional forces.

States would base decisions regarding its strategic force

-  The United States insists on agreements that can be structure on the nature and magnitude of the threat
effectively verified and fully complied with. Arms posed by Soviet strategic forces, and not on standards
control agreements without effective verification contained in a flawed, unratified, and expired treaty
measures are worse than no agreements at all as which has been repeatedly violated by the Soviet
they create the possibility of Soviet unilateral Union. At the same time I indicated that-assuming no
advantage, and can affect U.S. and allied planning

significant change in the threat we face-the United

with a false sense of confidence.

States will not deploy more strategic nuclear delivery
vehicles, or more strategic ballistic missile warheads,

These principles contrast sharply with the Soviet arms

than does the Soviet Union. Thus, while ensuring an

control approach. The Soviets have historically sought

adequate strategic deterrent, the United States will

to exploit the arms control process to gain unilateral

continue to exercise the utmost restraint, in order to

advantage by shifting the military balance in their favor.

foster the necessary atmosphere for obtaining Soviet

At the same time, they have pursued additional

agreement to significant reductions.

advantage by failing to comply with important
provisions of existing arms control agreements, secure
in the knowledge that the United States does not cheat While the United States' priority objective in arms
and can be relied on for full compliance with control is deep reductions in strategic offensive arms,
agreements in force. we are also engaged in a wide variety of negotiations

and discussions on other subjects. The U.s. approach

This approach has proven at least partially successful to all of these areas is consistent. We seek only those
for the Soviets in the past. The arms control agreements agreements which are equitable, verifiable, and will
of the 1970s largely legitimized the planned Soviet enhance our security and that of our allies.
strategic buildup, while constraining our own force
modernization by reducing public support for essential

Specifically:

strategic programs. Typical of the defects of the past

-  In the area of Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces

was the SALT II Treaty of 1979, a fundamentally flawed

(INF), we seek the complete elimination of an entire

agreement which was never ratified. Unequal and
**24**


-----

class of weapons: land-based longer-range INF Substantial progress toward the achievement of U.s.
(LRINF) missiles. As an interim goal, we seek a arms control goals was made at the October 1986
global agreement limiting the U.s. and USSR to 100 meeting in Iceland between General Secretary
LRINF missile warheads each, to be deployed in Gorbachev and myself. At that meeting we agreed on
Soviet Asia and the United States, with none of either the outlines of a 50 percent reduction in strategic
side in Europe. offensive forces and a dramatic global reduction in INF

missiles. In the near-term, our primary focus will be to

-  Consistent with our belief that strategic defenses may

work toward agreement in these areas. Consistent with

offer a safer, more stable basis for deterrence, we

our priority on radically reducing the most

seek Soviet agreement for an orderly transition to a

destabilizing strategic systems-and in response to the

more defense-reliant world.

Soviet desire for a ten-year commitment not to
withdraw from the ABM Treaty-we proposed to accept

-  We have proposed an effectively verifiable global

such a commitment through 1996, during which time

ban on chemical weapons.

research, development and testing, which is permitted

-  We seek alliance-ta-alliance negotiations to establish by the ABM Treaty, wou Id continue. At the same time,
a more stable balance in conventional forces from the proposed agreement provided for:
the Atlantic to the Urals, at lower levels. Such
reductions must be effectively verifiable and must

-  A fifty percent reduction in strategic offensive forces

recognize the geographic asymmetries between the

of the United States and Soviet Union during the first

two sides.

five years of the ten year period.

-  In the area of nuclear testing, we seek essential -  Elimination of all U.S. and Soviet offensive ballistic
verification improvements to permit ratification of missiles of whatever range or armament during the
existing treaties: the Threshold Test Ban Treaty, and second five years.
the Peaceful Nuclear Explosions Treaty. Once our

-  Agreement that either side could deploy advanced

verification concerns have been satisfied and the

strategic defenses after the ten-year period, unless

ratification process is complete, we would be

both agreed not to do so.

prepared immediately to engage in negotiations with
the Soviets on ways to implement a step-by-step
program to limit and ultimately end nuclear testing, It is too soon to foresee the future course of arms
in association with a program to reduce and control following Reykjavik. Much depends on the
ultimately eliminate all nuclear weapons. attitude of the Soviet Union. The United States has

tabled proposals in the Geneva negotiations reflecting

-  Finally, we seek to improve stability through the areas agreed on in Iceland; the Soviet Union has
improved measures which could prevent tabled proposals that only partially reflect the
misunderstanding during periods of crisis. We have achievements of Reykjavik. If the Soviets maintain their
made progress on such measures at the recently current attempt to hold all progress hostage to U.s.
concluded Stockholm conference. agreement to kill the Strategic Defense Initiative,

prospects for progress are dim. On the other hand, if

In all of these areas we consider effective verification to they are willing to implement the agreements reached
be equally as important as specific negotiated limits; in Reykjavik, we can move now to achieve greater
they should be negotiated concurrently. We cannot stability and a safer world. In moving to that world, I
accept obligations that limit our military programs will maintain my commitment to broad, deep,
un less we can effectively verify Soviet compliance with equitable, and verifiable reductions, focused especially
those same obligations. This is particularly important in on ballistic missiles, and my equally strong
light of the continuing pattern of Soviet violations commitment to the Strategic Defense Initiative as a
documented in the several reports which I have basis for moving to a safer, more stable form of
submitted to the Congress on Soviet non-compliance. deterrence.

**25**


-----

Finally, I should emphasize that the measure of success U.S. Contribution to NATO. The United States
in arms control is not the number of meetings held or contributes to this NATO deterrent in several ways.
agreements signed. Rather it is whether those Most visible is the peacetime stationing of over
agreements which are signed contribute to U.s. and 300,000 military personnel in the European theater.
allied security and advance the cause of peace and Although our allies contribute the majority of the
stability. Because of tnis, while the United States will conventional forces in Europe, and would continue to
remain both creative and patient, it will continue to do so in crisis and mobilization, the presence of U.S.

forces makes it clear that it is not possible to attack a

reject calls for agreements which do not enhance u.s.

NATO ally without simultaneously engaging the full

and allied security and contribute to global stability

military might of the United States.

In addition to the direct provision of forces, the United
States provides security assistance to those NATO allies

_MAINTENANCE OF A_
_CONVENTIONAL DETERRENT_ whose economies do not permit them to make as great

a contribution to the common defense as they and we
would wish. Such assistance serves as an important

Forward Deployed Conventional Defense Capability. and cost-effective force multiplier, increasing both the
Strategic nuclear capabilities are essential for political solidarity and the military effectiveness of
deterrence, but they alone are obviously not enough. NATO, Finally, the United States provides the main
The United States and its allies require robust contribution to the nuclear umbrella over NATO which
conventional forces as an integral part of our overall has been one of the pillars of NATO's strategy for

decades.

deterrent. The U.s. National Security Strategy is built
on the concepts of forward defense and alliance

The Strategy of Flexible Response. NATO's deterrent

solidarity. Consistent with this strategy, we maintain

strategy requires a capability for flexible response,

large, forward deployed forces at sea and on the

appropriate to the nature of Soviet provocation. In

territory of our NATO and Asian allies in time of peace.

addition to robust U.S. and allied conventional forces,

The overall size and capabilities of u.s. armed services backed by the strategic nuclear capability of the United
are heavily influenced by the need to maintain such States, this strategy must be supported by effective and
presence, which is essential to deter aggression. substantial non-strategic nuclear forces as well. The

United States contributes to all legs of the "NATO

The most demanding threat with which those forces Triad": conventional forces, non-strategic nuclear forces,
must be prepared to deal is, of course, the Soviet and strategic forces. NATO's 1979 decision to
threat. Soviet forces may always outnumber our own- modernize its nuclear forces through deployment of
even when allied forces are thrown into the balance. Ground Launched Cruise Missiles and Pershing II
For this reason, we must give the most careful attention ballistic missiles helped to redress the imbalance
to maintaining our forces' qualitative superiority at the created by the Soviet deployment of 55-20 missiles
level necessary to accomplish their deterrent and targeted against NATO territory. It also signalled NATO
warfighting missions. resolve to maintain the effectiveness and integrity of its

deterrent capabilities, and helped lay the foundation for
effective arms control negotiations aimed at reducing

An additional premise of American defense policy is

the ballistic missile threat to NATO.

that the United States does not seek to deal with the
threat from the Soviet Union unaided. A system of

In clear contrast to the Soviet Union, it is NATO's

vigorous alliances is the only effective way to deter the policy to maintain non-strategic nuclear forces at the
Soviets. The most important of these alliances is NATO, lowest level capable of deterring the Warsaw Pact
which for over a generation has preserved peace and threat. In pursuance of this policy, the Alliance decided
security in Europe. While no single NATO partner can in October 1983 to reduce the number of warheads in
match the massive Soviet conventional forces, together Europe by 1,400, in addition to the 1,000 warhead
we are capable of fielding a powerful deterrent. reduction completed in 1980. These reductions, taken

26


-----

independently of any arms control agreement, will Thus, our strategy recognizes that a variety of factors
reduce NATO's nuclear stockpile in Europe to the would affect the nature, locations, and intensity of our
lowest level in over 20 years. This makes it essential military actions in a conflict with the Soviet union. Our
that the remaining stockpile be survivable, responsive, strategy is not to try to fight "every where at once:' We
and effective. would do what is strategically sensible and

Deterrence of Chemical Warfare. While neither NATO operationally achievable under the circumstances. But
nor the United States seeks to match the Soviets we do need the capability for credible responses to
weapon for weapon, deterrence would be weakened if major threats worldwide, so we can ensure that our
the Soviets were allowed to field a capability which weakness does not tempt our adversaries.
was completely unmatched by a countervailing NATO

Other U.S. Commitments. NATO is not our only

capability. This premise, which underlies NATO's

alliance. The United States has bilateral or multilateral

decision to modernize its theater nuclear forces, is

**security commitments with some 43 nations**

equally relevant to our own determination to

throughout the globe.

modernize U.S. chemical weapons capability through
development of modern, safe, binary munitions. This

In support of those commitments, and to deter Soviet

modernization will provide us the capability to deter

and Soviet client state adventurism, the United States

Soviet first use of chemical weapons. In the absence of

maintains forward deployed forces in many regions of

such capability, we will remain dependent on an aging

strategic importance. In addition to our fleet in the

stockpile of unitary chemical weapons ill-suited to

Mediterranean, the United States maintains a large

modern delivery systems, and alliance nuclear

naval presence in the Western Pacific. A smaller

capabilities, to deter such Soviet use-an obviously

presence in the Indian Ocean serves to support our

undesirable and risk-prone situation.

interests in Southwest Asia. U.S. Air Forces deployed

The Scope and Intensity of Conflict. Our strategy

throughout the Pacific assist in meeting our security

recognizes that the Soviet Union, together with allied

commitments to such nations as Japan and the

forces, is capable of simultaneous aggression in more

Philippines. Substantial ground and air forces are

than one region of the world. Should aggression occur

deployed in Korea to complement forces of the

in several regions simultaneously, U.s. military

Republic of Korea in deterring aggression from the

responses would be governed by existing commitments,

North.

general strategic priorities, the specific circumstances at
hand, and the availability of forces. This capability to Our global forward deployed forces serve several
respond would be enhanced by the flexibility we have functions. They are essential to the creation of regional
built into our forces, including our capabilities for

power balances which deter Soviet aggression and

global strategic mobility and power projection. This

promote overall regional stability; they support the

capability to respond effectively in distant theaters

political independence of nations on the Soviet

reduces the risk that we will ever have to meet such

periphery and hence are key to the fundamental u.s.

attacks.

strategic objective of avoiding Soviet domination of the

If we must respond to such an attack, our overall Eurasian land mass; and finally, they provide an
objective would be to terminate the war as soon as immediately available capability to deal with lesser
possible, at the lowest level of violence consistent with military contingencies.
the restoration 'of peace on terms favorable to the
United States and its allies. Should our initial attempts Although the Soviet Union represents the greatest
to defeat aggression fail, however, U.S. strategy provides threat to the United States and its allies, as mentioned
for the flexible and sufficient application of force for as earlier, it is not the only threat. Forward deployed
long as combat continues to ensure that no area of forces can also discourage local aggression, contribute
vital interest is lost. Should escalation occur, despite to regional stability, and serve as visible symbols of
our best efforts to contain the intensity of the conflict, United States' will and capability to protect its interests.
we would attempt to employ our forces in a manner For military contingencies not involving the Soviet
which would discourage further escalation while Union, however, the United States looks primarily to
achieving our national objectives. the nations involved to provide for their own defense.

27


-----

Direct involvement of U.S. military forces is a last contingencies in Southwest Asia, where we have no
resort, to be undertaken only when clear political military bases or permanently stationed military forces.
objectives have been established, our political will is
clear, and appropriate military capabilities are available. Consistent with our alliance approach to security, U.s.
If U.s. combat forces are committed, the United States allies make critical contributions to the effectiveness of
would seek to limit the scope and level of the conflict, our mobility capabilities. Not only do our allies
avoid the involvement of the Soviet Union, and achieve contribute airfield and port facilities, they also augment
U.S. objectives as quickly as possible.

our airlift and provide the bulk of our sealift capability.
Finally, allied cooperation is an obvious prerequisite for

In the past six years we have made substantial progress

prepositioning.

in improving the capability of our forward deployed
forces to protect U.S. interests, execute our National

When this decade began, we faced severe difficulties in

Strategy, and support alliance commitments. We remain

moving large forces quickly enough to deter Soviet

firmly committed to continued improvement in our

aggression, deploying forces to two or more theaters

deployed capabilities in support of our forward-defense,
alliance-based strategy. The following paragraphs will simultaneously, or moving material effectively into less-
discuss selected capabilities which provide essential developed regions. Since 1981, with the support of
foundations for that strategy. Congress, we have made great progress in redressing

these deficiencies, adding substantially to our airlift

Maintenance of Global Support and Mobility and sealift capability and prepositioning additional
Capabilities. The ability to reinforce and resupply large quantities of material abroad. Not all of our
forward deployed forces is essential to the execution of

objectives have been accomplished, however. In

the U.S. strategy of forward defense and alliance

particular, the continuing decline of the U.S. merchant

solidarity. Rapid reinforcement of NATO during times of

marine and U.S.-flag commercial shipping assets is a

tension, for example, is critical to effective deterrence.

matter of concern. This problem is compounded by the
decline of the U.S.-flag fleet which results in a

The Soviets have a natural geographic advantage with

reduction of the seagoing workforce to man all our

respect to countries on the Eurasian rim, and growing
capability to launch simultaneous offensives in Europe, U.S.-flag vessels-as well as ships of the Ready Reserve
Southwest Asia and the Far East. Capitalizing on Force, the National Defense Reserve Fleet and any
interior lines of communication, they can redeploy and effective U.S. controlled ships which might need
resupply forces over a broad geographic range. Recent recrewing. The lack of merchant mariners in the near
Soviet efforts have significantly improved military term could impede our ability adequately to project
access, by rail and road, to strategically important areas and sustain forces by strategic sealift.
along the USSR's southern frontiers.

Maintenance of an Adequate Logistics Base. To

Our global support and mobility capabilities, including maintain a strong conventional deterrent it is vital that
airlift, sealift, and prepositioning are therefore essential we provide adequate logistic support for u.s. forces. A
to allow us to meet military challenges around the robust logistics infrastructure strengthens deterrence by
periphery of the Eurasian continent, which remains the demonstrating our preparations for hostilities at any
primary locus of Soviet expansionist interests. level of intensity, and for the length of time necessary
Prepositioning ashore or at sea can sharply reduce our to defend U.S. interests. Adequate, sustained support
response times. Airlift, the quickest and most flexible of helps raise the nuclear threshold, strengthens
our mobility assets, would deliver initial reinforcements deterrence, and improves prospects for early success in
in most contingencies; but sealift will inevitably carry conflict. Adversaries must not conclude that U.S. and
the bulk of our reinforcement and resupply material, as allied capabilities would erode if confronted with a
it has in past crises. To reduce response times, the complex or prolonged military campaign.
United States combines prepositioning with airlift and
sealift in an integrated fashion. Mobility capabilities are We have made substantial progress over the past six
especially critical to our strategies for dealing with years in improving our military logistics base, and in
28


-----

the process provided stronger support for our arms. In the case of our land-based forces committed to
deterrence strategy. With the support of Congress, we Europe, this requires constant upgrading and
will seek continued improvement in this unglamorous, modernization to retain a qualitative edge in the face of
but essential component of military power. the Pac(s superior numbers.
Concurrently, we will continue to emphasize to our
allies the impOrtance of improving the logistics base of While NATO requirements properly occupy much of
their own forces to ensure that their endurance in our ground forces' concern, the global nature of
combat will be parallel to that of our forces. potential threats to U.S. interests requires maintenance

of flexible and diverse ground forces capable of rapid

**Maintenance of Adequate Active Forces. Support of** deployment to, and effective operations in, areas of
our conventional deterrent requires that we maintain strategic importance. This has led the Army to establish
balanced and effective active forces sufficient in quality five rapidly deployable light divisions, while continuing
and quantity to make our National Military Strategy efforts have gone into the enhancement of Marine
credible. In the context of our alliance relationships, Corps capabilities. These ground forces, with
deterring and, if necessary, defeating the Soviet threat appropriate tactical air support, prOVide essential
requires a carefully structured mix of u.s. and allied elements of our capability to deal with worldwide
land and sea-based forces capable of executing the contingency requirements.
agreed strategy until reinforced from the respective
countries' mobilization bases. In the case of NATO, the Tactical airpower supports the achievement of ground
proximity of major Warsaw Pact ground, air and naval force goals by maintaining battlefield air superiority,
forces to Alliance territory, the speed with which providing responsive and effective firepower for Army
modern conflict can unfold, the Pads significant maneuver units, and conducting deep interdiction of
numerical advantages, and the Soviets' strong doctrinal enemy forces, command and control capabilities, and
emphasis on surprise, all argue for substantial, .sources of logistic support. In addition, it plays a
qualitatively advanced, and flexible u.S. and allied critical role in assuring the essential reinforcement and
conventional forces. resupply of U.S. forward deployed forces by protecting

port facilities, aerial ports of debarkation, and lines of

The land-based forces of the United States and its allies communication from attack and disruption. The
would have primary responsibility for blunting a Soviet capability of air forces to deploy rapidly in crises adds
attack and defending allied territory, while to our ability to deter threats to our interests in distant
simultaneously disrupting and destroying the follow-on areas, and to bring effective military power to bear
forces which Soviet strategy relies on to exploit any should deterrence fail.
initial successes. U.S. and allied ground forces,
supported by tactical air power, require the capability Maritime forces playa unique role in supporting our
to halt a Pact attack and restore the integrity of Alliance military strategy. Given the realities of our geostrategic
territory if NATO political and military objectives are to position, fronting on two oceans, maritime superiority
be achieved. Absent such capability, Alliance strategy is vital to support our alliance relationships and our
becomes heavily dependent on the threat of resorting forward deployed forces. While maritime superiority
to nuclear weapons to achieve essential deterrence and depends predominantly on the capabilities of our naval
warfighting objectives. forces, land-based air forces also contribute to its

maintenance in important ways, including early

For decades it has been a fundamental U.s. objective to warning of enemy air threats, long-range aerial tanker
reduce· the risk of nuclear warfare by maintainfng the support for sea-based tactical aircraft, and the laying of
nuclear threshold at a high level. Achievement of this anti-submarine mines.
goal requires that, wherever we confront Soviet forces,
the forces of the United States and its allies have the Maritime superiority enables us to capitalize on Soviet
capability to achieve their missions with conventional geographic vulnerabilities and to pose a global threat

**29**


-----

to the Soviers interests. It plays a key role in plans for Maintenance of Effective Reserve Forces and National
the defense of NATO allies on the European flanks. It Mobilization Base. The effective mobilization of
also permits the United States to tie down Soviet naval manpower and industrial resources in the event of
forces in defensive posture protecting Soviet ballistic conflict would provide essential support for our military
missile submarines and the seaward approaches to the capabilities. With approximately 6 percent of GNP
Soviet homeland, and thereby to minimize the wartime devoted to defense, our peacetime economy focuses on
threat to the reinforcement and resupply of Europe by the needs of the civilian marketplace, not on the
sea. nation's defense requirements. We rely on the inherent

size and strength of the U.S. economy as our ultimate

The mobile nature of maritime forces allows them line of defense, tapping into civilian production to a
directly to influence land campaigns through the greater or lesser extent only as the situation may
application of sea-based tactical air power; and by the require.
use of amphibious forces to seize strategically
important territory, reinforce allies accessible from the As a result, we require an ability to surge our industrial
sea, or threaten the seaward flanks of enemy ground base to produce the additional wartime materiel
forces. needed during conflict. The health of the industrial

base, therefore, has clear military and strategic
significance. Accordingly, the u.s. Government

This capability to project power far from our shores is

continues to promote initiatives which support

of particular importance, given the central position of

improvements in industrial productiVity and

the Soviet Union in the Eurasian land mass, the fact

modernization.

that many of the United States' most important allies
are located on the Eurasian periphery and offshore

Additionally, through its procurement procedures, the

islands, and the volatility of many Third World areas in

government seeks to provide incentives for increased

which there is no U.s. military presence. Our naval

productiVity, improved manufacturing technologies, and

power projection capabilities would play an essential

to increase U.s. competitiveness in the international

role in any Southwest Asia conti ngency.

marketplace.

Essential to our wartime strategy, maritime superiority To complement our industrial mobilization programs,
plays equally vital roles in peacetime. Mobile maritime the United States has maintained for over thirty years a
forces, easily deployed in time of crisis, are a traditional stockpile program to ensure a supply of critical raw
symbol of our nation's will and capability to defend its materials to support defense and essential civilian
vital interests. They have proven to be an indispensable needs during an emergency. It is important that we
tool of crisis management for every U.S. president since continue to modernize our stockpile program to keep
the end of World War II. Finally, by permitting the pace with current requirements, changes in industrial
rapid application of U.S. power, maritime superiority capacity and new manufacturing and technological

developments. Since fundamental disagreements on

contributes to regional stability, whether in the Indian

stockpile policies exist with the Congress, we must

Ocean, Central America, the Middle East, or other

renew efforts to resolve our differences and develop

areas of strategic concern.

realistic goals and policies which will produce a
modernized stockpile for the future.

The trends in the maritime area are generally favorable.
We are steadily building back toward our goal of a 600

On the manpower side, the Total Force policy

ship, 15 carrier battle group Navy. With continued established in the early 1970s places increased
strong Congressional support, the programs of this responsibilities on the reserve component of U.S.
Administration should ensure our essential maritime forces. Today, fully 50 percent of the combat units for
superiority for the remainder of this century. land warfare are in reserve components. Reserve units
**30**


-----

perform important missions and support functions on a procurement of a medium-sized ElV. This will
daily basis. Their priority for manning, training, and complement the Shuttle, and existing small and large
equipment 'modernization is not based on their ElVs. In addition, selected government satellites will be
peacetime status as forces "in reserve;' but on the basis designed for dual compatibility with either the Shuttle
of their direct integration into the nation's operational or ElVs.
plans and missions. In many cases, the sequence of

In view of the increasing reliance of U.S. and allied

deployment in the event of conflict would place reserve

forces on space-based support, we must be prepared to

component units side-by-side, and sometimes ahead of

protect our space assets against hostile interference.

active duty forces.

Accordingly, other facets of the national security space
program include development of concepts and

To maximize the cost effectiveness of the Total Force

techniques that allow systems to survive in crisis, and

policy, we must continue to balance the combat and

the development of an anti-satellite capability to deter

support elements of our active and reserve force

threats to U.S. space systems, and to deny an adversary

structure, their costs, and attendant levels of risk. While

the use of his space-based resources in war, correcting

there are specific mission areas in which the role of

a serious asymmetry in U.S. and Soviet space

reserve components can be expanded, we must

capabilities. The Soviets introduced their anti-satellite

exercise care to avoid making demands on our

(ASAT) system over a decade ago. Today it is the world's

personnel that would fundamentally alter the nature of

only operational ASAT system. The Congressionally

service in the reserves. Our peacetime operational

imposed ban on testing of our developmental ASAT

tempo, forward deployments, and our general strategy

system against targets in space leaves the Soviets with a

of deterrence all require a substantial, balanced, and monopoly in ASAT capability and should be removed.
ready active duty military establishment.

Overall, Soviet space programs are strong and growing.
Their well-publicized manned space programs, their

**_SPACE SUPPORT OF_** their impending heavy-lift space launch capabilitiesambitious space scientific exploration programs, and

will pose strong challenges to U.S. space leadership in

**_NATIONAL SECURITY_**

the near-term. In addition, these capabilities provide
the base for rapid development and deployment of
military space assets, in crises or war.

The United States uses space systems to conduct a
variety of activities that are essential to our national An emerging technology that has important security, as
security, including command, control, and well as civil and commercial applications, is the
communications, navigation, environmental National Aerospace Plane. The design of this plane
monitoring, warning, surveillance, and treaty incorporates advanced air and space flight technologies
monitoring. Support of these important activities to yield an aircraft that can function in both the
requires assured U.S. access to space, supported by an atmosphere of earth and the vacuum of space. The first
efficient and predictable launch capability. Therefore, flight of an experimental aerospace craft, which
late last year I directed that U.S. national space launch capitalizes on important U.s. technological advantages,
capability be based on a balanced mix of launchers could take place by the mid-1990s. .
consisting of the Space Transportation System and
Expendable Launch Vehicles (ElVs). The elements of
this mix support the mission needs of the national

**_INTELLIGENCE SUPPORT OF_**

security, 'civil government, and commercial sectors ofu.s. space activities. **_NATIONAL SECURITY_**

To support this approach, the Department of Defense Development and execution of a sound National
has undertaken an effort to achieve the design and ' Security Strategy requires effective intelligence

**31**


-----

capabilities to provide thorough and accurate the severity of the threat. As part of our intelligence
appreciations of actual or potential threats to our strategy we have taken a number of steps in recent
national security. Early warning of developments which years to strengthen our security and counter-
could place at risk key U.S. interests is vital if we are to intelligence capabilities. These efforts will continue as
employ the relevant elements of national power in a a matter of high national priority.
timely way, and deal with threats before they become
unmanageable, or entail the risk of major conflict.

**_LOW INTENSITY CONFLICT_**

Our deterrence strategy relies heavily on reliable
intelligence concerning potential adversaries' strategies,

Conflict in the Third World can pose serious threats to

forces, doctrine, strengths, weaknesses, and probable U.S. security interests. Low Intensity Conflicts, which
courses of action. Intelligence also provides essential take place at levels below conventional war but above
insights into how we are viewed by those adversaries. the routine, peaceful competition among states, can be
An appreciation of their perceptions of our capabilities, particularly troublesome. They often involve a
political will, national interests, and likely reaction to protracted struggle of competing principles and
hostile provocation, provides an important measure of ideologies. low Intensity Conflicts may be waged by a
the effectiveness of our deterrence. Intelligence also combination of means, including the use of political,
improves our ability to detect violations of arms control economic, informational, and military instruments.

They are often localized, but can have significant

agreements and potential technological breakthroughs

regional and global security implications.

which could adversely affect the strength of our
strategic or conventional deterrents. Intelligence allows

Major causes of low Intensity Conflict are instability

us to plan our strategies and forces to take advantage of

and lack of political and economic development in the

our adversaries' weaknesses, correct our own, and

Third W:>rld (though Low Intensity Conflict can occur

capitalize more effectively on areas of relative

in areas outside the Third World as well). These

advantage.

conditions provide fertile ground for unrest and for

The ability to conduct covert operations is an essential groups and nations wishing to exploit unrest for their

own purposes. The resulting conflicts are of concern to

adjunct of our intelligence capability, and allows us to

the United States when they assault U.S. national

deal effectively with developing threats to our security

interests and the security, values, or political

before they require the employment of u.s. military

foundations of the United States, our friends, and allies.

power or other actions entailing higher costs or risks.

Low Intensity Conflict can gradually isolate the United
States, its allies, and major trading partners from the

The capability to deal with the hostile intelligence Third W:>rld and from each other. This isolation can be
threat to the United States provides equally important manifest in economic, political, and military terms.
support for our National Security Strategy. The

Specifically, Low Intensity Conflict can lead to:

extremely large and active intelligence services of the
Soviet Union, its clients and surrogates, conduct highly -  Interruption of Western access to vital resources.
sophisticated collection and analysis operations

-  Gradual loss of U.S. military basing and access

targeted against us, our allies, and friends. The Soviets rights.
rely heavily on espionage, and the illegal acquisition of

-  Expanded threats to key sea lines of communication.

Western military technology, to achieve broad strategic
aims and aid materially in shifting the global -  Gradual shifting of allies and trading partners
"correlation of forces" to Soviet advantage. The away from the United States into positions of

accommodation with hostile interests.

apprehension over the past few years orspies
conducting very damaging espionage operations -  Expanded opportunities for Soviet political and
against the United States has dramaticaly underlined military gains.
**32**


-----

An effective U.s. response to this form of warfare U.s. and Western interests. Therefore, we will
requires the national will to sustain long-term encourage expansion of free trade, the development of
commitments. The United States has addressed the private enterprise, and the expansion and
manifestations of Low Intensity Conflict through a independence of local economies. U.S. development
tough counter-terrorism policy; support for democratic assistance and economic aid programs facilitate these
resistance movements; and political, economic, and policies. In addition, we will encourage private
military assistance to developing nations to help them investment in the Third World when that investment
prevent or combat low intensity challenges. supports balanced economic growth.

Informational Policy and Low Intensity Conflict. Low

U.S. policy for dealing with Low Intensity Conflict

Intensity Conflict.is a political struggle in which ideas

situations may be summarized as follows: When it is in

may be as important as arms. We hold significant

_u.s. interest to do 50, the United States:_

advantages over our adversaries in this area. In contrast

-  Will take measures to strengthen friendly nations to our adversaries, we have an open political system
facing internal or external threats to their

that thrives on communication and truth. We must

independence and stability by systematically

ensure, however, that accurate information concerning

employing, in coordination with friends and allies, American ideals and objectives is available throughout
the full range of political, economic, informational,

the Third World; and that the resources needed to

and military instruments of power. Where possible,

accomplish this are available.

action will be taken before instability leads to
violence. Political Instruments and low Intensity Conflict. We

recognize that other nations may not necessarily

-  Will work to ameliorate the underlying causes of

develop along democratic lines identical to ours.

instability and conflict in the Third World by

Nevertheless, we seek to encourage the development of

pursuing foreign assistance, trade, and investment

political systems that protect the rights of the individual

programs that promote economic development and

and provide for representative government, free

the growth of democratic social and political orders.

institutions, and an environment in which human

-  May support selected resistance movements acting in dignity can flourish. We do this partially by example,
opposition to regimes working against U.s. interests. and by defending our own ideals when they are
Such support will be coordinated with friends and challenged. We can also promote development of
allies and may contain political, informational, humane social orders by helping eliminate security
economic, and military elements. threats and the underlying economic causes of unrest

and instability.

-  Will take steps to discourage Soviet and other state-
sponsored adventurism, and increase the costs to

Military Instruments in low Intensity Conflict. The

those who use proxies or terrorist and subversive

fundamental tenet of u.s. strategy for dealing with low

forces to exploit instability in the Third World.

Intensity Conflict directed against our friends and allies
is that military institutions in threatened states must

The low Intensity Conflict strategies that support these

become able to provide security for their citizens and

policies must coordinate the use of a variety of policy

governments. U.S. low Intensity Conflict policy,

instruments among U.s. Government agencies and

therefore, recognizes that indirect-rather than direct-

internationally. Responses may draw on economic,

applications of U.S. military power are the most

political, and informational tools, as well as military

appropriate and cost effective ways to achieve national

assistance.

goals. The principal military instrument in Low
Intensity Conflict, therefore, is security assistance.

Economic Policy and low Intensity Conflict. U.S.
policy for low Intensity Conflict recognizes that long The primary role for U.S. armed forces in Low Intensity
term political and economic development will reduce Conflict is to support and facilitate the security
the underlying causes of instability of the Third World, assistance program. The"military services must also
help undermine the attractiveness of totalitarian stand ready to provide more direct forms of military
regimes, and eventually lead to conditions favorable to assistance when called upon. Usually, this assistance

33


-----

significant steps to define and implement policies to

will consist of technical training and logistical support.

counter international terrorism. These policies focus on

The services and the Unified Commands must also be

deterring, pre-empting and effectively reacting to

prepared for the effective execution of contingency and

international terrorist incidents. low Intensity Conflict

peacekeeping operations when such operations are

policy goes beyond this, however, and deals with the

required to protect national interests. U.S. combat

broader problem of supporting groups and

forces will be introduced into low Intensity Conflict

governments against which terrorism is being used as a

situations only as a last resort and when vital national

subversive weapon.

interests cannot otherwise be adequately protected.

We must realize that low Intensity Conflicts are

Narcotics Trafficking and Low Intensity Conflict. frequently protracted struggles. In addition, most of the
Narcotics trafficking can breed violence, fuel instability instruments of power that we can bring to bear on
and threaten governing institutions wherever it is found. them work indirectly and over a long period of time.
The vast revenues produced by illegal narcotics sales, Therefore, we must be patient in such struggles. It is
and concomitant use of international financial networks important that we prevail, but especially important that
to launder the proceeds of these transactions, can we recognize that we often cannot do so easily or
promote the type of instability that becomes a breeding quickly. On the other hand, we do hold important
ground for low Intensity Conflict. For these reasons, advantages. We represent a model of political and
our policies for dealing with drug trafficking provide economic development that promises freedom from
important support for our efforts to deal with low political domination and economic privation. If we can

protect our own security, and maintain an environment

Intensity Conflict.

of reasonable stability and open trade and
communication throughout the Third World, political,

Terrorism and Low Intensity Conflict. Under some

economic, and social forces will eventually work to our

circumstances, terrorism can be an important aspect of
low Intensity Conflict. This Administration has taken advantage.

34


-----

**Executing the Strategy**
##### v.

This portion of the report discusses U.S. capabilities to can influence growth in positive directions. The overall
execute the National Security Strategy discussed in goal of our efforts is to create a more stable world in
preceding chapters with particular emphasis on those which humane social and political orders can flourish
areas where resource shortfalls impede effective and which can support balanced economic growth. In
achievement of important national strategy objectives. short, our foreign operations programs are intended to

support the types of positive change that will protect
our national interests over the long term. A stable

**_FOREIGN POLICY_** world whose nations can meet the economic needs oftheir citizens and respect individual rights is a world

that is safer for the United States and its friends.

**_CAPABILITIES_**

We spend only about two percent of our annual federal

The United States depends on foreign assistance and budget on the various foreign assistance programs. This
other foreign operations programs to protect national is indisputably money well spent. The good we do, the
security, promote its interests, and communicate its problems we help solve, and the threats we counter
values and principles throughout the world. Our through our assistance programs far outweigh the costs.
foreign operations programs include economic and They represent a highly leveraged investment.
military assistance, food aid, development assistance, Nevertheless, our foreign assistance programs do not
international education and communication programs, receive the support they deserve from the Congress. In
the overseas operations of the State Department, and the last few years, Administration foreign operations
many other important functions. budget requests have been severely cut by the

Congress. Although all programs must bear the burden

These programs convert our foreign policy into positive, of reducing the budget deficit, the cuts in foreign
visible actions which provide assistance to people who assistance have often been grossly disproportionate
face severe economic privation, and promote the when compared with other programs.
economic and political development so important to
support free and democratic societies. The programs This is penny wise and pound foolish. We cannot
also help governments seeking to defend themselves dismiss foreign assistance as a "give-away" program that
from internal and external threats. By helping our wastes money which could better be spent on
friends enhance their security, we can help create the Americans. In the first place, such a characterization is
necessary preconditions for economic and political factually wrong. Much of the money we spend in
development. foreign assistance programs goes to purchase goods

and services produced here in the United States. Our

Equally important, our programs tell people about food aid programs are one of the best examples, but
American ideals and values. By building greater other programs, such as foreign military sales, also
understanding of what the United States stands for, we directly increase U.S. exports.

**35**


-----

Furthermore, our assistance programs work to solve Congress cut our request to $13.6 billion. The effect of
problems, relieve hardships, and ameliorate conflicts this cut is devastating. After we meet our commitment
that, if neglected, could degenerate into crises to the Middle East peace process, we have grossly
adversely affecting U.S. interests. Unless we can be an inadequate funds left to meet other requirements. As a
active participant in encouraging the type of world result, we are unable to fulfill our commitments to
order we desire, we may find ourselves compelled to countries that provide us with strategically important
defend our interests with more direct, costly, and basing and access rights. Indeed, some programs will
painful means. have to be cut over SO percent this year. We face the

danger of falling behind in programs that are designed

We face a foreign assistance funding crisis under the to help key regions beset with severe economic and
FY1987 budget voted by Congress. In that budget, we security problems. We also can do little to help Third
sought $16.2 billion for Foreign Economic and Military World debtors get back on thei r feet.
Assistance. That assistance was carefully calculated to
support a broad'variety of important U.S. national The cuts signal a policy of retreat. Clearly, in the next
security objectives. few months the Congress and the Executive Branch

must work together to find solutions to these funding

Specifically: problems so that we can resume our positive role.

These programs are a key part of our first line of

-  Thirty-four percent of that budget was to go to Israel

defense in protecting American freedoms, and must

and Egypt, reinforcing our vital search for lasting

enjoy full bipartisan support to be effective. I solicit

peace in that region.

such support for the FY 1987 supplemental

-  Twenty-six percent was intended for military access appropriations request which has been submitted to
states and countries hosting U.S. military forces such Congress.
as the Republic of Korea, the Philippines, Greece
and Turkey.

-  Eleven percent would have gone to Central America
and the Caribbean. **_DEFENSE CAPABILITIES_**

-  Seventeen percent was for countries which share our
democratic values and need our help to advance Defense resources. The successful execution of any
them, such as Thailand and Colombia; where new National Security Strategy depends on the availability
democracies have emerged, such as Bolivia and of adequate resources. Strategies which depend on
Uruguay; and where fundamental economic reforms unrealistic or unachievable assumptions about resource
are taking place, such as Ecuador and Senegal. availability are doomed to failure. At the same time,

recent history has taught us that the time between the

-  All other country programs accounted for on Iy three

onset of a crisis and the need for a national security

percent of the total foreign aid request. Some are

response has dWindled over the years. The days when

poverty-stricken African states to which we are

nations could respond to crises by raising, training, and

directing our humanitarian and technical assistance

equipping new forces are gone. This fact of life,

programs. Others, such as Burma, are active partners

coupled with the sober knowledge that crisis situations

with us in the war against international narcotics

can burst upon the world with startling suddenness,

trafficking.

means that we must be able to deter aggression and

-  The remaining nine percent of our assistance was to infringement of our vital interes~s at any moment, and
go to international organizations, multilateral at places far removed from the United States.
development banks, the Peace Corps, refugee
assistance, narcotics control efforts, and AID non- In practical terms, this means that the Administration
country programs. must not adopt strategies that our country cannot afford,
**36**


-----

adequacy. We and our allies must have credible

and that our military leaders cannot and must not base

military responses, the prospects of which convince our

their plans on resources that are beyond the nation's

adversaries that aggression would entail unacceptably

capability to provide. It also means that Congress,

high costs for them. How much military power is

operating from a shared view of U.S. national interests,

required to deter is inevitably a subjective question,

and the objectives which support them, must provide

involving our sense of how others view our military

the Executive with the resources necessary to

capabilities and our political will to use them, if

implement a realistic, prudent and effective strategy.

necessary. In this respect, our forces must not only be
adequate, but must be unmistakably perceived as

Providing for the common defense is the most

adequate to defend our interests, execute our strategy,

important responsibility of the federal government-

and preserve our alliance relationships.

shared equally by the Executive and Legislative
branches. Partnership is the key to its successful

Without question, the defense program required to

execution. In that spirit, in the early 1980's-for the

support our strategy is affordable. In fact, in the past

third time since World War II-Congress and the

seven years, Americans have devoted an average of onIy

Executive joined together in a concerted effort to

6.1 percent of GNP to defense-well under rates in the

rebuild and strengthen our military capabilities.

19S0s and 1960s, which ranged from 7 percent to 9.2

However, unlike past build-ups, which were

percent. Likewise, at about 27 percent of federal

characterized by high rates of consumption to support

outlays, defense spending falls well below the

combat operations in Asian conflicts, we focused this

peacetime average of 38 percent during the postwar

time on investment. There were important manpower

era. In both instances, the increases of the early 1980s

and readiness problems to be overcome as well, but it

seem large only because the spending of the late 1970s

was clear that only an increase in investment would

was so severely depressed.

produce the necessary positive, sustained impact on
the military balance. In the FY88-89 Defense Budget, I have not asked the

Congress to approve defense increases similar to those

This action was essential to redress the serious of the early 1980s. At the same time, the Congress must
imbalances between u.s. and Soviet capabilities which act positively to protect the gains that we together have
had emerged during the 1970's-a period of achieved. We must not continue on the path of real
unprecedented military investment by the Soviets, decline in defense investment established during the
aimed at shifting the global "correlation of forces" past two years. The time has come for us to join
decisively in their favor. Had we not arrested this together in supporting moderate, sustainable increases
dangerous trend, the damage to our most fundamental in our defense budget, consistent with the economic
national interests would have been profound. growth we expect for the nation as a whole, and with
Fortunately, the Congress and the American people the long-term challenge which the Soviet Union
recognized the essentiality of rebuilding the country's presents to the free world. Together, as a nation, we
defenses. As a result, we have achieved great progress. must break the pattern of costly and inefficient ups and
Our level of investment roughly matches that of the downs in defense spending, and support the path of
Soviets'. However, the legacy of a decade in which sustained, reasonable growth, at a rate which will
Soviet investment far exceeded our own remains, and allow the continuing modernization of our strategic
must be corrected. ~nd conventional forces, while maintaining adequate

levels of military readiness, sustainability, and force

Judgments about the adequacy of our defense program structure.
ultimately come down to questions of risk. Put in its

Military Forces. Earlier in this report I set forth our

starkest form, the issue is: how much risk to the

strategy for the maintenance of deterrence against

survival of this country and its free institutions are we

strategic nuclear or conventional attack on the United

willing to accept? Military forces which are
unsuccessful in deterring major war fail the first test of States or its all ies.

**37**


-----

The execution of our strategy to maintain a credible combined-arms capability that will enable our
nuclear deterrent through the modernization of our divisions to maintain a qualitative edge over the
strategic forces has been successfuI to date. Major much larger Soviet forces.
elements of the Strategic Modernization Program have

-  Ongoing modernization programs for our tactical air

been approved by the Congress and ouf strategic forces

forces supplement these ground force programs. The

are becoming more sUlvivable and effective each day.

ability of our tactical air forces to maintain local air

We are improving the capability and credibility of our
diversified strategic force mix and will continue to do superiority and support ground forces requires
so well into the next century. continuing improvement.

-  The program to revitalize our special operations

As we look forward to the future, we are examining

forces is being fully implemented as one of our

options that wi II allow us to capitalize on the progress

highest priorities. This program will ensure that we

made in the Strategic Defense Initiative to render

have highly trained forces immediately available to

ballistic missiles obsolete and place deterrence on a

respond to a broad range of crises and Low Intensity

more stable long-term foundation. Strong support for

Conflict situations, when our interests so require.

this program, which exploits our strengths in advanced
technology, advances both our deterrence and our

-  Improvements in c'l are of continuing high priority

arms control goals. Full funding of the FYBB-B9 budget

in order to strengthen the ability to employ our

request for SOl is essential to sustain the important

conventional forces to their full capability.

progress made to date and allow the program to
proceed at an efficient pace. -  New short and long range mobility forces are

improving our capability to transport and support

The survivability of our land-based ICBM forces will our forward units, and to deploy forces in
increase dramatically in the years ahead. as we move contingencies. The ability to build up military power
from older, fixed basing modes to new mobile basing rapidly in strategically important areas on the
modes that contribute to stability through increased Eurasian periphery is essential for deterrence, and for
survivability. The new concepts for mobile basing of neutralizing the geographical advantages of the
the Peacekeeper and the Small ICBM will revitalize the Soviet Union.
ICBM leg of the strategic triad, significantly improve

-  The warfighting capability of our naval forces is

deterrence, and allow implementation of the Scowcroft

improving markedly with the increase in the quantity

Commission recommendations in a manner consistent
with earlier Congressional gUidance. and quality of ships and aircraft. This long-term

program to assure our ability to use the world's

As we continue to improve our strategic deterrent oceans in peace and war requires continuing
forces, we must be mindful of the fact that our support.
conventional forces are the first line of deterrence, and
an essential means of supporting U.S. interests in crises The full impact of these major modernization programs
short of general war. With the emergence of rough will be felt over the decade ahead. Accomplishment of
nuclear parity between the United States and the Soviet our objectives will greatly increase our conventional
Union, conventional forces have become even more deterrent capability. The net improvement in our
important to maintaining a secure deterrent. Our defense posture will not be marginal; it will be
current conventional force modernization program fundamental. Full support of these programs is
contributes to a strong forward defense posture.

essential to avoid deterioration of the U.S.-Soviet
conventional force balance, and assure that we have

Key elements include:

conventional forces capable of conducting forward

-  The Army's modernization program, which is based defense of our interests without recourse to nuclear
on the new Air Land Battle doctrine, and provides a weapons.
**38**


-----

strategy, military requirements, and our acquisition

As we pursue the qualitative upgrading of our forces,

programs; and ensure that we realize maximum

we must continue to refine our plans and concepts for

military benefit for every defense dollar.

employing them. Our military strategy is complex. To
accomplish their tasks the Services have developed

Important organizational changes have occurred; others

appropriate doctrines, organizations and tactics.

are impending. New Unified Commands for

Ensuring that these are melded into a coherent Transportation and Special Operations Forces will
National Military Strategy presents a challenge in the become operational this year, and we will shortly
continuously changing international environment. This establish the newly authorized position of Assistant
problem is magnified by the diversity of potential Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low
contingencies within the spectrum of conventional Intensity Conflict, concurrently activating the
conflict. At the theater level, regional strategies have Congressionally-mandated Board for Low Intensity
been developed by the Unified Commanders. These Conflict within the National Security Council
strategies, together with other considerations global in organization. The authority of the Chairman, Joint
character, or which cross CINCS' lines of authority, are Chiefs of Staff, and the Unified Commanders, has been
integrated into the National Military Strategy. That strengthened; and the new position of Vice Chairman,
strategy provides an effective basis for the employment Joint Chiefs of Staff, has been established.
of our military capabilities worldwide, in a

In 1986, the Congress approved my proposal to create

coordinated, mutually supporting fashion. That strategy

an Under Secretary of Defense for AcqUisition. This

undergoes periodic reviews to revalidate and update its

appointment has led to a reorganization of

essential elements. The results will not only improve

procurement functions within the Department of

our capability for employment of military forces, but

Defense. These changes are intended to achieve a

provide stronger conceptual support for development of

major reduction in the time required to field new

our conventional force R&D and procurement

technology and equipment, to involve the professional

programs. In doing so, we are always mindful of the

judgment of the Joint Chiefs of Staff more directly in

relationship between nuclear and conventional

the identification and validation of military

deterrence. Our long-term objective of reducing our requirements, and to improve the efficiency of the
reliance on nuclear weapons, if successful, demands acqUisition process generally. To promote technological
special attention to maintaining both the effectiveness innovation, the role of the Defense Advanced Research
of our conventional deterrent and strong ·alliance Projects Agency in prototyping and other advanced
relationships. development work on joint programs has been

expanded.

Improving Efficiency. An important part of the activity

To aid our understanding of future requirements, last

aimed at supporting our National Security Strategy

fall we established.<l bipartisan Commission on

includes a series of ongoing efforts to improve the

Integrated Long;rerm Strategy. This group of

management and operational effectiveness of our

distinguished Americans is working to provide the

defense establishment. Improving the efficiency of the

Secretary of Defense and my Assistant for National

Department of Defense has been the subject of much

Security Affairs insights into the role and strategic

attention and a number of notable achievements over implications of new defense technologies over the next
the past six years. Most recently these efforts have twenty years. The Commission will also look at ways to
included the report of the Blue Ribbon Commission on accelerate the introduction of the most promising new
Defense Management, chaired by David Packard; and technologies into our military forces. Possible new
Congressional action on defense reorganization. As a threats resulting from ongoing Soviet research programs
result of this activity, important changes'have been will also be examined.
accomplished in the way the Department of Defense

Changes underway in the defense planning process will

does business. The overriding objectives of these

strengthen the relationship between the fiscal plans for

combined efforts are to improve the quality of our

defense and the overall budgetary plans for the federal

strategic planning; promote alight linkage between

39


-----

government. With the encouragement of Congress, we accomplished is the National Security Council (NSC),
are for the first time submitting a two-year defense and the various interagency groups which function
budgei. In both instances, the objective is greater under its supervision.
stability for the defense program. While we will

The NSC helps us apply our broad objectives to

continue to strive for greater cost control and savings, at

specific situations and translate those objectives into

the program level, the Blue Ribbon Commission on

detailed policies and strategies. The overreaching task

Defense Management concluded that in the future, .'

of the NSC is to help ensure that my decisions are

significant efficiencies in the defense budget were more

made in a timely manner, and with benefit of the

likely to be achieved through greater program stability

clearest possible articulation of alternative courses of

than through specific management actions.

action, their relative strengths and weaknesses, and
likely consequences.

Greater stability can be effectively accomplished only
through close cooperation between the Executive

The results of this process are formally recorded as

Branch and the Congress. Our joint interest in

National Security Decision Directives (NSDDs). The

improving defense management has produced a series

NSDDs, in the aggregate, provide a broad body of

of interconnected organizational and procurement guidance for the preparation of foreign and defense
reforms that are now underway. We must now let the policy, military planning, and the development of sub-
Department of Defense implement these reforms and strategies to support the National Security Strategy's
assess their effectiveness without undue interference. It objectives. Over the past six years we have developed
is likely that some adjustments will be required. After over two hundred and fifty NSDDs. Not all remain in
suitable experience with the new structure and force, and not all deal with topics of global import; but
procedures, we will make appropriate the process is effective in promoting the integrated
recommendations to the Congress. employment of the broad and diverse range of tools

available for achieving our national security objectives.

The continued development and successful

**_INTEGRATING NATIONAL_** implementation of u.s. National Security Strategy is a

major responsibility of the Executive Branch. But the

**_SECURITY CAPABILITIES_**

Administration cannot accomplish this alone.
Developing and supporting a National Security Strategy
for the United States that prOVides a sound vision for

As I indicated earlier, the effective achievement of our

the future and a realistic guide to action must be a

National Security Strategy's objectives requires the

cooperative endeavor of the Congress and the

carefully integrated employment of all facets of national

Administration.

power. To the maximum extent possible, we attempt to
achieve our objectives through employment of the non- I look forward to working with the Congress in a
coercive elements of national power. This approach is bipartisan manner to achieve increased understanding
aided when we are able to identify problems early, of, and broad support for, our National Security
diagnose them thoroughly, and apply the pooled Strategy and its objectives. There can be no endeavor
insights and wisdom of my senior advisors to their more important for the long-term well-being of the
solution. The principal vehicle through which this American people; and I solicit the Congress' closest
essential integrating function is collaboration in achieving it.

**40**


-----

**VI. Looking Forward to the 1990's**

Six years ago, when the American people elected me freedom loving people take up arms against those
as their President, I was determined to achieve four regimes which seek to impose their will on
near-term, urgently needed objectives in the National populations who want peace and economic stability.

We have seen mounting opposition to those forces in

Security Strategy area:

the world that aggressively employ military power and

-  First, to restore our nation's military strength after a coercion to achieve their goals.
decade of neglect which allowed the Soviet Union
to overtake us in many critical categories of military This is what has given me the personal strength to
**power;** forge ahead in times of trouble and criticism, in times

of great risk and potential loss. I have seen that time is

-  Second, to restore our nation's economic strength

on our side against those forces in this world that are

and reinvigorate the world economic system, in the

committed to the elimination of freedom, justice, and

wake of the energy crisis and global recession;

democratic ways of life. Time is running out for those

-  Third, to restore the nation's international prestige as regimes because people everywhere realize that the
a world leader, after some years of our image being way of life imposed by those forces is counter to basic
tarnished and our adversaries believing that the human values. People across the world see that we
United States was retreating from its international offer a vision of the future. Our adversaries offer the
obligations; and darkened ways of an unsatisfied past through

domination by military power, stifling statism, and

-  Fourth, to restore personal motivation to all

political oppression.

Americans and carry our message to the world that
individuals and not governments should control

I have used every opportunity these past six years to

their economic, spiritual and political destinies.

drive this theme home, both here and abroad. This is
also the dominant theme of our National Security

After six years, I can report this restoration process is

Strategy-the very pulse of our nation which must be

well underway. The ship of state is heading in a new,

carried into the future to ensure that we remain strong

long-term direction which should be pursued over the

and innovative, vibrant and free.

remaining years of this century. I believe that our most
important thrust in the National Security Strategy area We must never forget that freedom is never really free;
has been to restore the image of the United States as it is the most costly thing in the world. And freedom is
the light of freedom throughout the world. never paid for in a lump sum; installments come due in

every generation. All any of us can do is offer the

We have seen our message taken to heart by peoples generations that follow a chance for freedom.
and governments throughout the world in these last six
years. We have seen nations change their economic I ask that we stand together in my final two years as
thinking to place more emphasis on the worth and your President to ensure that we continue setting in
work of the individual as opposed to satisfying the place a strategy which will carry us securely into the
interests of the state. We have seen thousands of 21st Century.

**41**


-----

