-----

For sale by the U.S. Gevernment Printing Office
Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328

ISBN 0-16-045531-6


-----

|Col1|CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF WASHINGTON, D.C. 20318-9999 The dramatic events comprising the end of the Cold War and the demise of the Soviet Union, as well as longer-term economic, demographic, environmental, and technological developments, have profoundly altered the international security environment. The security challenges of a largely bipolar world have been replaced with more ambiguous and, in some cases, equally dangerous problems. Our strategy for meeting these challenges is described by the President in A National Security Strategy of Engagement and Enlargement. Under this national strategy we will enhance our security by maintaining a strong defense capability, promoting cooperative security measures, working to open foreign markets and spur global economic growth, and promoting democracy abroad. This new national military strategy, derived from the national security strategy and the defense framework outlined in the Bottom-Up Review, describes the critical role which the Armed Forces will play in helping to achieve our Nation’s objectives. This is a strategy of flexible and selective engagement required to support our Nation’s interests. Reflecting the ambiguous nature of our security challenges, the strategy emphasizes full spectrum capabilities for our Armed Forces. The fundamental purpose of the Armed Forces must remain to fight and win our Nation’s wars whenever and wherever called upon. With worldwide interests and challenges, the United States must maintain its capability to deal with more than one major crisis at a time. For this reason, our Armed Forces must maintain the capability to fight and win two nearly simultaneous regional contingencies, even as we continue to restructure and reduce the size of the force. The challenge of the new strategic era is to selectively use the vast and unique capabilities of the Armed Forces to advance national interests in peacetime while maintaining readiness to fight and win when called upon. This new national military strategy describes the objectives, concepts, tasks, and capabilities necessary in the near term to adapt the Armed Forces’ proven capabilities to meet this challenge. /Signed/ JOHN M. SHALIKASHVILI Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF WASHINGTON, D.C. 20318-9999 The dramatic events comprising the end of the Cold War and the demise of the Soviet Union, as well as longer-term economic, demographic, environmental, and technological developments, have profoundly altered the international security environment. The security challenges of a largely bipolar world have been replaced with more ambiguous and, in some cases, equally dangerous problems. Our strategy for meeting these challenges is described by the President in A National Security Strategy of Engagement and Enlargement. Under this national strategy we will enhance our security by maintaining a strong defense capability, promoting cooperative security measures, working to open foreign markets and spur global economic growth, and promoting democracy abroad. This new national military strategy, derived from the national security strategy and the defense framework outlined in the Bottom-Up Review, describes the critical role which the Armed Forces will play in helping to achieve our Nation’s objectives. This is a strategy of flexible and selective engagement required to support our Nation’s interests. Reflecting the ambiguous nature of our security challenges, the strategy emphasizes full spectrum capabilities for our Armed Forces. The fundamental purpose of the Armed Forces must remain to fight and win our Nation’s wars whenever and wherever called upon. With worldwide interests and challenges, the United States must maintain its capability to deal with more than one major crisis at a time. For this reason, our Armed Forces must maintain the capability to fight and win two nearly simultaneous regional contingencies, even as we continue to restructure and reduce the size of the force. The challenge of the new strategic era is to selectively use the vast and unique capabilities of the Armed Forces to advance national interests in peacetime while maintaining readiness to fight and win when called upon. This new national military strategy describes the objectives, concepts, tasks, and capabilities necessary in the near term to adapt the Armed Forces’ proven capabilities to meet this challenge. /Signed/ JOHN M. SHALIKASHVILI Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff|CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF WASHINGTON, D.C. 20318-9999 The dramatic events comprising the end of the Cold War and the demise of the Soviet Union, as well as longer-term economic, demographic, environmental, and technological developments, have profoundly altered the international security environment. The security challenges of a largely bipolar world have been replaced with more ambiguous and, in some cases, equally dangerous problems. Our strategy for meeting these challenges is described by the President in A National Security Strategy of Engagement and Enlargement. Under this national strategy we will enhance our security by maintaining a strong defense capability, promoting cooperative security measures, working to open foreign markets and spur global economic growth, and promoting democracy abroad. This new national military strategy, derived from the national security strategy and the defense framework outlined in the Bottom-Up Review, describes the critical role which the Armed Forces will play in helping to achieve our Nation’s objectives. This is a strategy of flexible and selective engagement required to support our Nation’s interests. Reflecting the ambiguous nature of our security challenges, the strategy emphasizes full spectrum capabilities for our Armed Forces. The fundamental purpose of the Armed Forces must remain to fight and win our Nation’s wars whenever and wherever called upon. With worldwide interests and challenges, the United States must maintain its capability to deal with more than one major crisis at a time. For this reason, our Armed Forces must maintain the capability to fight and win two nearly simultaneous regional contingencies, even as we continue to restructure and reduce the size of the force. The challenge of the new strategic era is to selectively use the vast and unique capabilities of the Armed Forces to advance national interests in peacetime while maintaining readiness to fight and win when called upon. This new national military strategy describes the objectives, concepts, tasks, and capabilities necessary in the near term to adapt the Armed Forces’ proven capabilities to meet this challenge. /Signed/ JOHN M. SHALIKASHVILI Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff||
||||


CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20318-9999


-----

-----

#### Table of Contents

**Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i**
**Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1**
**International Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2**
**Regional Instability**
**Weapons of Mass Destruction**
**Transnational Dangers**
**Dangers to Democracy and Reform**

**National Military Objectives . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4**
**Promote Stability**
**Thwart Aggression**

**Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6**
**Strategic Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6**
**Overseas Presence**
**Power Projection**

**Components of the Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8**
**Peacetime Engagement  Military-to-Military Contacts 8 / Nation**
Assistance 8 / Security Assistance 8 / Humanitarian Operations 9 /
Counterdrug and Counterterrorism 9/ Peacekeeping 9

**Deterrence and Conflict Prevention  Nuclear Deterrence 10 / Regional**
Alliances 10 / Crisis Response 11 / Arms Control 11 /
Confidence-Building Measures 12 / Noncombatant Evacuation
Operations 12 / sanctions Enforcement 12 / Peace Enforcement 12

**Fight and Win  Clear Objectives - Decisive Force 13 / Wartime Power**
Projection 13 / Fight Combined and Fight Joint 13 / Win the
Information War 15 / Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction 15 /
Two Major Regional Contingency Focus 15 / Force Generation 15 /
Win the Peace 16

**Military Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17**

**Posture and Size**

**Force Building Foundations  Quality People 18 / Readiness 18 /**
Enhancements 18 / Modernization 19 / Balance 19

**Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20**


-----

-----

## Executive Summary

##### A Strategy of Flexible and Selective Engagement


United States’ interests requires the
use of appropriate military
capabilities in concert with the
economic, diplomatic, and
informational elements of our
national power. Our Armed Forces
are engaged worldwide on a
continual basis to accomplish two
national military objectives —
**promoting stability and thwarting**
**aggression.**

We anticipate a
considerable period before stability
returns to our strategic environment.
Our peacetime efforts to counter
regional instability, impede the
proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, reduce the impact of
transnational threats, and support
democracy and reform are important
for promoting stability and deterring
aggression during the post-Cold
War transformation process.

##### The Strategy

Our military forces must
perform three sets of tasks to
achieve the military objectives of
promoting stability and thwarting
aggression. These three
components of the strategy are
**peacetime** **engagement,**
**deterrence** **and** **conflict**
**prevention, and** **fighting and**
**winning our Nation’s wars.**
Accomplishing the specific tasks of
the strategy is facilitated by the two
complementary strategic concepts of
**overseas presence and** **power**
**projection.**


##### Introduction

In formulating national
military strategy, the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff derives guidance
from the national security strategy
articulated by the President and from
the Bottom-Up Review conducted
by the Secretary of Defense. The
_National Security Strategy of_
_Engagement and Enlargement_
emphasizes worldwide
**engagement and the enlargement**
of the community of free market
democracies. In turn, this new
national military strategy calls for
**flexible** and **selective**
**engagement, involving a broad**
range of activities and capabilities to
address and help shape the evolving
international environment.

##### The International Environment

Challenges to our global
interests did not disappear with the
end of the Cold War. Today we face
a world in which threats are
widespread and uncertain, and
where conflict is probable, but too
often unpredictable. The strategic
landscape is characterized by four
principal dangers which our military
must address: regional instability;
**the proliferation of weapons of**
**mass destruction; transnational**


**dangers such as drug trafficking and**
terrorism; and the **dangers to**
**democracy and reform** in the
former Soviet Union, Eastern
Europe, and elsewhere.

Many ethnic, religious,
territorial, and economic tensions,
held in check by the pressures of the
bipolar global competition, erupted
when the constraints posed by the
Cold War were removed. Regional
instability also results when regional
powers such as Iraq, Iran, and
North Korea pursue aggressive
policies in attempts to dominate their
neighbors militarily, politically, or
economically.

Despite progress, the
process of economic and political
reform in the successor states to the
Soviet Union is subject to reversal.
Moreover, Russia will continue to
retain large numbers of nuclear
weapons and associated delivery
systems. Thus, it is important for us
to work with Russia and the other
newly independent states to stem
the proliferation of all types of
weapons of mass destruction and to
support the process of democratic
reform.

##### National Military Objectives

Guarding against threats to
mass destruction; transnational


-----

and friends and fight jointly,
integrating the required capabilities
from each of the Services.

(4) help dominate combat
operations by winning the
information war.

(5) counter weapons of
mass destruction through deterrence
and improved capability to operate
in contaminated environments;

(6) initiate force
preparations to handle a second
major regional contingency at the
outset of the first conflict to deter
potential aggressors;

(7) generate the required
forces by withdrawing from lower
priority missions and mobilizing
critical Reserve forces; and

(8) begin plans to win the
peace at the outset of the conflict.

##### Military Capabilities

The US Armed Forces are
now in their eighth year of
drawdown. As we reduce the force,
we are also restructuring it for the
challenges of the next century. This
smaller, restructured force will be
improved through enhancements and
selected modernizations, enabling it
to execute our new strategy, fully
prepared for the challenges of a new
era.

The core requirement of our
strategy as laid out in the BottomUp Review is a force capable of
fighting and winning two major
regional conflicts nearly
simultaneously. While this
requirement most challenges the


##### Strategic Concepts:

**Overseas presence takes**
the form of both permanently
stationed forces and forces
temporarily deployed abroad. Thus,
we maintain overseas presence not
only through forces permanently
stationed overseas but also through
a broad program of routine air,
ground and naval deployments,
various contingency operations, and
global prepositioning of equipment.
Overseas presence helps to keep
important infrastructure available and
ready in times of crisis. Although
the size of our permanent overseas
presence has decreased significantly
in recent years because of changes
in the international environment, the
importance of these forces has not
diminished. They provide visible
proof of our commitment to defend
American interests and those of our
allies and friends.

With fewer US forces
permanently stationed overseas, we
must proportionately increase our
capability to project forces abroad.
The existence of a credible power
**projection capability complements**
our overseas presence in acting as a
deterrent to potential adversaries. It
further provides our national leaders
greater flexibility in employing
military force.

##### Components of the Strategy:

**Peacetime engagement**
describes a broad range of
noncombat activities undertaken by
our Armed Forces that demonstrate
commitment, improve collective
military capabilities, promote
democratic ideals, relieve suffering,


and enhance regional stability. The
elements of peacetime engagement
include military-to-military contacts,
nation assistance, security
assistance, humanitarian operations,
counterdrug and counterterrorism,
and peacekeeping.

In concert with the other
elements of US national power, our
military capabilities serve to deter
**aggression and prevent conflict**
by convincing potential adversaries
that their objectives will be denied
and that their aggression will be
decisively defeated. Deterring
nuclear attack against the United
States remains a critical task for our
military. This second component of
the strategy is a product of many
concepts and programs which
include nuclear deterrence, regional
alliances, crisis response, arms
control, confidence-building
measures, noncombatant evacuation
operations, sanctions enforcement,
and peace enforcement.

Being ready to fight and
**win the Nation’s wars remains our**
foremost responsibility and the prime
consideration governing all our
military activities. This ability serves
as the ultimate guarantor of our vital
interests and is the fundamental
reason that our Nation has raised
and sustained its military forces.

In war, the employment of
US forces will follow these
principles:

(1) set clear objectives and
apply decisive force;

(2) project the necessary
power to the theater of operations;

(3)fightcombinedwithallies


-----

force structure, other needs, such as
forces to provide adequate overseas
presence, space capabilities to
support a wide range of activities in
peace and war, and secure nuclear
forces for deterrence, have also
been taken into account.

The combat forces and
supporting capabilities are built on
five fundamental foundations. The
first is the high quality men and
**women who comprise our military**
forces. There is no greater factor
for our military success which is why
we are working hard to recruit and
retain quality people through realistic
training and a good quality of life.

The second foundation is
**readiness. Maintaining high**
readiness of our forces is a
prerequisite to deterring aggression
and responding to crises. Today we
are placing increased emphasis on
joint readiness by strengthening joint
doctrine and education, developing
joint readiness measures, and
improving joint and coalition training.

The third foundation consists
of various force **enhancements.**
Improvements are already
underway to our strategic mobility
capability, including airlift, sealift, and
prepositioning. Continued
improvements are also required in
battlefield surveillance, our global
command and control system, and
the ability to employ precision
weapons.

The fourth foundation is
**modernization, which is vital to**
preserve the essential combat edge
that US forces now possess and to
ensure future readiness. Due to
budget constraints, major new
investments will be pursued only


where there is a substantial payoff.
Existing weapons systems and
platforms will continue to be updated
to take advantage of rapid
technological advances.

The fifth force-building
foundation is balance. Despite its
smaller size, our military must retain
an appropriate mix of forces and
capabilities to provide the versatility
to handle today’s challenges and to
provide a hedge against
unanticipated threats. Combat
forces must be balanced with
capable supporting forces, active
duty forces must be balanced with
appropriate Reserve capabilities,
and force structure must be balanced
with infrastructure.

##### Conclusion

The national military strategy
of **flexible and** **selective**
**engagement addresses the**
challenges and opportunities of the
next century. US global
responsibilities require global
capabilities, despite a regional focus
in implementing the strategy. We
must apply all our strengths and
work with allies and friends to assure
stability in a troubled and complex
world. This means our smaller
forces must be made stronger and
more versatile but remain built on the
same strong foundation of
outstanding people.


-----

## Introduction


ith the end of the Cold
War, international
relations have entered a

# W

new era. New democracies are
evolving within the former Soviet
Union and Europe; old rivalries are
being transformed. For the United
States this unsettled period provides
both opportunities and risks as we
seek to promote our values and
protect our interests worldwide.

In _A National Security_
_Strategy of Engagement and_
_Enlargement the President_
described our security objectives
and provided the Armed Forces the
guidance to shape our military
strategy. Drawing also from the


guidance developed in the BottomUp Review, this military strategy
outlines how best to use US military
capabilities to help achieve national
goals. This military strategy of
flexible and selective engagement
prescribes a selective employment
of military capabilities in peace and
the use of decisive military force in


war to achieve our national military
objectives in this new international
environment.

National military strategy
addresses the main dangers which
threaten US security interests,
identifies the national military
objectives, determines the military
tasks we must accomplish to achieve
these objectives, and examines the
capabilities and forces required.

This is a strategy which
applies day-to-day to guide our
activities in the near term, even when
we are at peace. But let there be no
doubt about one fundamental fact:
military forces exist — are organized,
trained, and equipped — first and
foremost to fight and win America’s
wars. Within this overriding
requirement, this strategy also
embodies a number of associated
priorities.


-----

## International Environment


e have recently passed
from a longstanding

# W bipolar order to a still

unsettled multipolar world. This was
a welcome development, bringing
promising opportunities to advance
our interests and values but also
ushering in new and diverse
c h a l l e n g e s .

Today the United States
faces no immediate threat to its
national survival. However, global
interdependence and transparency,
coupled with our worldwide security
interests, make it difficult to ignore
troubling developments almost
anywhere on earth. In fact, in the 5
years since the fall of the Berlin Wall
we have deployed our forces to
assist in security or humanitarian
crises about 40 times — a far greater
pace than in the preceding 20 years.
This level of activity, a measure
reflective of these unsettled times,
suggests a continuing need for
flexible and robust military
capabilities.

It is also true that the
intentions of other nations can
change, sometimes very rapidly, and
thus our national military strategy
must account for the military
capabilities of other nations as well
as their current intentions.

In surveying the
international environment, the
national security strategy as
articulated by the President
recognizes four principal dangers
which our military, in combination
with other elements of national


power, must address: regional
instability, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction,
transnational dangers, and the
dangers to democracy and reform
in the former Soviet Union, Eastern
Europe, and elsewhere.

##### REGIONAL INSTABILITY

egional instabilities are, and
will remain, a recurring

### R

challenge, from nations that explode
into internal conflict, as happened in
Yugoslavia, Somalia, and Rwanda,
to attacks against neighboring states,
as we saw when Iraq invaded
Kuwait. Many antagonisms that
were buried by the frozen
relationships of the Cold War have
now surfaced, adding to those that
carried over from that era.


The revival of age-old
religious, ethnic, and territorial
quarrels, in many cases
compounded by the more
contemporary tensions stemming
from the disintegration of the Soviet
Union, may present an even wider
threat: the risk that they may engulf
neighboring states. Among the
former Soviet republics, in
theBalkans, in the Maghreb, and
throughout Africa, dangerous
instabilities litter the landscape.
Additional challenges are posed by
Iraq, Iran, and North Korea, each
of which is an imminent threat to the
security of its neighbors and region.

##### WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION


### T


he threat of nuclear attack
against the American


Iraqi forces continue to threaten regional stability


-----

homeland today has diminished but
there are still thousands of nuclear
warheads and strategic delivery
systems in the world. Despite the
internal political and economic
changes underway in the states of
the former Soviet Union, we must
remain mindful of these capabilities.
For as long as these weapons exist,
they will remain a threat to our
security.

Especially troubling is the
prospect that some of these weapons
or their component materials might
be stolen or otherwise acquired by
third parties. Thus, the security and
accountability of all nuclear
warheads, weapon systems, and
materials remain a grave concern.

Indeed, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction —
nuclear, chemical, and biological —
is one of the most troubling dangers
we face. The ongoing efforts to
obtain such weapons by a number
of countries present great and
growing risks for the United States
and its allies. The continuing
diffusion of missile delivery


technology is increasing the risks we
face. Even the prospect of a hostile
regional power or terrorist group
gaining access to nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons contributes to
regional insecurities and increases the
difficulty of settling disputes
peacefully.

##### TRANSNATIONAL DANGERS

ncreasing global
interdependence has made

### I

every nation more vulnerable to
growing transnational threats.
Spreading diseases, fleeing refugees,
international crime syndicates, and
drug lords are several of the more
serious transnational threats that
bleed across our own and other
nations’ borders. What gives these
threats unique character is that
combating them lies beyond the
reach of any single government. But
the damage they might inflict on our
health, children, prosperity, and
societies could be significant.


##### DANGERS TO DEMOCRACY AND REFORM

he community of democratic
nations and free-market

### T

economies is growing throughout the
world — a trend consistent with
important US interests. The United
States is committed to supporting
nations transitioning into this
community and therefore will assist
in efforts to defend against threats
to democratic and economic reform
in the former Soviet Union, Eastern
Europe, and elsewhere. However,
the transition process in these
emerging democracies remains
susceptible to setbacks and
reversals. The failure of democratic
reform in the newly independent
states, and particularly in Russia
itself, would not necessarily return
us to the bipolar standoff that
characterized the Cold War, but it
would in all likelihood adversely
affect the United States and its
interests.


Turning the armed
forces of the former
Soviet Union into a
professional military
institution under
democratic civilian
control remains one
of the greatest
challenges facing the
world today.


-----

|Col1|National Military Objectives|
|---|---|
|||


ince the birth of the Nation
our military strategy has
been anchored to the same

# S

core purpose: to protect our Nation
and its interests, while maintaining
fundamental American values intact.
Throughout the latter half of the
century this has required a strategy
of global engagement. This
engagement is no less required
today, even though our national
military strategy has continued to
evolve.

In addressing the four
dangers discussed earlier, US
military strategy must be intrinsically
constructive, proactive, and
preventive, helping to reduce the
sources of conflict and at the same
time blocking the effective use of
force by potential adversaries. In


military terms, we have translated
these purposes as two
complementary objectives:
promoting stability and thwarting
aggression.

##### PROMOTE STABILITY

e must not expect an easy
transition to the stable,

### W

multipolar world we seek. The last
transition of such magnitude, at the
end of World War II, took years and
saw numerous conflicts; and the
form of that stability posed a threat
to our Nation for nearly 40 years.

A primary thrust of our
strategy must  be  to  promote a


long-term stability that is
advantageous to the United States.
There is ample historical precedent
in this century that regional instability
in military, economic, and political
terms can escalate into global
conflict. Our strategy further
promotes stability in order to
establish the conditions under which
democracy can take hold and
expand around the world. We intend
to use the daily, peacetime activities
of the Armed Forces to pursue this
effort. US forces stationed overseas,
as well as those temporarily
deployed, participate with allies at
all levels in cooperative and defensive
security arrangements that help
preclude conflict and foster the
peaceful enlargement of the
community of free market nations.


-----

##### This is a period of great promise but also of great uncertainty ... Without our leadership and engagement aboard, threats will fester and our opportunities will narrow.

 A National Security Strategy of Engagement and Enlargement


heavily committed elsewhere.
Consequently, we must have forces
of sufficient size and capabilities, in
concert with regional allies, to defeat
potential enemies in major conflicts
that may occur nearly simultaneously
in two different regions. Maintaining
this capability also provides a hedge
against the emergence of a hostile
coalition or a more powerful or
resurgent adversary.


In carefully selected cases,
where our interests so dictate, we
must be prepared in peacetime to
use our vast capabilities to transport,
communicate, support, assist, and
manage to address our regional
security needs and counter emerging
instabilities. When more significant
interests are at stake and our
capabilities would make a difference,
we must also be prepared to deploy
forces, usually in conjunction with
allies and friends, but alone if we
must.

##### THWART AGGRESSION

he most serious measure of

### T engagement is our

commitment to protect US extended
interests and our allies. We will be
prepared to respond promptly in the
Persian Gulf area, in Northeast Asia,
and other regions where US interests
or allies are threatened. Through this
preparation we seek to prevent
conflict and reassure allies and
friends of our commitment and
capabilities.

Should war nevertheless


occur, our forces, in concert with
those of our allies and friends, must
be capable of defeating any potential
adversary and establishing the
decisive conditions which lead to
long-term solutions.

Because the United States
has important national interests
throughout the world, we must avoid
any situation in which a hostile power
in one region might be tempted to
take advantage when US forces are


The Demilitarized Zone -- a constant reminder of the need
for deterrent forces on the Korean Peninsula


-----

## Strategy


he end of the Cold War has
further tightened the close,
complementary relationship

# T

that must exist between military
activities and other elements of US
national power. The President’s
national security strategy describes
this relationship and prescribes a set
of integrated regional approaches to
meet US interests in different parts
of the globe. The strategic military
objectives described above will thus
be achieved in concert with other
elements of power and by military
activities which may vary from region
to region depending on US interests
and particular conditions.

This strategy of flexible and
selective engagement comprises
three sets of tasks: remaining
constructively engaged in peacetime;
acting to deter aggression and
prevent conflict; and fighting and
winning our Nation’s wars when
called upon. To facilitate performing
these tasks, we continue to refine the
two fundamental and complementary
strategic concepts of overseas
presence and power projection.
Our strategy for accomplishing our
national military objectives is best
understood by examining these two
strategic concepts and the three
components of the strategy:
peacetime engagement, deterrence
and conflict prevention, and
warfighting.


##### Strategic Concepts

 OVERSEAS PRESENCE

verseas presence forces,

### O including some tailored for

specific missions, perform a variety
of activities that promote stability and
prevent conflict. Additionally,
through overseas presence we
maintain mobile, combat-ready
forces capable of responding to a
wide range of threats throughout the
world. US forces overseas provide
visible proof of our commitment to
defend American interests with our
allies and friends worldwide.
Overseas presence is not a crutch
for friends who refuse to bear their
share of the burden; rather it is an


essential mechanism to support our
fundamental interests in forward
regions where the support of these
interests can best be developed.

Overseas presence takes
the form of permanently stationed
forces and forces temporarily
deployed, some on a regular,
rotational basis. In addition, we
maintain an overseas presence
through a broad program of routine
air, ground, and naval deployments,
as well as various contingency
operations.

In accordance with our
security needs, the bulk of our
overseas presence forces are
deployed in Western Europe, Japan,
and South Korea, with smaller
capabilities elsewhere in the Pacific,
the Middle East and Southwest Asia,
and Latin America. Approximately
100,000 US military members serve
in Europe in ground forces
consisting of substantial elements of
two Army divisions along with a
corps headquarters, associated
corps troops, and other supporting
elements; in air forces consisting of


US and Egyptian forces train together in Exercies Bright Star


-----

overseas forces, the ability to project
tailored forces through rapid,
strategic mobility gives national
leaders additional time for
consultation and increased options
in response to potential crises and
conflicts.

Our ability to rapidly project
power worldwide depends on four
strategic mobility enhancements:
increased airlift capability, additional
prepositioning of heavy equipment
afloat and ashore, increased surge
capacity of our sealift, and improved
readiness and responsiveness of the
Ready Reserve Force.

Power projection is
essential for pforming the required
tasks of all components of the
strategy, however, it is most critical
in the deterrence and conflict
prevention and warfighting portions
of our military strategy.

Aerial refueling one of the keys to
global power
projection


about two and one-third fighter
wings; and in a Mediterranean naval
ashore presence sufficient to support
a carrier battle group and an
amphibious ready group.

In Northeast Asia we also
retain close to 100,000 troops. In
South Korea they serve in one Army
division and one wing of combat
aircraft. In Japan we maintain a
Marine Expeditionary Force, an
Army special forces battalion, one
and one-half wings of combat
aircraft, and forward deploy an
aircraft carrier, amphibious assault
ship, and their support ships.

In the Middle East we
maintain only a small presence. The
bulk of our overseas presence
commitment in this area, as well as
in Southwest Asia, is reflected in the
significant periodic deployments of
forces, to include participation in
contingency operations. Our forces
deploy to Africa to participate in
humanitarian or peace operations as
national interests dictate. In Latin
America small numbers of our
Armed Forces help to promote
democratic growth in many
countries and work to halt the import
of drugs into our country.

Our overseas presence
helps to keep important infrastructure
available and ready. Permanently
stationed forces maintain support
and basing that are vital for receiving
reinforcement and for throughput
and onward movement in time of
crisis and conflict.

Although the size of our
forces permanently stationed
overseas and the size of some


deployments have decreased in
recent years, and in Europe
dramatically, their importance has not
diminished. They signal our
commitment to the region in which
they are deployed and are a visible
reminder to those who would
threaten our interests.

##### POWER PROJECTION

With fewer US forces
permanently stationed overseas, we
must increase our capability to
project forces abroad. Credible
power projection capability
complements our overseas presence
in acting as a deterrent to potential
adversaries. Effective power
projection capabilities also provide
greater flexibility in employing
military force. Coupled with


-----

##### Components of the humanitarian and peace op
erations such as in Haiti.

##### Strategy

The success of these operations hinges on mutual
trust, effective

##### PEACETIME

communications and inter
##### ENGAGEMENT

operability, and doctrinal
familiarity, precisely the

verseas presence and results we seek from

### O power projection provide the ongoing military-to
basis for executing the tasks required military contacts.
by our strategy. The first group of
these tasks, peacetime engagement, These programs are also a
describes a broad range of non- platform for imparting influence and
combat activities undertaken by our democratic values to militaries in
Armed Forces that demonstrate reforming or newly democratic
commitment, improve collective nations. The militaries of Central and
military capabilities, promote Eastern Europe are a particular
democratic ideals, relieve suffering, priority. US military-to-military Joint
and in many other ways enhance Contact Teams are at work in twelve
regional stability. On any given day, of these countries today and we are
tens of thousands of the men and expanding this program to other
women of our Armed Forces are regions this year.
engaged worldwide across the range
of peacetime engagement activities. Combined training exercises

provide particularly useful militaryto-military contacts. Their benefits

##### Military-to-Military are many: combined training, joint

readiness and interoperability, and

##### Contacts

military professionalism. Our
sponsorship of such exercises also

Military-to-military contact

helps to shape our basing,

programs are one of the most

prepositioning, logistic support, and

effective instruments in our efforts to

security agreements.

create a more stable security order.
Today there are opportunities to

We also maintain an active

forge new and more cooperative

exchange program between military

security relationships both with

units and regularly assign individual

former adversaries and with

personnel to work for limited

formerly nonaligned nations.

periods with other armed forces.

Moreover, there has been a vast

Exchanges of personnel, both as

increase in our participation in

students and teachers, at military

multinational operations whose

academies and professional military

members include many

schools foster understanding

nontraditional  allies,  as  we

between our respective military

saw in the Gulf War and in recent

establishments.


Military contacts at all levels promote
understanding

##### Nation Assistance

Our forces participate
selectively in a variety of activities
to assist friendly nations as they
combat lawlessness, subversion, and
insurgency. These efforts are
carefully orchestrated to reinforce
the host nation’s developmental
programs. Specific activities that
involve our Armed Forces include
bilateral and multilateral exercises,
civil-military operations, intelligence
and communications sharing, and
logistic support.

##### Security Assistance

Security assistance involves
the selective use of cooperative
programs with allied and friendly
armed forces that furnish these
countries with the means to defend
themselves from aggression and to
fight alongside US forces in a
coalition effort. Providing vital
training and US-manufactured
weapons systems increases the
access and influence of the US
military and improves the
interoperability of potential coalition
members. In addition, these
contacts


-----

US forces provide medical care
during operations in Somalia

help to build and solidify
relationships with emerging
democracies and security partners.
Security assistance also deters
aggression in unstable regions and
provides a cost-effective alternative
to maintaining larger US forces in the
region.

A very important avenue for
interaction between US military
personnel and their foreign
counterparts is the International
Military Education and Training
(IMET) program. Last year,
students from more than 100 foreign
countries studied at US military
schools, learning not only technical
skills but also gaining a broader
appreciation for American values
and perspectives.

Our regional commandersin-chief are unanimous in stating that
security assistance programs, along
with military-to-military contacts,
produce gains that far exceed their
costs and we seek to reenergize and
expand these important programs.


##### Humanitarian Operations

Our Armed Forces stand
ready to participate in humanitarian
and disaster relief operations at home
and abroad. The US military can
offer unique capabilities in terms of
logistics (transport, supply, and
distribution), communications, and
security. Often, our greatest
contribution to these operations
resides in our ability to rapidly
respond when more traditional relief
agencies are overwhelmed. After
these organizations are “up and
running,” military forces can be
withdrawn. A prime example of this
concept is the recent US assistance
operation in Rwanda.

##### Counterdrug and Counterterrorism

The Armed Forces,
working in close cooperation with
law enforcement agencies, will use
all means authorized by the President
and the Congress to halt the flow of
illegal drugs into this country. We
will also act both unilaterally and in
concert with security partners to fight
international terrorism.

##### Peacekeeping

We remain prepared to
support traditional peacekeeping
operations on a case-by-case basis.
When warranted by circumstances
and national interests, this support
may include participation of US
combat units. When appropriate,
we prefer to share the burden of
peacekeeping with allies and friends.


When the United States
does participate, we will follow the
guidelines of Presidential Decision
Directive 25, to include seeking a
clear delineation of the objectives of
each operation, ensuring an
unbroken chain of command to the
President, and ensuring rules of
engagement to protect our forces
and permit the proper execution of
assigned tasks. The capabilities we
provide will be carefully tailored,
usually to reinforce and supplement
the resources of our international
partners. We recognize that peace
operations are often different from
traditional military operations in the
tasks and capabilities they require of
our Armed Forces. We are
continuing to develop appropriate
doctrine and training for these
operations.

Reserve component
elements will take on increased
responsibility for participating in and
supporting peacekeeping missions.

##### DETERRENCE AND CONFLICT PREVENTION

Deterrence and conflict
prevention, the second component
of the strategy, is a combination of
efforts to deter threats to our
security and interests as well as a
series of other actions we can take
to restore stability, security, and
adherence to international law. Our
military strategy envisions vigorous
efforts in each of the following tasks
in order to secure our interests and
reduce the potential for conflict.


-----

adjusting its missions, command
arrangements, and forces
accordingly. Implementing the
Combined Joint Task Force concept
will facilitate NATO’s participation
in non-traditional, out-of-area
operations such as peace operations,
sanctions enforcement, and
humanitarian assistance. It will also
enable NATO to provide timely
operational support to other bodies
such as the United Nations and the
Western European Union.

Today, many of our former
adversaries have expressed a desire
to join NATO — an indicator of
NATO’s success in adapting to meet
new security challenges. More than
20 nations, including Russia and
other former Soviet republics, have
already joined NATO’s Partnership
for Peace program. These countries
seek to align their defense programs
and policies more closely with
NATO’s — and to forge stronger
ties to the West. The United States
fully supports and participates in the
Partnership for Peace initiative which
both fosters regional stability and is
essential to the eventual enlargement
of the NATO alliance.

Five of the seven US mutual
defense treaties are with partners in
the Asia-Pacific region, helping to
underpin the relative stability of an
area that is home to the world’s
fastest growing economies. We will
remain engaged with the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations, the
sponsor of the largest security forum
(involving 18 countries) in that

region.

In Northeast Asia our
bilateral security relationship with
Japan remains fundamental to US


##### Nuclear Deterrence

The highest priority of our
military strategy is to deter a nuclear
attack against our Nation and allies.
Our survival and the freedom of
action that we need to protect
extended national interests depend
upon strategic and nonstrategic
nuclear forces and their associated
command, control, and
communications.

We have recently
concluded a comprehensive Nuclear
Posture Review that looked into the
next century and validated those
systems we will need for the
foreseeable future. Though we are
continuing to pursue reductions
under the Strategic Arms Reduction
Treaty (START) I and II, we still
need to maintain a survivable triad
of strategic delivery systems. This
serves both to deter still very
powerful strategic arsenals and to
convince possible adversaries that
any attempt to seek a nuclear
advantage would be futile. We still
need to maintain a mix of forward
deployed and deployable
nonstrategic nuclear weapons, both
to provide deterrent coverage over
our allies, and because extended
deterrence, in many cases, is a
decisive factor in our non
proliferation efforts.

##### Regional Alliances

Our regional strategies, and
the global strategy of which they are
a part, are built on the foundation of
strong and effective alliances. Our
goal of a stable, multipolar world
hinges on both the ability to preserve
and adapt our existing alliances to
challenges we confront today and


anticipate tomorrow and on the
capacity to develop new
relationships as necessary.

American forces in Europe
continue to demonstrate a strong
commitment to this area of significant
national interests. In addition, we
provide NATO with key leadership,
critical intelligence and
communications support, and much
of the nuclear force that guarantees
European security. Our capability
to conduct military operations is
sustained through frequent exercises
and interoperability training that
ensures the effectiveness of
coalitions both in and beyond the
treaty area.

The end of the Cold War
has seen NATO’s military focus
evolve from deterring aggression by
the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact to
dealing with today’s diverse security
challenges. The Alliance has
embraced a new strategic concept
that recognizes the changes in the
geostrategic environment and is

The strategic triad provides the
foundation for deterrence


-----

US soldiers train with Partnership for Peace cooperation
partners in Exercise Cooperative Bridge '94


security. Our forces in Japan are a
visible demonstration of our
commitment to the peace and
stability of the entire region and are
available for short-notice
deployment throughout the theater.
Frequent combined US and
Japanese military exercises continue
to enhance professional interaction
between our militaries.

The defense of the Republic
of Korea (ROK) will remain a key
element of US strategy in this region.
Our forward stationed forces there
represent an unambiguous
demonstration of that commitment.
We will continue to conduct a
vigorous exercise program with
ROK forces to ensure that we are
ready and able to work together and
to reinforce the theater, if necessary.

In Southwest Asia, we must
remain alert to the dangers posed by
a still aggressive Iraq and a
revolutionary Iran that continues to
fan the flames of social, political, and
economic dissent among neighboring
states. US commitment to peace
and security in the critical Persian
Gulf region is demonstrated through


bilateral defense cooperation
agreements, security assistance,
prepositioning, forward presence,
and combined exercises. These
activities in a region vital to US and
global security and prosperity assist
our friends in improving their selfdefense while deterring aggression.

We will continue to support
the deepening of democracy
throughout the Western
Hemisphere. We are strengthening
our relationships with Latin America
and Mexico and are working with
the Organization of American States
to promote stability and mutual
security.

##### Crisis Response

Should our resolve to
protect vital national interests be
challenged, we must be able to
respond rapidly through a wide
spectrum of deterrent options and
preventive measures. We intend to
respond initially to crises using our
forces stationed and deployed
overseas but will be prepared to
deploy all necessary forces to


threatened areas as we
demonstrated in October 1994
when Saddam Hussein once again
moved forces south and threatened
Kuwait. Critical to such
reinforcement requirements are seaand land-based prepositioned
equipment sets, enhanced airlift and
sealift capabilities, and air refueling
forces. Rapid power projection,
from the United States to overseas
areas and between regions, remains
key to crisis response.

##### Arms Control

Arms control efforts
contribute significantly to our
security by limiting and reducing the
number and types of weapons that
can threaten us and by reducing
regional arms buildups that can raise
tensions and risks. Among the
fundamental arms control
agreements are the Anti-Ballistic
Missile Treaty, START I and II, the
Treaty on Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces (INF), and the
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
The Treaty on Conventional Armed
Forces in Europe is a landmark
agreement that has significantly
reduced conventional forces for the
first time in our generation and has
greatly enhanced security in this area
vital to US interests.

Recognizing the
contributions that arms control
agreements can make to national
security, we seek to broaden the
range of arms control efforts to
address chemical and biological
weapons. When implemented, the
Chemical Weapons Convention will
mandate the destruction of all
chemical weapons and their
production facilities.


-----

##### Confidence-Building Measures

Our military forces will
continue to be directly involved in
confidence-building efforts to foster
openness and transparency in
military affairs. Implementation of
Vienna Document 1994 is a concrete
example of such efforts which
include information exchanges,
exercise limits and observations, and
demonstrations of military capability.
Agreements governing Dangerous
Military Activities and regional
initiatives, such as the Open Skies
regime that permits aerial overflight
of participating nations’ territories,
directly support our goal of
preventing conflict.

##### Noncombatant Evacuation Operations

The US Government is
responsible for protecting the lives
and safety of its citizens abroad.
Often, that task falls to our Armed
Forces. When conditions of
violence or disorder in foreign
countries threaten American lives,
US forces, in support of the
Department of State, will use all
appropriate means to extract
American citizens promptly and
safely.

##### Sanctions Enforcement

Military forces are
increasingly used to enforce
economic sanctions resulting from
national policy decisions and UN
Security Council resolutions. US
forces will participate in operations


Forces training for emergency
evacuation operations

to search, divert, delay, or disrupt
transport vessels and to assist in the
compliance of guidelines set by either
US or UN authorities. Effective
enforcement requires efficient
coordination of military operations
at sea, on land, and in the air and
space.

##### Peace Enforcement

On occasion, US forces
may be directed to participate in
peace enforcement operations or
other operations which stand in the
gray zone between peace and war.
These operations are characterized
by the use of force or the threat of
the use of force, and are interwoven
with diplomatic and economic
efforts, often involving both
governmental and nongovernmental
organizations. Such actions may be
undertaken to maintain or restore
international peace and security, or
to respond to acts of aggression.


We continue to incorporate
the lessons learned from our recent
experiences in Iraq, Somalia, and the
former Yugoslavia. For example,
when significant US forces are
directed to participate in a major
peace enforcement operation likely
to involve combat, our guidelines will
continue to be to:

     - Commit sufficient forces to
achieve clearly defined objectives;

    - Plan to achieve those
objectives decisively; and

    - Reassess and adjust, as
necessary, the size, composition, and
disposition of our forces to achieve
our objectives.

Application of these
guidelines is clearly exemplified by
our Operation Uphold Democracy
in Haiti commencing in September
1994.

During peace enforcement
operations, command and control
arrangements are critical. Ordinarily
in such instances, a US command
will be established or the mission will
be conducted through a competent,
established regional organization
such as NATO or an ad hoc
coalition. The greater the US military
contribution and the greater the
likelihood of combat, the more
inclined we will be to lead the
operation. The President, however,
will never relinquish command
authority over US forces.


-----

Adaptive force packaging responds to the Joint Task Force
Commnader's requirements


provide the necessary intelligence,
logistics, and communications
support, as well as capabilities to
protect our forces during
deployment.

We continue to build on the
lessons learned in Operation Desert
Storm to strengthen our power
projection capabilities. During the
September 1994 deployment of
forces to Haiti, roll-on/roll-off
shipping was proved exceptionally
ready and significantly more reliable
as a result of post-Gulf War
improvements. Early access to
combat, combat support, and
combat service support capabilities
in the Reserve component is also
vital to meet our power projection
requirements for any major regional
contingency. We have demonstrated
in recent operations in both Haiti and
Kuwait that we have the ability to
gain this prompt access to the
Reserves, clearly indicating
improved wartime capabilities.

##### Fight Combined and Fight Joint

While we maintain the
unilateral capability to wage decisive
campaigns to protect US and
multinational security interests, our
Armed Forces will most often fight
in concert with regional allies and
friends, as coalitions can decisively
increase combat power and lead to
a more rapid and favorable outcome
to the conflict. Combined
operations capitalize on our
peacetime training, help generate and
sustain international support, and
enable our forces to provide the
high-leverage capabilities required to
achieve decisive outcomes against
any adversary.


##### FIGHT AND WIN

he ability of US Armed
Forces to fight and win, the

### T

third component of our strategy,
serves as the ultimate guarantor of
our vital interests. This ability is
crucial to deter aggression and
prevent conflict, and if challenged, it
assures that we will in fact prevail.
Being ready to fight and win remains
our foremost responsibility and the
prime consideration governing all our
military activities. It is for this reason,
fundamentally, that our Nation has
raised and sustained its Armed
Forces.


In war, our use of military
force will follow the principles
outlined below.

##### Clear Objectives — Decisive Force

In any application of force,
military objectives will be clearly


defined to support our national
political aims in the conflict. We
intend to commit sufficient force to
achieve these objectives in a prompt
and decisive manner.

##### Wartime Power Projection

If we have forces deployed
to the threatened area when crisis
turns to conflict, these forces will
assist our regional allies in creating a
viable defense to halt the invasion
rapidly and will form the basis for
the subsequent buildup of combat
power needed to defeat the
aggressor decisively. But we
anticipate that, for the most part, we
will project air, land, and sea forces
from the United States and, in some
cases, from overseas areas, to
augment forward-deployed forces
or to establish US presence in the
theater of operations. This power
projection could ultimately entail the
transport of large numbers of
personnel and their equipment. Such
an effort requires detailed plans to


-----

flow of follow-on ground and landbased air contingents. These forces
assist in providing protective cover
from air, land, sea, or missile
intrusion. By ensuring freedom of
the seas and controlling strategic
choke points, naval and marine
forces provide strategic freedom of
maneuver and thus enhance
deployment and sustainment of joint
forces in theater.

Air forces must be capable
of conducting military operations to
gain and maintain control of the
skies, holding vital enemy capabilities
at risk throughout the theater, and
helping to destroy the enemy’s ability
to wage war. Air superiority is
essential so we can quickly move
forces into theater and attack the
enemy at will. Air control provides
the joint force numerous operational
and tactical advantages while
facilitating land and naval maneuver.
Air forces provide sustained, precise
firepower, reconnaissance and
surveillance, critical refueling, and
global lift to rapidly deploy and
sustain joint forces in theater.

Space forces play an
increasingly important role in
prosecuting modern warfare. They
provide global and battlefield
surveillance, ballistic missile
warning, precise navigation,
secure communications,
weather, and intelligence
information.
Space assets facilitate


Modern warfare requires
US forces to fight as a joint team
whether operating unilaterally or as
part of an international coalition.
Accordingly, each of the Services
provides trained and ready forces to
support the combatant
commanders’ warfighting plans and
operations. Success in joint and
combined military operations
requires bringing to bear, at the right
times and places, the unique and
complementary capabilities of each
of the Services.

Each Service has both a role
and primary and collateral functions
to execute, for which it must train,
organize, and equip its forces. Land
forces are mainly involved with
prompt and sustained combat
operations on land; naval and marine
forces with operations at or from the
sea; air forces with military
operations in the air. Each of our
Services leverages the benefits of
unhindered access to space.

Land  forces  must  be
capable of deplaoying rapidly and,
if  necessary,  executing  forcible
entry  o seize  the  initiative and
close  with  and  destroy  enemy
forces   through   synchronized
maneuver   and   precision  fire
throughout the breadth and depth
of the battle area.  They ust be
capable  of  achieving operational
and  tactical  freedom  of
maneuver and be sufficiently
agile to achieve their
objectives before


opponents can effect
countermeasures. Land forces must
possess the capabilities necessary to
dominate the land battle. In addition,
they must provide the combat
support and combat service support
necessary to sustain the land battle
as well as provide critical elements
of support to joint forces deployed
in theater. Ultimately, land forces
can occupy territory, control
populations, and provide on-thescene assurance that political
objectives will be met.

Naval and marine forces
must be capable of conducting naval
and amphibious warfighting
operations. Forward-deployed
naval expeditionary forces can
respond immediately to a crisis,
execute forcible entry or reinforce
other forward-deployed elements,
and through prompt action help halt
an enemy offensive and enable the


Services leverages the benefits of

Air forces provide sustained, precise

unhindered access to space.

firepower, reconnaissance and
surveillance, critical refueling, and

Land  forces  must  be

global lift to rapidly deploy and

capable of deplaoying rapidly and,

sustain joint forces in theater.

if  necessary,  executing  forcible
entry  o seize  the  initiative and

Space forces play an

close  with  and  destroy  enemy

increasingly important role in

forces   through   synchronized

prosecuting modern warfare. They

maneuver   and   precision  fire

provide global and battlefield

throughout the breadth and depth

surveillance, ballistic missile

of the battle area.  They ust be

warning, precise navigation,

capable  of  achieving operational

secure communications,

and  tactical  freedom  of

weather, and intelligence

maneuver and be sufficiently

information.

agile to achieve their

Space assets facilitate

objectives before

Joint warfighting requires the balanced
contributions of all the Armed Services


-----

Interactive information sharing is key to modern battlefield success


effective command and control and
enhance the joint utilization of
our land, sea, and air forces.

Special operations forces
from all three military departments
provide combatant commanders
and deployed forces with unique
capabilities to conduct direct action,
special reconnaissance,
unconventional warfare,
counterterrorism, psychological
operations, and civil affairs activities.
Properly employed, special
operations forces provide
commanders capabilities that extend
their vision of the battlefield, increase
their flexibility, and enhance their
initiative. These forces will be fully
integrated into military operations by
the combatant commanders.

##### Win the Information War

The remarkable leverage
attainable from modern
reconnaissance, intelligence
collection and analysis, and highspeed data processing and


transmission warrants special
emphasis. The Services and
combatant commands require such
fused information systems. These
systems enhance our ability to
dominate warfare. We must assure
that this leverage works for us and
against our adversaries. New
doctrine is being developed, and
training and control programs are
underway, to ensure that
advantages, built on the early
success in Operation Desert Storm,
are being exploited.

##### Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction

Potential adversaries should
recognize our capability to dominate
any escalation of conflict should
weapons of mass destruction be
employed against us. In addition,
we will maintain and strengthen our
defensive capabilities against such
weapons. We continue efforts to
prevent the use of mass destruction
weapons and make preparations to
operate effectively in environments


marked by biological, chemical, or
radioactive contamination.

##### Two Major Regional Contingency Focus

When entering any regional
conflict, we will fully apply all the
principles addressed above to
ensure decisive victory. At the same
time, however, we will remain aware
that risks and dangers remain in
other regions. While projecting
forces to one contingency, we will
be enhancing the readiness of other
assets to handle a challenge
elsewhere. Some high-leverage
capabilities could be used in one
major regional contingency and then
reallocated and redeployed to
another as conditions permit. Other
capabilities essential to fighting and
winning the first conflict will remain
in the theater where they are
committed.

##### Force Generation

We will quickly generate
combat power in wartime. Active
forces engaged overseas in lower
priority missions may be recalled,
reorganized, retrained, and
redeployed. Normally our Armed
Forces will withdraw from
operations other than war when the
security situation is stabilized and
other organizations are prepared to
assume responsibility for relief or
security. In times of crisis, we will
need to accelerate this process. As
our first forces react to a major
regional crisis, we will begin actions
to ensure forces are ready to meet a
second contingency should it arise.
Activities not involving critical US
interests will be turned over to the


-----

United Nations or other responsible
regional security organizations while
we attend to higher priority taskings.

Substantial Reserve forces
will be committed to combat and
combat support missions early in any
major regional contingency. To
backfill active forces elsewhere and
to prepare for unforeseen
contingencies, some Reserve
component forces can expect to be
mobilized immediately and to remain
on active duty throughout the
conflict, even though they are not
directly involved in operations.

##### Win the Peace

In the wake of any major
theater conflict, our forces will likely
encounter numerous demands to
attend to the needs of the indigenous
population. This may well include
activities such as providing


humanitarian relief and nation
assistance that are included in the
peacetime engagement component
of our military strategy. Planning for
post-conflict operations will begin
prior to and continue throughout any
conflict. Close coordination and
cooperation between military and
other governmental and
nongovernmental agencies will be
particularly critical during the
transition period following war as
some functions are transferred to
non-military organizations and while
our forces are being redeployed and
reconstituted.


-----

## Military Capabilities


Our military forces are being
sized and structured using scenariobased planning and assessments
initiated during the Bottom-Up
Review. Although no one can
predict with certainty where the next
conflict will occur, the use of
plausible, illustrative scenarios
against postulated threat forces
enables comparisons and analyses
to determine the relative values of
different forces and capabilities
across a range of circumstances.
While the two nearly simultaneous
major regional contingency
requirement most challenges the
force structure, other needs, such as
forces to provide adequate overseas
presence, space capabilities to
support a wide range of activities in
peace and war, and secure nuclear
forces for deterrence, have also
been taken into account.

Combat support
capabilities, including transportation,
logistics, intelligence,
communications, and medical,
remain vital to our success and will
be strengthened.

US forces arriving in
Haiti to support
Operation Uphold
Democracy


## In- ter- na- tional En- vi- ron- ment


##### POSTURE AND SIZE

he US Armed Forces are
now in their eighth year of

### T

drawdown and will continue to be
reduced and reshaped in
accordance with the Bottom-Up
Review. By 1999 total active end
strength will reduce to 1,445,000
people, down from 2,130,000 in
1989. Over the next few years,
active Army divisions will continue
to decline from 18 to 10, active Air
Force fighter wings from 24 to 13,
and Navy battle force ships from
567 to 346. Active Marine Corps
structure will remain at three Marine
Expeditionary Forces, but end
strength will continue to decline from
197,000 personnel to 174,000.
Selected Reserve personnel will
decline from 1,170,000 in 1989 to
893,900 in 1999, with a
proportionate decline in force
structure. The Coast Guard will
reduce its active end strength from
44,000 to 36,300.


Nevertheless, the United
States will retain formidable forces.
While smaller, we must become
pound for pound more capable
through enhancements and selected
modernizations. Our ability to
execute this strategy of flexible and
selective engagement will be put at
risk without these required force
upgrades.

The dynamic and
unpredictable post-Cold War
environment demands that we
maintain military capabilities flexible
and responsive enough to cope with
unforeseen threats. Thus, US forces
will be sized and structured to
achieve decisive victory in two
nearly simultaneous major regional
conflicts and to conduct combat
operations characterized by rapid
response and a high probability of
success.


-----

##### FORCE BUILDING FOUNDATIONS

he combat forces and

### T supporting capabilities

must be built on five fundamental
foundations.

##### Quality People

The experience of
Operation Desert Storm confirmed
that there is no substitute for high
quality men and women in our
Armed Forces. In a smaller force
with diverse requirements, quality
people provide the fundamental edge
over any adversary.

The requirement for quality
people is not an abstraction. It
reflects the fundamental reality of
military operations: despite intense
planning and high technology,
military operations are nevertheless
marked by ambiguity, uncertainty,
and chance, and are driven by
emotion; they normally continue 24
hours a day, in any conceivable
terrain or climate, and in conditions
of extreme stress. Under these
circumstances, leadership, courage,
initiative, flexibility, and skill will
remain essential to victory. No
foreseeable change in technology
will diminish the importance of high
quality men and women in our
military.

We are working hard to
maintain excellence among our
recuits. But we must also develop
and retain these quality young people
in the Armed Forces. Developing
this talent requires enlightened
leadership as well as realistic and
challenging training. Retaining good


people   requires
paying attention to
quality of  life for
our  service  men
and  women  and
their families. This
involves  not only
providing adequate
m i  l i t a  r  y
co m pe n sa t i on
a n d   f a m i l y
p r o g r a m s but
e n s u r i n g  that The key foundation of our Armed Forces
our o p e r a t i n g is quality people
tempo and planned
deployments are kept within readiness were defined in Servicereasonable bounds. specific terms. Today we are

strengthening joint and allied doctrine

##### Readiness and education, developing joint

readiness measures, and improving

Experience show that crises joint and coalition training and
can emerge quickly and exercises.
unpredictably. Our forces currently
maintain a range of possible postures **_Enhancements_**
to meet possible contingencies, from
American aircraft aloft on combat air Enhancement of our
patrol over the Adriatic Sea and strategic mobility capability, including
elsewhere to large Reserve airlift, sealift, and prepositioning, is
component forces in the United already underway. We have taken
States. delivery of the first 18 of the initial

procurement of 40 C-17 advanced

Our forces must be transport aircraft. One Army heavy
sufficiently ready - manned, brigade equipment set is
equipped, trained, and sustainable - prepositioned aboard ships now on
to meet the deployment station to cover contingencies from
requirements our strategy demands Northeast Asia to the Persian Gulf.
and to provide a hedge against Our plans call for three additional
uncertainty. They must be ready to brigade sets to be prepositioned
fight today. We are working to ashore, two in Southwest Asia and
strengthen readiness through better one in South Korea. We are
understanding and prediction of procuring more sealift, including
requirements as we restructure the medium-speed roll-on/roll-off ships.
force. In combination, these assets will

greatly improve the power

Warfighting plans require us projection capability of our forces.
to strengthen joint readiness and to
exercise routinely with our allies and Battlefield surveillance will
friends. Traditional measures of continue to be upgraded with the


-----

C-17 Airlifter's and Roll-On/Roll-Off ships are key enhancements
to Strategic Mobility


integration of systems such as the
Joint Surveillance and Target Attack
Radar System, the upgraded
Airborne Warning and Control
System, the RC-135 Rivet Joint
intelligence platform, and unmanned
aerial vehicles.

Enhancements to provide a
robust, globally capable and
interoperable communications
architecture are also required.
These include the jam- resistant
MILSTAR satellite communications
system and the Global Command
and Control System. Additionally,
the appropriate mix of US military
and commercial space systems will
be integrated to reduce costs and


optimize support for the warfighter.
We must retain a decisive advantage
in these areas.

Planned firepower
enhancements include the Joint
Standoff Weapon, Joint Direct
Attack Munitions, sensor-fuzed
weapons, ATACMS, and other
strike enhancements for early arriving
bombers and fighter-bombers.

##### Modernization

We intend to remain the
best-equipped force in the world.
Modernization programs preserve
the essential combat edge that US
forces now possess. Through a
program of recapitalization, we are


consciously retiring certain weapons
systems and platforms in order to afford
more capable and modern equipment.
Modernization programs provide the
technological foundation for future
capabilities and readiness.

Defense investments during
the Cold War have provided us the
necessary foundation in terms of
platforms, systems, and research
and development. We now seek the
greatest value added under a more
constrained budget. Major
modernization programs involving
significant investment are being
undertaken only where there is
clearly a substantial payoff.
Continued modernization of existing
platforms will take advantage of
rapid technological change,
particularly in the areas of
reconnaissance and information
warfare. Operational prototyping
will be used to rapidly field small
numbers of high leverage systems.

##### Balance

Despite its smaller size, our
Armed Forces must retain an
appropriate mix of forces and
capabilities to provide versatility and
a hedge against the unknown. Force
structure must support land, sea, air,
and space requirements. Combat
forces must be balanced with
capable supporting forces, active
duty forces must be balanced with
appropriate Reserve capabilities,
and force structure must be balanced
with infrastructure.

As roles, missions, and
functions are reexamined in an effort
to attain greater efficiency, we must
ensure that the balance among critical
combat, combat support, and other
supportingcapabilitiesisretained


-----

## Conclusion

|Col1|Conclusion|
|---|---|
|||


his national military
strategy builds on its
predecessors and continues

# T

the evolution from the strategies
developed during the Cold War.
Despite the breakup of the Soviet
Union and the subsequent
drawdown of US forces, this is a
strategy of continued global
engagement. Flexibly and
selectively applied, US military
power will remain a fundamental
factor in assuring national security.

In keeping with the broad
outlines of military strategy
developed over nearly half a century,
we see the United States with
worldwide responsibilities that
require flexible military capabilities.
As before, we will stand together
with our allies and friends to assure
stability in a troubled world.
Deterrence and conflict prevention
are central elements of our strategy.
A balanced force structure, including
air, land, naval, and space elements,
a strategic nuclear force, and
correctly sized overseas presence
are essential to maintaining the
required deterrent and warfighting
capabilities.

The days of the familiar
bipolar competition with the former
Soviet Union are now in the past.
Security issues are more complex
and increasingly regional in nature.
Our actions must be appropriate to
meet specific needs across a broad
range of potential challenges. This
requires a high tempo of military
activity, including military operations,
with a significant risk of hostile action.


The forces to meet our security
needs will be largely based in the
United States. Even though smaller
than before, they will need to remain
highly capable. Quality people,
readiness, enhancements, selected
modernization, and balance will
provide the critical edge.

This military strategy is one
of flexible and selective engagement,
designed to protect US interests
throughout the world and to help
meet the security needs of our
partners in key regions. This strategy
requires a ready American military
force capable of responding quickly
and decisively to protect our
Nation’s security.


-----

-----

