-----

### A NATIONAL
#### SECURITY
##### STRATEGY
**OF**
**ENGAGEMENT**
###### AND
**ENLARGEMENT**

**THE WHITE HOUSE**
**JULY 1994**

t
I
F l b th U S G t P i ti Offi
r


-----

**Contents**

**Preface ... i** Promoting Prosperity at Home ... 15

Enhancing American Competitiveness ... 15

**I.** **Introduction ... 1**

Partnership with Business and Labor '" 15

**II.** **Advancing Our Interests Through** Enhancing Access to Foreign Markets ... 16

**Engagement and Enlargement ... 5** The North American Free Trade

Agreement ... 16

Enhancing Our Security ... 6

Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation .,. 16

Maintaining a Strong Defense Capability ... 6

Uruguay Round of GAD ... 16

Major Regional Contingencies .,. 7

U.5. - Japan Framework Agreement ... 16

Overseas Presence .,. 7

Expanding the Realm of Free Trade .., 17

Counterterrorism, Fighting Drug
Trafficking and Other Missions ... 8 Strengthening Macroeconomic

Combatting Terrorism ... 8 Coordination ... 17

Fighting Drug Trafficking ...9 Providing for Energy Security ... 17

Other Missions .,. 9 Promoting Sustainable Development

Abroad ... 17

Deciding When and How to Employ
U.S. Forces ... 10 Promoting Democracy ... 18

Combatting the Spread and Use of
Weapons of Mass Destruction **III. Integrated Regional Approaches ... 21**
and Missiles .., 11

Europe and Eurasia ... 21

Nonproliferation and

East Asian and the Pacific ... 23

Counterproliferation ... 11

The Western Hemisphere .,. 24

Strategic Nuclear Forces ... 11

The Middle East, Southwest and

Arms Control ... 12

South Asia .., 25

Peace Operations .,. 13

Africa ... 26

Strong Intelligence Capabilities ... 14

The Environment .., 15 **IV. Conclusions ... 29**


-----

**Preface**

Protecting our nation's security - our people, our territory ment must be carefully tailored to serve our interests and
and our way of life - is my Administration's foremost priorities. .
mission and constitutional duty. The end of the Cold War
fundamentally changed America's security imperatives. This report, submitted in accordance with Section 603 of
The central security challenge of the past half century - the Goldwater-Nichols Defense Department
the threat of communist expansion - is gone. The dangers Reorganization Act of 1986, elaborates a new national
we face today are more diverse. Ethnic conflict is security strategy for this new era. Focussing on new threats
spreading and rogue states pose a serious danger to and new opportunities, its central goats are:
regional stability in many corners of the globe. The prolif-
eration of weapons of mass destruction represents a major -  To credibly sustain our security with military forces
challenge to our security. Large scale environmental degra- that are ready to fight.
dation, exacerbated by rapid population growth, threatens
to undermine political stability in many countries and -  To bolster America's economic revitalization.
regions.

-  To promote democracy abroad.

At the same time, we have unparalleled opportunities to
make our nation safer and more prosperous. Our military Over the past seventeen months, my Administration has
might is unparalleled. We now have a truly global worked to pursue these goals. This national security
economy linked by an instantaneous communications strategy report presents the strategy that has gUided this
network, which offers growing scope for American jobs effort. It is premised on a belief that the line between
and American investment. The community of democratic our domestic and foreign policies has increasingly disap-
nations is growing, enhancing the prospects for political peared - that we must revitalize our economy if we are
stability, peaceful conflict resolution and greater dignity to sustain our military forces, foreign initiatives and global
and hope for the people of the world. The international influence, and that we must engage actively abroad if we
community is beginning to act together to address pressing are to open foreign markets and create jobs for our people.
global environmental needs.

We believe that our goals of enhancing our security,

Never has American leadership been more essential- to bolstering our economic prosperity, and promoting
navigate the shoals of the world's new dangers and to democracy are mutually supportive. Secure nations are
capitalize on its opportunities. American assets are unique: more likely to support free trade and maintain democratic
our military strength, our dynamic economy, our powerful structures. Nations with growing economies and strong
ideals and, above all, our people. We can and must make trade ties are more likely to feel secure and to work toward
the difference through our engagement; but our involve- freedom. And democratic states are less likely to threaten


-----

our interests and more likely to cooperate with the U.s. to multi-cultural and increasingly driven by ideas and
meet security threats and promote sustainable development. information.

Since my Administration began, we have taken actions to Our prospects in this new era are promising. The specter
meet these goals. To enhance global security, for example, of nuclear annihilation has dramatically receded. The
we have pursued peace initiatives in the Middle East, historic events of the past year - including the handshake
established NATO's Partnership for Peace, reached a between Israel and the PLO and the breakthroughs by
denuclearization agreement with Ukraine and Russia and Nelson Mandela and F.W. DeKlerk that culminated in the
implemented a firm strategy for a non-nuclear Korean election of a multi-racial parliament and a government
peninsula.To bolster prosperity at home and around the headed by President Mandela - suggest this era's
world, we have passed the North American Free Trade possibilities for progress toward security, prosperity and
Agreement, worked to open Asian-Pacific markets through democracy.
the first-ever summit meeting of the Organization for Asian
Pacific Economic Cooperation, lowered export controls Our nation can only address this era's dangers and oppor-
and - having successfully completed the seventh GATT tunities if we remain actively engaged in global affairs. We
round - will now work with Congress to pass it this year. are the world's greatest power, and we have global inter-
Our actions to promote democracy include our support for ests as well as responsibilities. As our nation learned after
South Africa's recent transformation, aid to a new democ- World War I, we can find no security for America in isola-
ratic Russia and Central and Eastern European nations, and tionism, nor prosperity in protectionism. For the American
our work with our Western Hemisphere neighbors, which people to be safer and enjoy expanding opportunities, our
will culminate at December's Summit of the Americas. nation must work to deter would-be aggressors, open

foreign markets, promote the spread of democracy abroad,

Even with the Cold War over, our nation must maintain encourage sustainable development and pursue new
military forces that are sufficient to deter diverse threats opportunities for peace.
and, when necessary, to fight and win against our adver-
saries. While many factors ultimately contribute to our Our national security requires the patient application of
nation's safety and well-being, no single component is American will and resources. We can only sustain that
more important than the men and women who wear necessary investment with the broad, bi-partisan support of
America's uniform and stand sentry over our security. the American people and their representatives in Congress.
Their skill, service and dedication constitute the core of The full participation of Congress is essential to the success
our defenses. Today our military is the best-equipped, best- of our new engagement, and Iwi II consu It with Congress
trained and best-prepared fighting force in the world, and I at every step of the policy making and implementation
am committed to ensure that it remains so. process. The Cold War may be over, but the need for

American leadership abroad remains as strong as ever. I

Our national security strategy reflects both America's inter- am committed to bUilding a new public consensus to
ests and our values. Our commitment to freedom, equality sustain our active engagement abroad. This document is a
and human dignity continues to serve as a beacon of hope part of that commitment.
to peoples around the world. The vitality, creativity and
diversity of American society are important sources of
national strength in a global economy that is dynamic,

**ii**


-----

**I. Introduction**

A new era is upon us. The Cold War is over. The dissolu- Soviet Union are experiencing wrenching economic and
tion of the Soviet empire has radically transformed the political transitions, as are many new democracies of
security environment facing the United States and our Central and Eastern Europe. While our relations with the
allies. The primary security imperative of the past half other great powers are as constructive as at any point in
century - containing communist expansion while . this century, Russia's future is uncertain, and China main-
preventing nuclear war - is gone. We no longer face tains a repressive regime even as that country assumes a
massive Soviet forces across an East-West divide nor Soviet more important economic and political role in global
missiles targeted on the United States and ready to fire. Yet affairs. The spread of weapons of mass destruction poses
there remains a complex array of new and old security serious threats. Violent extremists threaten fragile peace
challenges America must meet as we approach a new processes, from the Mideast to South Africa. Worldwide,
century. there is a resurgence of militant nationalism as well as

ethnic and religious conflict. This has been demonstrated

This national security strategy assesses America's role in by upheavals in Bosnia, Rwanda and Somalia, where the
this new international context and describes the United States has participated in peacekeeping and
Administration's strategy to advance our interests at home humanitarian missions.
and abroad.

Not all security risks are military in nature. Transnational

This is a period of great promise but also great uncertainty. phenomena such as terrorism, narcotics trafficking, envi-
We stand as the world's preeminent power. America's ronmental degradation, rapid population growth and
core value of freedom, as embodied in democratic gover- refugee flows also have security implications for both
nance and market economics, has gained ground around present and long term American policy. In addition, an
the world. Hundreds of millions of people have thrown off emerging class of transnational environmental issues are
communism, dictatorship or apartheid. Former adversaries increasingly affecting international stability and conse-
now cooperate with us in diplomacy and global problem quently will present new challenges to U.S. strategy.
solving. The threat of a war among great powers and the
specter of nuclear annihilation both have receded dramati- American leadership in the world has never been more
cally. The dynamism ofthe global economy is trans- important. If we exert our leadership abroad, we can make
forming commerce, culture and global politics, promising America safer and more prosperous - by deterring aggres-
greater prosperity for America and greater cooperation sion, by fostering the peaceful resolution of dangerous
among nations. conflicts, by opening foreign markets, by helping democ-

ratic regimes and by tackling global problems. Without our

At the same time, troubling uncertainties and clear threats active leadership and engagement abroad, threats will
remain. The new, independent states that replaced the fester and our opportunities will narrow.

1


-----

We can only engage actively abroad if the American -  The President convened a NATO Summit in January
people and the Congress are wi Iii ng to bear the costs of 1994. The Summit approved the Partnership For
that leadership - in dollars, political energy and, at times, Peace and other major new initiatives, to ensure that
American lives. In a democracy, the foreign policy of the NATO is prepared to meet the European and trans-
nation must serve the needs of the people. The preamble Atlantic security challenges of this era, and to
of the Constitution sets out the basic objectives: provide the secUFity relationships that will bind

former communist states to the rest of Europe. Since

_to provide for the common defense, promote_

then,21 countries, including Russia, have joined the

_the general welfare, and secure the blessings of_

Partnership for Peace.

_liberty to ourselves and our posterity._

-  The President launched a comprehensive policy to

The end of the Cold War does not alter these fundamental

combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruc-

purposes. Nor does it reduce the need for active American

tion and the missiles that deliver them. The U.s.

efforts, here and abroad, to pursue those goals. One

opened formal negotiations on a Comprehensive

purpose of this report is to help foster the broad, bi-

Test Ban Treaty and secured landmark commitments

partisan understanding and support necessary to sustain

to eliminate all nuclear weapons in Ukraine, Belarus

our international engagement. Congressional participation

and Kazakhstan.

is critical to this commitment.

-  On May 3, 1994, President Clinton signed a

Our national security strategy is based on enlarging the

Presidential Decision Directive establishing "u.s.

com~u.nity of market democracies while deterring and

Policy on Reforming Multilateral Peace Operations."

containing a range of threats to our nation, our allies and

This policy represents the first, comprehensive frame-

our interests. The more that democracy and political and

work. for u.s. decision-making on issues of peace-

~conomic liberalization take hold in the world, particularly

keeping and peace enforcement suited to the realities

In countries of geostrategic importance to us, the safer our

of the post Cold War period.

nation is likely to be and the more our people
are likely to prosper.

On the economic front, Administration policies have
reaped dramatic successes:

To that broad end, the report explains the three central
components of our strategy of engagement and enlarge-

-  The President worked with the Congress on effective

ment: our efforts to enhance our security by maintaining a

measures to reduce the federal budget deficit and

s~rong defense capability and promoting cooperative secu-

restore economic growth. These measures help

nty measures; our work to open foreign markets and spur

increase our competitiveness and strengthen our

global economic growth; and our promotion of democracy

position in negotiations with other nations.

abroad. It also explains how we are pursuing the three
elements of our strategy in specific regions.

-  The President secured approval of the North
American Free Trade Agreement which creates the

During this Administration's first seventeen months, this

world's largest free trade zone and will create

strategy already has begun to produce tangible results with

hundreds of thousands of American jobs. The vote

respect to our security requirements:

for NAFTA marked a decisive U.S. affirmation of its
international engagement. Through its environmental

-  At the President's direction, the Pentagon completed

and labor side agreements, we are working actively

the Bottom Up Review, a full-scale assessment of

to protect the rights of workers and to reduce air and

what defense forces and systems our nation needs for

water pollution that crosses national boundaries.

this new security era. The President has also set forth
a five-year defense budget that funds the force struc-

-  The Administration stood at the forefront of a multi-

ture recommended by the Review, and he repeatedly

lateral effort to achieve history'S most extensive

stressed that he will draw the line against further cuts

market.opening agreements in the GATT Uruguay-

that would undermine that force structure or erode

round negotiations on world trade. The President is

U.S. military readiness.

2


-----

committed to working with Congress to secure U.S. -  The United States launched a series of initiatives to
accession this year to this pathbreaking agreement bolster the new democracies of Central and Eastern
and the resulting World Trade Organization. Europe. We affirmed our concern for their security,

recognizing that such assurances would playa key

-  The President convened the first meeting of leaders role in promoting democratic developments.
of the Organization for Asian Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC) - and took steps to expand our -  The U.s., working with the Organization of
ties with the economies of the Asia-Pacific region, American States, helped reverse an anti-democratic
the fastest growing area in the world.. coup in Guatemala.

-  We have committed the United States to reduce its -  The Administration led efforts to strengthen UN sanc-
greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by the year tions on the military rulers of Haiti towards the end
2000, and we have developed a National Climate of restoring democracy and Haiti's democratically-
Plan to achieve that goal. The United States has also elected president.
taken a leading role at the international level towards
phasing out the production of most ozone-depleting -  The President invited the democratic nations of the
substances. Under the Montreal Protocol for the Hemisphere to an unprecedented summit to discuss
protection ofthe ozone layer, the u.s. is contributing cooperation in support of democracy in the hemi-
to developing countries' efforts to reduce their emis- sphere, as well as mutual prosperity and sustainable
sions of ozone-depleting chemicals. In June 1993, development.
the u.s. signed the Biodiversity Treaty.

-  The u.S. has increased support for South Africa as it

-  The Administration has asserted world leadership on conducted elections and became a multiracial
population issues, focussing in the context of the democracy.
upcoming Conference on Population and
Development on a plan to promote family planning, -  The Administration initiated policies aimed at crisis
primary health and related development strategies prevention, including a new peacekeeping policy
that allow families to choose the number and and a proposed revision of the Foreign Assistance
spacing of their children. Act.

Finally, the President has demonstrated a firm commitment This report has two major sections. The first part of the
to expanding the global realm of democracy: report explains our strategy of engagement and enlarge-

ment. The second part describes briefly how the

-  The Administration substantially expanded u.s. Administration is applying this strategy to the world's
support for democratic and market reform in Russia major regions.
and the other newly independent states ofthe former
Soviet Union.

3


-----

II. Advancing our Interests Through
Engagement and Enlargement

The dawn of the post-Cold War era presents the United ultimately defined by our security requirements. Such
States with many distinct dangers, but also with a generally requirements start with our physical defense and economic
improved security environment and a range of opportuni- well-being. They also include environmental security as
ties to improve it further. The unitary threat that dominated well as the security of values achieved through expansion
our engagement during the Cold War has been replaced of the community of democratic nations.
by a complex set of challenges, and our nation's strategy
for defining and addressing those challenges is still Our national security strategy draws upon a range of polit-
evolving. In this time of global change, it is clear we ical, military and economic instruments, and focuses on
cannot police the world; but it is equally clear we must the primary objectives that President Clinton has stressed
exercise global leadership. As the world's premier throughout his campaign and his Administration:
economic and military power,. and its premier practitioner
of democratic values, the U.S. is indispensable to the -  Enhancing Our Security. Taking account of the reali-
forging of stable political relations and open trade. ties of the post-Cold War era and the new threats, a

military capability appropriately sized and postured

Our leadership must stress preventive diplomacy- to meet the diverse needs of our strategy, including
through such means as support for democracy, economic the ability, in concert with regional allies, to win two
assistance, overseas military presence, military-to-military nearly simultaneous major regional conflicts. We
contacts and involvement in multilateral negotiations in will continue to pursue arms control agreements to
the Middle East and elsewhere - in order to help resolve reduce the danger of nuclear conflict and promote
problems, reduce tensions and defuse conflicts before they stability.
become crises. These measures are a wise investment in
our national security because they offer the prospect of -  Promoting Prosperity at Home. A vigorous and inte-
resolving problems with the least human and material cost. grated economic policydesigned to stimulate global

environmentally sound economic growth and free

Our engagement must be selective, focussing on the chal- trade and to press for open and equal u.s. access to
lenges that are most relevant to our own interests and foreign markets.
focussing our resources where we can make the most
difference. We must also use the right tools - being -  Promoting Democracy. A framework of democratic
willing to act unilaterally when our direct national interests enlargement that increases our security by
are most at stake; in alliance and partnership when our protecting, consolidating and enlarging the commu-
interests are shared by others; and multilaterally when our nity of free market democracies. Our efforts focus on
interests are more general and the problems are best preserving democratic processes in key emerging
addressed by the international community. In all cases, the democratic states including Russia, Ukraine and
nature of our response must depend on what best serves other new states of the former Soviet Union.
our'own long-term national interests. Those interests are

5


-----

These basic objectives of our national security strategy will taining a strong defense capability of forces ready to fight.
guide the allocation of our scarce national security We are developing integrated approaches for dealing with
resources. Because deficit reduction is also central to the threats arising from the development of nuclear and other
long-term health and competitiveness of the American weapons of mass destruction by other nations. Our secu-
economy, we are striving for the most efficient and envi- rity requires a vjgorous arms control effort and a strong
ronmentally sound use of our resources. We have already intelligence capability. We have implemented a strategy
begun the difficult process of making these adjustments by for multilateral peace operations. We need to rigorously
undertaking a fundamental review of our national defense apply clear guidelines for when to use military force in this
requirements and of the means for promoting democracy. era.
We have also submitted to the Congress major reform
legislation to update and streamline our international We also face security risks that are not military in nature.
programs. Transnational phenomena such as terrorism, narcotics traf-

ficking, and refugee flows also have security implications
both for present and long term American policy. An

**_Enhancing our Security_** emerging class of transnational environmental issues areincreasingly affecting international stability and conse-

quently will present new challenges to u.s. strategy.

The U.S. government is responsible for protecting the lives
and personal safety of Americans, maintaining our political
freedom and independence as a nation and providing for

Maintaining a Strong Defense Capability

the well-being and prosperity of our nation. No matter
how powerful we are as a nation, we cannot secure these u.s. military capabilities are critical to the success of our
basic goals unilaterally. Whether the problem is nuclear strategy. This nation has unparalleled military capabilities:
proliferation, regional instability, the reversal of reform in the United States is the only nation capable of conducting
the former Soviet empire, or unfair trade practices, the large-scale and effective military operations far beyond its
threats and challenges we face demand cooperative, multi- borders. This fact, coupled with our unique position as the
national solutions. Therefore, the only responsible U.S. security partner of choice in many regions, provides a
strategy is one that seeks to ensure U.S. influence over and foundation for regional stability through mutually benefi-
participation in collective decisionmaking in a wide and cial security partnerships. Our willingness and ability to
growing range of circumstances. playa leading role in defending common interests also

help ensure that the United States will remain an influen-

An important element of our security preparedness tial voice in international affairs - political, military and
depends on durable relationships with allies and other economic - that affect our well-being, so long as we
friendly nations. Accordingly, a central thrust of our retain the military wherewithal to underwrite our commit-
strategy of engagement is to sustain and adapt the security ments credibly.
relationships we have with key nations around the world.
These ties constitute an important part of an international To protect and advance U.S. interests in the face of the
framework that will be essential to ensuring cooperation dangers and opportunities outlined earlier, the United
across a broad range of issues. Within the realm of security States must deploy robust and flexible military forces that
issues, our cooperation with allies includes such activities _can accomplish a variety of tasks:_
as: conducting combined training and exercises, coordi-
nating military plans and preparations, sharing intelli- -  Dealing with Major Regional Contingencies. Our
gence, jointly developing new systems, and controlling forces must be able to help offset the military power
exports of sensitive technologies according to common of regional states with interests opposed to those of
standards. the United States and its allies. To do this, we must

be able to credibly deter and defeat aggression, by

The post-Cold War era presents a different set of threats to projecting and sustaining U.S. power in more than
our security. In this new period, enhancing American one region if necessary.
security requires, first and foremost, developing and main-

6


-----

-  Providing a Credible Overseas Presence. u.s. forces Major Regional Contingencies
must also be forward deployed or stationed in key
overseas regions in peacetime to deter aggression. The focus of our planning for major theater conflict is on
Such overseas presence demonstrates our commit- deterring and, if necessary, fighting and defeating aggres-
ment to allies and friends, underwrites regional sion by potentially hostile regional powers, such as North
stability, gains us familiarity with overseas operating Korea, Iran or Iraq. Such states are capable of fielding
environments, promotes combined training among sizable military forces that can cause serious imbalances in
the forces of friendly countries, and provides timely military power within regions important to the United
initial response capabilities. States, with allied or friendly states often finding it difficult

to match the power of a potentially aggressive neighbor.

-  Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction. We are To deter aggression, prevent coercion of allied or friendly
devoting greater efforts to stemming the proliferation governments and, ultimately, defeat aggression should it
of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery occur, we must prepare our forces to confront this scale of
means, but at the same time we must improve our threat, preferably in concert with our allies and friends, but
capabilities to deter and prevent the use of such unilaterally if necessary. To do this, we must have forces
weapons and protect ourselves against their effects. that can deploy quickly and supplement U.S. forward
(Our integrated program to deal with threats to our based and forward deployed forces, along with regional
security from weapons of mass destruction is allies, in halting an invasion and defeating the aggressor.
discussed below.)

With programmed enhancements, the forces the

-  Contributing to Multilateral Peace Operations. Administration is fielding will be sufficient to help defeat
When our interests call for it, the United States must aggression in two nearly simultaneous major regional
also be prepared to participate in multilateral efforts conflicts. As a nation with global interests, it is important
to broker settlements of internal conflicts and bolster that the United States maintain forces with aggregate capa-
new democratic governments. Thus, our forces must bilitieson this scale. Obviously, we seek to avoid a situa-
prepare to participate in peacekeeping, peace tion in which an aggressor in one region might be tempted
enforcement and other operations in support of these to take advantage when U.S. forces are heavily committed
objectives. (Our strategy for peace operations and elsewhere. More basically, maintaining a "two war" force
the contribution of u.s. forces is discussed below.) helps ensure that the United States will have sufficient mili-

tary capabilities to deter or defeat aggression by a coalition

-  Supporting Counterterrorism Efforts and Other of hostile powers or by a larger, more capable adversary
National Security Objectives. A number of other than we foresee today.
tasks remain that u.s. forces have typically carried
out with both general purpose and specialized units. We will never know with certainty how an enemy might
These missions include: counterterrorism and puni- fight or precisely what demands might be placed on our
tive attacks, noncombatant evacuation, counter- own forces in the future. The contributions of allies or
narcotics operations, nation assistance, and humani- coalition partners will vary from place to place and over
tarian and disaster relief operations. time. Thus, balanced u.s. forces are needed in order to

provide a wide range of complementary capabilities and to

To meet all of these requirements successfully, our forces cope with the unpredictable and unexpected.
must be capable of responding quickly and operating
effectively. That is, they must be ready to fight and win.
This imperative demands highly qualified and motivated Overseas Presence
people; modern, well-maintained equipment; realistic

The need to deploy U.S. military forces abroad in peace-

training; strategic mobility; and sufficient support and

time is also an important factor in determining our overall

sustainment capabilities.

force structure. We will maintain robust overseas presence
in severzll forms, such as permanently stationed forces,

7


-----

deployments and combined exercises, port calls and other conflict arises and raise the odds that u.s. forces will find a
force visits, as well as military-to-military contacts. These relatively favorable situation should a U.S. response be
activities provide several benefits. Specifically they: required.

_•_ _Give form and substance to our bilateral and multi-_ **Counterterrorism, Fighting Drug Trafficking**
lateral security commitments. **and Other Missions**

-  Demonstrate our determination to defend U.S. and

While the missions outlined above will remain the primary

allied interests in critical regions, deterring hostile

determinants of our general purpose and nuclear force

nations from acting contrary to those interests.

structure, U.S. military forces and assets will also be called
upon to perform a wide range of other important missions

-  Provide forward elements for rapid response in crises

as well. Some of these can be accomplished by conven-

as well as the bases, ports and other infrastructure

tional forces fielded primarily for theater operations. Often,

essential for deployment of U.S.-based forces by air,

however, these missions call for specialized units and

sea and land.

capabiI ities.

-  Enhance the effectiveness of coalition operations,

**Combating Terrorism**

including peace operations, by improving our ability
to operate with other nations.

As long as terrorist groups continue to target American citi-
zens and interests, the United States will need to have

-  Allow the United States to use its position of trust to

specialized units available to defeat such groups. From

prevent the development of power vacuums and

time to time, we might also find it necessary to strike

dangerous arms races, thereby underwriting regional

terrorists at their bases abroad or to attack assets valued by

stability by precluding threats to regional security.

the governments that support them.

-  Facilitate regional integration, since nations that may

Our policy in countering international terrorists i? to make

not be wi II ing to work together in our absence may

no concessions to terrorists, continue to pressure state

be willing to coalesce around us in a crisis.

sponsors of terrorism, fully exploit all available legal mech-
anisms to punish international terrorists and help other

-  Promote an international security environment of

governments improve their capabi!ities to combat

trust, cooperation, peace and stability, which is

terrorism.

fundamental to the vitality of developing democra-
cies and free market economies for America's own

Countering terrorism effectively reqUires close day-to-day

economic well-being and security.

coordination among Executive Branch agencies. The .
Departments of State, Justice and Defense, the FBI and CIA

Through training programs, combined exercises, military

continue to cooperate closely in an ongoing effort against

contacts, interoperability and shared defense with potential

international terrorists. Positive results will come from inte-

coalition partners, as well as security assistance programs gration of intelligence, diplomatic and rule-of~law activi-
that include judicious foreign military sales, we can

ties, and through close cooperation with other govern-

strengthen the local self-defense capabilities of.our friends

ments and international counterterrorist organizations.

and allies. Through active participation in regional security
dialogues, we can reduce regional tensions, increase trans-

Improving U.S. intelligence capacities is a significant part

parency in armaments and improve our bilateral and

of the U.S. response. Terrorists, whether from well-orga-

multilateral cooperation.

nized groups or the kind of more loosely organized group
responsible for the World Trade Center bombing, have the

By improving the defense capabiIities of our friends and

. advantage of being able to take the initiative in the timing

demonstrating our commitment to defend common inter-

and choice of targets. Terrorism involving weapons of

ests, these activities enhance deterrence, encourage

mass destruction represents a particularly dangerous

responsibility-sharing on the part of friends and allies,

potential threat that must be countered.

decrease the likelihood that U.S. forces will be necessary if

8


-----

The United States has made concerted efforts this past year At home and in the international arena, prevention, treat-
to punish and deter terrorists. On June 26, 1993, following ment and economic alternatives must work hand-in-hand
a determination that Iraq had plotted an assassination with law enforcement and interdiction activities. Long-
attempt against former President Bush, President Clinton term efforts will be maintained to help nations develop
ordered a cruise missile attack against the headquarters of healthy economies with fewer market incentives for
Iraq's intelligence service in order to send a firm response producing narcotics. U.S. efforts will increase efforts
and deter further threats. Similarly, on March 4, 1994, the abroad to foster public awareness and support for govern-
United States obtained convictions against the four defen- mental cooperation on a broad range of activities to
dants in the bombing of the World Trade Center. reduce the incidence of drug abuse. Public awareness of a

demand problem in producing or trafficking countries can

U.S. leadership and close coordination with other govern- be converted into publiC support and increased govern-
ments and international bodies will continue, as demon- mental law enforcement to reduce trafficking and produc-
strated by the UN Security Council sanctions against Libya tion. There has been a significant attitudinal change and
for the Pan Am 103 and UTA 772 bombings, a new inter- awareness in Latin America and the Caribbean, partiCU-
national convention dealing with detecting and controlling larly as producer and transit nations themselves become
plastic explosives, and two important counterterrorism plagued with the ill effects of consumption. .
treaties - the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International Aviation Other Missions
and the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Attacks Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation. The United States government is also responsible for

protecting the Jives and safety of Americans abroad. In

Fighting Drug Trafficking order to carry out this responsibility, selected U.S. military

forces are trained and eqUipped to evacuate Americans

The Administration has undertaken a new approach to the from such situations as the outbreak of civil or interna-
global scourge of drug abuse and trafficking that will better tional conflict and natural or man-made disasters. For
integrate domestic and international activities to reduce example, U.S. Marines evacuated Americans from
both the demand and the supply of drugs. Ultimate Monrovia, Liberia in August of 1990, and from
success will depend on concerted efforts and partnerships Mogadishu, Somalia, in December of that year. In 1991,
by the public, all levels of government and the American u.s. forces evacuated nearly 20,000 Americans from the
private sector with other governments, private groups and Philippines over a three-week period following the erup-
international bodies. tion of Mount Pinatubo. This year, u.s. Marines coupled

with U.S. airlift, helped ensure the safe evacuation of u.S.

The U.S. will shift its strategy from the past emphasis on citizens from ethnic fighting in Rwanda.
transit interdiction to a more evenly balanced effort with
source countries to build institutions, destroy trafficking U.S. forces also provide invaluable training and advice to
organizations and stop supplies. We will support and friendly governments threatened by subversion, lawless-
strengthen democratic institutions abroad, denying ness or insurgency. At any given time, we have small
narcotics traffickers a fragile political infrastructure in teams of military experts deployed in roughly 25 countries
which to operate. We will also cooperate with govern- helping host governments cope with such challenges.
ments that demonstrate the political will to confront the
narcotics threat. U.S. military forces and assets are frequently called upon

to provide assistance to victims of floods, storms, drought

A new comprehensive strategy has been developed to deal and other disasters. Both at home and abroad, u.s. forces
with the problem of cocaine and another is being devel- provide emergency food, shelter, medical care and secu-
oped to address the growing threat from high-purity heroin rity to those in need.
entering this country. We will engage more aggressively
with international organizations, financial institutions and Finally, the U.S. will continue as a world leader in space
nongovernmental organizations in counternarcotics coop- through its technical expertise and innovation. Over the
eration. past 30 years, as more and more nations have ventured

9


-----

into space, the U.S. has steadfastly recognized space as an use of force, but it is appropriate to identify several basic
international region. Since all nations are immediately principles that will guide our decisions on when to use
accessible from space, the maintenance of an international force.
legal regime for space, similar to the concept of freedom of
the high seas, is especially important. Numerous attempts First, and foremost, our national interests will dictate the
have been made in the past to legally limit access to space pace and extent of our engagement. In all cases, the costs
by countries that are unable, either technologically or and risks of u.s. military involvement must be judged to
economically, to join space-faring nations. As the be commensurate with the stakes involved. In those
commercial importance of space is developed, the U.S. specific areas where our vital or survival interests - those
can expect further pressure from non-participants to rede- of broad, overriding importance to the survival, security
fine the status of space, similar to what has been attempted and vitality of our national entity - are at stake, our use of
with exclusive economic zones constraining the high seas. force will be decisive and, if necessary, unilateral. In other

situations posing a less immediate threat, our military

Retaining the current international character of space will engagement must be targeted selectively on those areas
remain critical to achieving U.S. national security goals. that most affect our national interests - for instance, areas
Our main objectives in this area include: where we have a sizable economic stake or commitments

to allies, and areas where there is a potential to generate

-  Continued freedom of access to and use of space; substantial refugee flows into our nation or our allies.

-  Maintaining theUS. position as the major Second, as much as possible, we will seek the help of our
economic, political, military and technological allies or of relevant multilateral institutions. If our most
power in space; important national interests are at stake, we are prepared

to act alone. But especially on those matters touching

-  Deterring threats to U.S. interests in space and directly the interests of our allies, there should be a propor-
defeating aggression if deterrence fails; tional commitment from them.

-  Preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruc- Third, in every case, we will consider several critical ques-
tion to space; tions before committing military force. Have we consid-

ered nonmilitary means that offer a reasonable chance of

-  Enhancing global partnerships with other space- success? What types of U,S. military capabilities should
faring nations across the spectrum of economic, be brought to bear, and is the use of military force care-
political and security issues. fully matched to our political objectives? Do we have

reasonable assurance of support from the American people

**Deciding When and How to Employ** andand their elected representatives? Do milestones that will reveal the extent we of have timelines success or
**U.S. Forces** failure, and, in either case, do we have an exit strategy?

Our strategy calls for the development and deployment of Fourth, our engagement must meet reasonable cost and
American military forces in the United States and abroad feasibility thresholds. We will be more inclined to act
to respond to key dangers - those posed by weapons of where there is reason to believe that our action will bring
mass destruction, regional aggression and threats to the lasting improvement. On the other hand, our involvement
stability of states. will be more circumscribed when other regional or multi-

lateral actors are better positioned to act than we are. Even

Although there may be many demands for u.s. involve- in these cases, however, the United States will be actively
ment, the need to husband scarce resources suggests that engaged at the diplomatic level.
we must carefully select the means and level of our partici-
pation in particular military operations. It is unwise to
specify in advance all the limitations we will place on our

**10**


-----

**Combatting the Spread and Use of** The proliferation problem is global, but we must tailor our
**Weap'0ns of Mass Destruction and** approaches to specific regional contexts. We are leading

international efforts to bring North Korea into compliance

**Missiles** with its nonproliferation obligations, including the NPT,

IAEA safeguards, and the North-South denuclearization

Weapons of mass destruction - nuclear, biological, and

accord. We will continue efforts to prevent Iran from

chemical- along with the missiles that deliver them, pose

advancing its weapons of mass destruction objectives and

a major threat to our security and that of our allies and

to thwart Iraq from reconstituting its previous programs.

other friendly nations. Thus, a key part of our strategy is to

The United States seeks to cap, reduce and, ultimately,

seek to stem the proliferation of such weapons and to

eliminate the nuclear and missile capabilities of India and

develop an effective capability to deal with these threats.

Pakistan. In the Middle East and elsewhere, we encourage

We also need to maintain robust strategic nuclear forces

regional arms control agreements that address the legiti-

while seeking to implement existing strategic arms

mate security concerns of all parties. These tasks are being

agreements.

pursued with other states that share our concern for the
enormous challenge of stemming the proliferation of such

**Nonproliferation and Counterproliferation** weapons.

A critical priority for the United States is to stem the prolif- The United States has signed bilateral agreements with
eration of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass Russia and Ukraine, which commit both these countries to
destruction and their missile delivery systems. Countries' adhere to the guidelines of the MTCR. Russia has agreed
weapons programs, and their levels of cooperation with not to transfer space-launch vehicle technology with
our nonproliferation efforts, will be among our most potential military applications to India. South Africa has
important criteria in judging the nature of our bilateral joined the NPT and accepted full-scope safeguards.
relations. Argentina has joined the MTCR and Brazil has committed

itself publicly to adhere to the MTCR guidelines.

As a key part of our effort to control nuclear proliferation, Argentina, Brazil and Chile have brought the Treaty of
we seek the indefinite extension of the Nonproliferation Tlatelolco into force. We continue to push for the disman-
Treaty (NPT) beyond 1995 and its universal application. tlement of intercontinental ballistic missiles located in
Achieving a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty as soon as Ukraine and Kazakhstan and to press China to formalize
possible, ending the unsafeguarded production of fissile its earlier MTCR undertakings. With the United States and
materials for nuclear weapons purposes and strengthening Russia, Ukraine is pressing forward on implementation of
the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the International Atomic the Trilateral Accord, which provides for the transfer of
Energy Agency (IAEA) are important goals. They comple- warheads from Ukraine to Russia in return for fair compen-
ment our comprehensive efforts to discourage the accumu- sation for their value.
lation of fissile materials, to seek to strengthen controls and
constraints on those materials, and over time, to reduce Thus, the United States seeks to prevent additional coun-
world-wide stocks. tries from acquiring chemical, biological and nuclear

weapons and the means to deliver them. However, should

To combat missile proliferation, the United States seeks such efforts fail, u.s. forces must be prepared to deter,
prudently to broaden membership of the Missi Ie prevent and defend against their use.
Technology Control Regime (MTCR). The Administration
supports the prompt ratification and earliest possible entry The United States will retain the capacity to retaliate
in force of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) as against those who might contemplate the use of weapons
well as new measures to deter violations of and enhance of mass destruction, so that the costs of such use will be
compliance with the Biological Weapons Convention seen as outweighing the gains. However, to minimize the
(BWC). We also support improved export controls for impact of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction on
nonproliferation purposes both domestically and our interests, we will need the capability not only to deter
multilaterally. their use against either ourselves or our allies and friends,

but also, where necessary and feasible, to prevent it.

**11**


-----

This will require improved defensive capabilities. To mini- As noted above, arms control is an integral part of our
mize the vulnerability of our forces abroad to weapons of strategy to limit the spread of nuclear, chemical and
mass destruction, we are placing a high priority on biological weapons, and to limit the strategic nuclear
improving our ability to locate, identify, and disable arse- forces which could still pose a direct threat to the United
nals of weapons of mass destruction, production and States.
storage facilities for such weapons, and their delivery
systems. The full and faithful implementation of existing arms

control agreements, including the ABM Treaty, BWC, lNF,
CFE, several nuclear testing agreements, the 1992 Vienna

**Strategic Nuclear Forces.**

Document on CSBMs, Open Skies, the Environmental
Modification Convention (EnMod), Incidents at Sea and

We will retain strategic nuclear forces sufficient to deter

many others will remain an important element of national

any future hostile foreign leadership with access to

security policy. The on-going negotiation initiated by the

strategic nuclear forces from acting against our vital inter·

United States to clarify the ABM Treaty by establishing an

ests and to convince it that seeking a nuclear advantage

agreed demarcation between strategic and theater ballistic

would be futile. Therefore we will continue to maintain

missiles and update the Treaty to reflect the break-up of

nuclear forces of sufficient size and capability to hold at

the Soviet Union reflects the Administration's commitment

risk a broad range of assets valued by such political and

to maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of crucial

military leaders. We are engaged in a review to determine

arms control agreements.

what nuclear posture is required in the current world situa-
tion.

Future arms control efforts may become more regional and
multilateral. Regional arrangements can add predictability

The strategic arms control process, with its prescribed

and openness to security relations, advance the rule of

reductions in strategic offensive arms and steady shift

international law and promote cooperation among partici-

toward less destabilizing systems, remains indispensable.

pants. They help maintain deterrence and a stable military

The U.S. is committed to the ratification and entry into

balance at regional levels. The u.s. is prepared to

force of the START I and II Treaties. Although Ukraine has

promote, help negotiate, monitor and participate in

yet to accede to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, the Rada's

regional arms control undertakings compatible with

action on 3 February 1994 to ratify the START ITreaty and

American national security interests. We will generally

the Lisbon Protocol without reservations places Ukraine

support such undertakings but will not seek to impose

back on track toward becoming a Non-Nuclear Weapons

regional arms control accords against the wishes of

State. The U.S. is also reviewing whether future reductions

affected states.

in strategic forces below START II levels are advisable. We
will also explore strategic confidence-building measures

As arms control, whether regional or global, becomes

and mutual understandings that reduce the risk of

increasingly multilateral, the Conference on Disarmament

accidental war.

(CD) in Geneva will play an even more important role.
The u.s. will support measures to increase the effective-

**Arms Control** ness and relevance of the CD. Arms control agreements

can head off potential arms races in certain weapons cate-

Arms control is an integral part of our national security gories or in some environments. We will continue to seek
strategy. Arms control can help reduce incentives to initiate greater transparency, responsibility and, where appro~
attack; enhance predictability regarding the size and struc- priate, restraint in the transfer of conventional weapons
ture of forces, thus reducing fear of aggressive intent; and global military spending must increase. The UN
reduce the size of national defense industry establishments register of conventional arms transfers is a start in
and thus permit the growth of more vital, nonmilitary promoting greater transparency of weapons transfers and
industries; ensure confidence in compliance through effec- buildups, but more needs to be done. The U.S. has
tive monitoring and verification; and, ultimately, contribute proposed that the new regime to succeed the Coordinating
to a more stable and calculable balance of power. Committee (COCOM) focus on conventional arms sales

and dual-use technologies. Where appropriate, the United

**12**


-----

States will continue to pursue such efforts vigorously. global communications. The United States is committed to
Measures to reduce over-sized defense industrial establish- working with the United Nations to see that we pay our
ments, especially those parts involved with weapons of bills in full, while reducing our nation's proportional
mass destruction, will also contribute to stability in the assessment for these missions.
post-Cold War world. The Administration also will pursue
defense conversion agreements with FSU states, and When deciding whether to support a particular UN peace
possibly China. operation, the United States will insist that fundamental

questions be asked before new obligations are undertaken.
These include an assessment of the threat to international

**Peace Operations** peace and security, a determination that the peace opera-

tion serves U.S. interests as well as assurance of an interna-

In addition to preparing for major regional contingencies,

tional community of interests for dealing with that threat

we must prepare our forces for peace operations to support

on a multilateral basis, identification of clear objectives,

democracy or conflict resolution. The United States, along

availability of the necessary resources, and identification of

with others in the international community, will seek to

an operation's endpoint or criteria for completion.

prevent and contain localized conflicts before they require
a military response. U.S. support capabilities such as airlift,

Most UN peacekeeping operations do not involve U.S.

intelligence, and global communications, have often

forces. On those occasions when we consider contributing

contributed to the success of multilateral peace operations,

U.S. forces to a UN peace operation, we will employ

and they will continue to do so. U.S. combat units are less

rigorous criteria, including the same principles that would

likely to be used for most peace operations, but in some

guide any decision to employ U.S. forces. In addition, we

cases their use will be necessary or desirable and justified

will ensure that the risks to U.S. personnel and the

by u.s. national interests as guided by the Presidential command and control arrangements governing the partici-
Decision Directive, "U.s. Policy on Reforming Multilateral

pation of American and foreign forces are acceptable to

Peace Operations," and outlined below.

the United States.

Multilateral peace operations are an important component

The question of command and control is particularly crit-

of our strategy. From traditional peacekeeping to peace

ical. There may be times when it is in our interest to place

enforcement, multilateral peace operations are sometimes

U.S. troops under the temporary operational control of a

the best way to prevent, contain, or resolve conflicts that

competent UN or allied commander. The United States

could otherwise be far more costly and deadly.

has done so many times in the past - from the siege of
Yorktown in the Revolutionary War to the battles of Desert

Peace operations often have served, and continue to serve,

Storm. However, under no circumstances will the

important U.s. national interests. In some cases, they have

President ever relinquish his command authority over U.S.

helped preserve peace between nations, as in Cyprus and

forces.

the Golan Heights. In others, peacekeepers have provided
breathing room for fledgling democracies, as in Cambodia,

Improving the ways the United States and the UN decide

E[ Salvador and Namibia.

upon and conduct peace operations will not make the
decision to engage any easier. The lesson we must take

At the same time; however, we must recognize that peace

away from our first ventures in peace operations is not that

operations make demands on the UN that exceed the

we should foreswear such operations but that we should

organization's current capabilities. The United States is

employ this tool selectively and more effectively. In short,

working with the UN headquarters and other member

the United States views peace operations as a means to

states to ensure that the UN embarks only on peace oper-

support our national security strategy, not as a strategy

ations that make political and military sense and that the

unto itself.

UN is able to manage effectively those peace operations it
does undertake. We support the creation of a professional

The President is firmly committed to securing the active

UN peace operations headquarters with a planning staff,

support of Congress for U.S. participation in peace opera-

access to timely intelligence, a logistics unit that can be

tions. The Administration has set forth a detailed blueprint

rapidly deployed and a modern operations center with

13


-----

to guide consultations with Congress. With respect to mental, humanitarian and disaster relief activities, tech-
particular operations, the Administration will undertake nical intelligence assets (principally imagery) must be
such consultations on questions regarding command and directed to a greater degree towards collection of data on
control of u.s. forces, the nature of expected u.s. military these subjects.
participation, the mission parameters of the operation, the
expected duration, and budgetary implications. In addition Economic intelligence will play an increasingly important
to such operation-specific consultations, the role in helping policy makers understand economic trends.
Administration has also conducted regular monthly brief- Economic intelligence can support U.s. trade negotiators
ings for congressional staff, and will deliver an Annual and help level the economic playing field by identifying
Comprehensive Report to Congress on Peace Operations. threats to U.S. companies from foreign intelligence
Congress is critical to the institutional development of a services and unfair trading practices.
successful u.s. policy on peace operations.

This strategy requires that we take steps to reinforce

Two other points deserve emphasis. First, the primary current intelligence capabilities and overt foreign service
mission of our Armed Forces is not peace operations; it is reporting, within the limits of our resources, and similar
to deter and, if necessary, to fight and win conflicts in steps to enhance coordination of clandestine and overt
which our most important interests are threatened. collection. Key goals include to:
Second, while the international community can create
conditions for peace, the responsibility for peace ulti- -  Provide timely warning of strategic threats, whether
mately rests with the people of the country in question. from the remaining arsenal of weapons in the former

Soviet Union or from other nations with weapons of
mass destruction;

**Strong Intelligence Capabilities**

-  Ensure timely intelligence support to military opera-

Only a strong intelligence effort can provide adequate

tions;

warning of threats to u.s. national security and identify
opportunities for advancing our interests. Policy analysts,

-  Provide early warning of potential crises and facili-

decision makers and military commanders at all levels will

tate preventive diplomacy;

continue to rely on our intelligence community to collect
and analyze information unavailable from other sources

-  Develop new strategies for collection, production

and which provides an essential complement to foreign

and dissemination (including c1osE;r relationships

service reporting, media reports and private analysts who

between intelligence producers and consumers) to

rely entirely on open sources.

make intelligence products more responsive to
current consumer needs;

Because national security has taken on a much broader
definition in this post-Cold War era, intelligence must

-  Improve worldwide technical capabilities to detect,

address a much wider range of threats and dangers. We

identify and determine the efforts of foreign nations

will continue to monitor military and technical threats, to

to develop weapons of mass destruction;

guide long-term force development and weapons acquisi-
tion, and to directly support military operations.

-  Improve counterintelligence efforts;

Intelligence will also be critical for directing new efforts
against regional conflicts, proliferation of WMD, counter-

-  Provide focussed support for law enforcement agen-

intelligence, terrorism and narcotics trafficking. In order to

cies in areas like counternarcotics, counterterrorism

adequately forecast dangers to democracy and to u.S.

and illegal technology trade;

economic well-being, the intelligence community must
track political, economic, social and military develop-

-  Streamline intelligence operations and organizations

ments in those parts of the world where U.S. interests are

to gain efficiency and integration;

most heavily engaged and where overt collection of infor-
mation from open sources is inadequate. Finaily, to
enhance the study and support of worldwide environ-

**14**


-----

-  Revise long-standing security restrictions where 2025. Even when making the most generous allowances
possible to make intelligence data more useful to for advances in science and technology, One cannot help
intelligence consumers. but conclude that population growth and environmental

pressures will feed into immense social unrest and make

-  Strengthen intelligence relationships and sharing the world substantially more vulnerable to serious interna-
with friendly foreign intelligence services, especially tional frictions.
in areas where U.S. intelligence capabilities are
limited.

**_Promoting Prosperity at Home_**

**The Environment**

A central goal of our national security strategy is to

The more clearly we understand the complex interrelation- promote America's prosperity through efforts both at home
ships between the different parts of our world's environ- and abroad. Our economic and security interests are
ment, the better we can understand the regional and even increasingly inseparable. Our prosperity at home depends
global effects of local changes to the environment. on engaging actively abroad. The strength of our diplo-
Increasing competition for the dwindling reserves of macy, our ability to maintain an unrivaled military, the
uncontaminated air, arable land, fisheries and other food attractiveness of our values abroad ~ all these depend in
sources, and water, once considered "free" goods, is part on the strength of our economy.
already a very real risk to regional stability around the
world. The range of environmental risks serious enough to **Enhancing American Competitiveness**
jeopardize international stability extends to massive popu-
lation flight from man-made or natural catastrophes, such

Our primary economic goal is to strengthen the American

as Chernobyl or the East African drought, and to large-

economy and reverse the decline in American competi-

scale ecosystem damage caused by industrial pollution,

tiveness that plagued our international economic perfor-

deforestation, loss of biodiversity, ozone depletion, and

mance for over a decade. The first step toward that goal

ultimately climate change. Strategies dealing with environ-

was reducing the federal deficit and the burden it imposes

mental issues of this magnitude will require partnerships

on the economy and future generations. The economic

between governments and nongovernmental organiza-

program passed in 1993 will reduce the deficit by over

tions, cooperation between nations and regions, and a

$500 million, restored investor confidence in .the U.S. and

commitment to a strategically focused, long-term policy for

strengthened our position in international economic nego-

emerging environmental risks.

tiations. We are building on this deficit reduction effort
with other steps to improve American competitiveness:

The decisions we make today regarding military force

investing in technology; assisting defense conversion;

structures typically influence our ability to respond to

improving information networks and other vital infrastruc-

threats 20 to 30 years in the future. Similarly, our current

ture; and improving education and training programs for

decisions regarding the environment will affect the magni-

America's workforce. We are structuring our defense R&D

tude of its security risks over at least a comparable period

effort to place greater emphasis on dual-use technologies

of time, if not longer. The measure of our difficulties in the

that can enhance competitiveness and meet pressing mili-

future will be settled by the steps we take in the present.

tary needs. We are also reforming the defense acquisition
system so that we can develop and procure weapons and

As a priority initiative, the u.s. will press the global

materiel more efficiently.

community at the September Cairo Conference and in
other fora, to address the continuous climb in global popu-
lation. Rapid population growth in the developing world **Partnership with Business and Labor**
and unsustainable consumption patterns in industrialized
nations are the root of both present and potentially even Our economic strategy views the private sector as the
greater forms of environmental degradation and resource engine of economic growth. It sees government's role as a
depletion. A conservative estimate of the globe's popula- partner to the private sector - acti ng as an advocate of
tion projects 8.5 billion people on the planet by the year U.S. business interests; leveling the playing field in interna-

**15**


-----

tional markets; helping to boost American exports; and NAFTA will create more than 200,000 American jobs and
finding ways to remove domestic and foreign barriers to it incr~ases Mexico's capacity to cooperate with our nation
the creativity, initiative and productivity of American on a wide range of issues that cross our 2000 mile border
business. -  including the environment, narcotics trafficking and

illegal immigration.

To this end, on September 29, 1993, the Administration
published its report creating America's first national export **Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation**
strategy and making 65 specific recommendations for
reforming the way government works with the private

Our economic relations depend vitally on our ties with the

sector to expand exports. Among the recommendations

Asia Pacific region, which is the world's fastest-growing

were significant improvements in advocacy, export

economic region. In November 1993, President Clinton

financing, market information systems and product stan-

convened the first-ever summit of the leaders of the

dards education. The results of these reforms could enable

economies that constitute the Organization for Asia Pacific

u.s. exports to reach the trillion dollar mark by the turn of

Economic Cooperation (APEC). u.s. initiatives in the APEC

the century, which would help create at least six million

forum will open new opportunities for economic coopera-

new American jobs.

tion and permit U.s. companies to become involved in
substantial infrastructure planning and construction

Another critical element in boosting u.S. exports is

throughout the region. The trade and investment frame-

reforming the outdated export licensing system. last year,

work agreed to in 1993 provides the basis for enhancing

that reform began with significant liberalization of export

the "open regionalism" that defines APEC.

licensing controls for computers, supercomputers and
telecommunications equipment. This year the
Administration is seeking comprehensive reform of the **Uruguay Round of GAIT**
Export Administration Act, which governs the process of
export licensing. The goal of this reform is to strengthen The successful conclusion in December 1993 of the
our ability to prevent proliferation and protect other Uruguay Round of the negotiations under the General
national interests, while removing unnecessarily burden- Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATI) significantly
some licensing requirements left over from the Cold War. strengthened the world trading system. The Uruguay

Round accord is the largest, most comprehensive trade
agreement in history. It will create hundreds of thousands

**Enhancing Access to Foreign Markets** of new U.S. jobs and expand opportunities for U.S. busi-

nesses. For the first time, international trade rules will

The success of American business is more than ever

apply to services, intellectual property and investments,

dependent upon success in international markets. The

and effective rules will apply to agriculture. The Uruguay

ability to compete internationally also assures that our

Round also continued the cuts in tariff rates throughout the

companies will continue to innovate and increase produc-

world that began just after the Second World War. The

tivity, which will in turn lead to improvements in our own

Administration is committed to working with Congress to

living standards. But to compete abroad, our firms need

passing GATI this year and ensuring that the promises

access to foreign markets, just as foreign industries have

made to American industries in the Uruguay Round are

access to our open market. We Vigorously pursue

fulfilled.

measures to increase access for our companies - through
bilateral, regional and multilateral arrangements.

**u.s. -** **Japan Framework Agreement**

**The North American Free Trade Agreement**

While japan is America's second-largest export market,
foreign access to the japanese market remains limited in

On December 3, 1993, President Clinton signed the North

many important sectors. japan's persistent current account

American Free Trade Act (NAFTA), which creates a free

surpluses are a major imbalance in the global economy. In

trade zone among the United States, Canada and Mexico.

july 1993 President Clinton and japanese Prime Minister

**16**


-----

Miyazawa established the U.S.-Japan Framework for **Providing for Energy Security**
Economic Partnership to redress the imbalances in our
economic relationship. By the February 1994 Summit The United States depends on oil for more than 40% of its
between President Clinton and Prime Minister Hosokawa, primary energy needs. Roughly 45% of our oil needs are
Japan had not yet fulfilled key commitments under the met with imports, and a large share of these imports come
Framework agreement. The Administration is continuing from the Persian Gulf area. The experiences of the two oil
efforts to ensure that competitive American goods and shocks and the Gulf War show that an interruption of oil
services have fair access to the Japanese market. We supplies can have a significant impact on the u.s.
believe Japan must take measures to open its markets and economy. Appropriate economic responses can substan-
stimulate its economy, both to benefit its own people and tially mitigate the balance of payments and inflationary
to fulfill its international responsibilities impacts of an oil shock; appropriate foreign policy

responses to events such as Iraq's invasion of Kuwait can

**Expanding the Realm of Free Trade** limit the magnitude of the crisis.

Over the longer term, the United States' dependence on

The conclusion of NAFTA and the Uruguay Round repre-

access to foreign oil sources will be increasingly important

sents unprecedented progress toward more open markets

as our resources are depleted. The U.S. economy has

both at the regional and global levels. The Administration

grown roughly 75% since the first oil shock; yet during

intends to continue its efforts in further enhancing U.S.

that time our oil consumption has remained virtually stable

access to foreign markets. The World Trade Organization

and oil production has declined. High oil prices did not

will provide a powerful new institutional lever for securing

generate enough new oil exploration and discovery to

such access. Emerging markets, particularly along the

sustain production levels from our depleted resource base.

Pacific Rim, present vast opportunities for American enter-

These facts show the need for continued and extended

prise, and APEC now provides a suitable vehicle for the

reliance on energy efficiency and conservation and devel-

exploration of such opportunities. The U.s. may also be

opment of alternative energy sources. Conservation

amenable to the possible establishment of free trade

measures notwithstanding, the u.s. has a vital interest in

regimes with other nations. All such steps in the direction

unrestricted access to this critical resource.

of expanded trading relationships will be undertaken in a
way consistent with protection of the international envi-
ronment and to the end of sustainable development here **Promoting Sustainable Development**
and abroad. **Abroad**

**Strengthening Macroeconomic** Broad-based economic development not only improves
**Cooraination** the prospects for democratic development in developing

countries, but also expands the demands for u.s. exports.

As national economies become more integrated interna- Economic growth abroad can alleviate pressure on the

global environment, reduce the attraction of illegal

tionally, the U.S. cannot drive global growth on its own.
International economic expansion will benefit from coordi- narcotics trade and improve the health and economic
nating the macroeconomic policies of the G-7 economies, productivity of global populations.
and especially the three major economies of the world -

The environmental aspects of ill-designed economic

the United States, Germany and Japan. To improve global
macroeconomic performance, we will continue to work growth are clear. Environmental damage.will ultimately
through the G-7 "heads of state" and financial leader block economic growth. Rapid urbanization is outstripping
meetings to seek growth-oriented policies to complement the ability of nations to provide jobs, education, and other .
our own budget deficit reduction efforts. Together we can services to new citizens. The continuing poverty of a
promulgate a growth strategy that combines reducing quarter of the world's people leads to hunger, malnutrition,
budget deficits in the U.s., lowering interest rates in economic migration, and political unrest. Widespread illit-
Germany and reducing current account surpluses in Japan. eracy and lack of technical skills hinder employment

**17**


-----

opportunities and drive entire populations to support them- a national biological survey to help protect species
selves on increasingly fragile and damaged resource bases. and to help the agricultural and biotechnical indus-
New diseases and epidemics, often spread through envi- tries identify new sources of food, fiber and medica-
ronmental degradation, threaten to overwhelm the health tions.
facilities of developing countries, disrupt societies, and
stop economic growth. These realities must be addressed -  New policies are being implemented to ensure the
by sustainable development programs which offer viable sustainable management of U.S. forests by the year
alternatives. U.s. leadership is of the essence. If such alter- 2000, as pledged internationally. In addition, u.s.
natives are not developed, the consequences for the bilateral forest assistance programs are being
planet's future will be grave indeed. expanded, and the United States is promoting

sustainable management of tropical forests.

Domestically, the U.S. must work hard to halt local and
cross-border environmental degradation. In addition, the -  In the wake of the 1992 United Nations Conference
u.s. should foster environmental technology targeting on Environment and Development, the United States
pollution prevention, control, and cleanup. Companies has sought to reduce land-based sources of marine
that invest in energy efficiency, clean manufacturing, and pollution, maintain populations of marine species at
environmental services today will create the high-quality, healthy and productive levels and protect endan-
high-wage jobs of tomorrow. By providing access to these gered marine mammals.
types of technologies, our exports can also provide the
means for other nations to achieve environmentally -  The United States has focussed technical assistance
sustainable economic growth. At the same time, we are and encouraged nongovernmental environmental
taking ambitious steps at home to better manage our groups to provide expertise to the republics of the
natural resources and reduce energy and other consump- Former Soviet Union and East European nations that
tion, decrease waste generation, and increase our recy- have suffered the most acute environmental crises.
cling efforts. The Agency for International Development, the

Environmental Protection Agency and other u.s.

Internationally, the Administration's foreign assistance agencies are engaged in technical cooperation with
program focuses on four key elements of sustainable many countries around the world to advance these
development broad-based economic growth; the environ- goals.
ment; population and health; and democracy. We will
continue to advocate environmentally sound private -  The Administration is leading a renewed global effort
investment and responsible approaches by international to address population problems and promote inter-
lenders. At our urging, the Multilateral Development Banks national consensus for stabilizing world population
(MDB's) are now placing increased emphasis upon growth. Our comprehensive approach will stress
sustainable development in their funding decisions, to family planning and reproductive health care,
include a commitment to perform environmental assess- maternal and child health, education, and improving
ments on projects for both internal and public scrutiny. In the status of women. The International Conference
particular, the Global Environmental Facility (GEF), estab- on Population Development, to be held in
lished this year, will provide a source of financial assis- September in Cairo, will endorse these approaches
tance to the developing world for climate change, biodi- as important strategies in achieving our global popu-
versity, and oceans initiatives. lation goals.

The U.S. is taking specific steps now in all of these areas:

**_Promoting Democracy_**

-  In June 1993, the United States signed the
Convention on Biological Diversity, which aims to

All of America's strategiC interests - from promoting pros-

protect and utilize the world's genetic inheritance.

perity at home to checking global threats abroad before

The Interior Department has been directed to create

they threaten our territory - are served by enlarging the

**18**


-----

community of democratic and free market nations. Thus, pragmatic commitment to see freedom take hold where
working with new democratic states to help preserve them that will help us most Thus, we must target our effort to
as democracies committed to free markets and respect for assist states that affect our strategic interests, such as those
human rights, is a key part of our national security strategy. with large economies, critical locations, nuclear weapons,

or the potential to generate refugee flows into our own

One of the most gratifying and encouraging developments nation or into key friends and allies. We must focus our
of the past 15 years is the explosion in the number of states efforts where we have the most leverage. And our efforts
moving away from repressive governance and toward must be demand-driven - they must focus on nations
democracy. Since the success of many of those experi- whose people are pushing for reform or have already
ments is by no means assured, our strategy of enlargement secured it
must focus on the consolidation of those regimes and the
broadening of their commitment to democracy. At the Russia is a key state in this regard. If we can support and
same time, we seek to increase respect for fundamental help consolidate democratic and market reforms in Russia
human rights in all states and encourage an evolution to (and the other newly independent states), we can help turn
democracy where that is possible. a former threat into a region of valued diplomatic and

economic partners. In addition, our efforts in Russia,

The enlargement of the community of market democracies Ukraine and the other states raise the likelihood of
respecting human rights and the environment is manifest continued reductions in nuclear arms and compliance
in a number of ways: with international nonproliferation accords.

-  More than 20 nations in Eastern Europe, the former The new democracies in Central and Eastern Europe are
Soviet Union, Latin America, and East Asia have, another clear example, given their proximity to the great
over the past 1a years, adopted the structures of a democratic powers of Western Europe, their importance to
constitutional democracy and held free elections; our security, and their potential markets.

-  The nations of the Western Hemisphere have Since our ties across the Pacific are no less important than
proclaimed their commitment to democratic regimes those across the Atlantic, pursuing enlargement in the
and to the collective responsibility of the nations of Asian Pacific is a third example. We will work to support
the OAS to respond to threats to democracy. the emerging democracies of the region and to encourage

other states along the same path.

-  In the Western Hemisphere, only Cuba and Haiti are
not democratic states; Continuing the great strides toward democracy and

markets in our emerging hemisphere is also a key concern

-  Nations as diverse as South Africa, Cambodia and EI and lies behind the President's decision to host the Summit
Salvador have resolved bitter internal disputes of the Americas this December. As we continue such
with agreement on the creation of constitutional efforts, we should be on the lookout for states whose entry
democracies. into the camp of market democracies may influence the

future direction of an entire region; South Africa and

The first element of our democracy strategy is to work with Nigeria now hold that potential with regard to sub-Saharan
the other democracies of the world and to improve our Africa.
cooperation with them on security and economic issues.
We also seek their support in enlarging the realm of demo- How should the United States help consolidate and
cratic nations. enlarge democracy and markets in these states? The

answers are as varied as the nations involved, but there are

The core of our strategy is to help democracy and markets common elements. We must continue to help lead the
expand and survive in other places where we have the effort to mobilize international resources, as we have with
strongest security concerns and where we can make the Russia and the other new states. We must be willing to
greatest difference. This is not a democratic crusade; it is a take immediate public positions to help staunch democ-

**19**


-----

ratic reversals, as we have in Haiti, Guatemala and sion of the Cold War. Our long-term goal is a world in
Nigeria, We must give democratic nations the fullest bene- which each of the major powers is democratic, with many
fits of integration into foreign markets, which is part of why other nations joining the community of market democra-
NAFTA and the GAD rank so high on our agenda. And cies as well.
we must help these nations strengthen the pillars of civil
society, improve their market institutions, and fight corrup- Our efforts to promote democracy and human rights are
tion and political discontent through practices of good complemented by our humanitarian assistance programs
_governance._ which are designed to alleviate human suffering and to

_pave the way for progress towards establishing democratic_

At the same time as we work to ensure the success of regimes with a commitment to respect for human rights
emerging democracies, we must also redouble our efforts and appropriate strategies for economic development.
to guarantee basic human rights on a global basis. At the
1993 United Nations Conference on Human Rights, the Through humanitarian assistance and policy initiatives
u.s. forcefully and successfully argued for a reaffirmation aimed at the sources of disruption, we seek to mitigate the
of the universality of such rights and improved interna~ contemporary migration and refugee crises, foster long-

tional mechanisms for their promotion. In the wake of this term global cooperation and strengthen involved interna-
gathering, the UN has named a High Commissioner for tional institutions. The U.S. will provide appropriate finan-
Human Rights, and the rights of women have been cial support and will work with other nations and interna-
afforded a new international precedence. The U.S. also tional bodies, such as the International Red Cross and the
continues to work for the protection of human rights on a UN High Commissioner for Refugees, in seeking voluntary
bilateral basis. To demonstrate our own willingness to repatriation of refugees - taking into full consideration
adhere to international human rights standards, the human rights concerns as well as the economic conditions
Administration will seek Senate consent to u.s. ratification that may have driven them out in the first place. Helping
of international conventions prohibiting discrimination on refugees return to their homes in Mozambique,
the basis of race and against women. Afghanistan, Eritrea, Somalia and Guatemala, for example,

is a high priority.

tn all these efforts, a policy of engagement and enlarge-
ment should take on a second meaning: we should Relief efforts will continue for people displaced by the
pursue our goals through an enlarged circle not only of conflict in Bosnia and other republics of the former
government officials but also of private and non-govern- Yugoslavia. We will act in concert with other nations and
mental groups. Private firms are natural allies in our efforts the UN against the illegal smuggling of Chinese into this
to strengthen market economies. Similarly, our goal of country. Efforts will continue to induce the military forces
strengthening democracy and civil society has a natural in Haiti to accept the installation of its democratically
ally in labor unions, human rights groups, environmental elected government, in part to help stem the flow of
advocates, chambers of commerce, and election monitors. Haitians attempting entry into the United States.
Just as we rely on force multipliers in defense, we should
welcome these "diplomacy multipliers," such as the
National Endowment for Democracy.

Supporting the global movement toward democracy
requires a pragmatic and long-term effort focussed on both
values and institutions. The United States must build on
the opportunities achieved through the successful conclu-

20


-----

III. Integrated Regional
**Approaches**

The United States is a genuinely global power. Our policy focussed on four goals: preventing the spread of the
toward each of the world's regions reflects our overall fighting into a broader European war that could threaten
strategy tailored to their unique challenges and opportuni- both allies and the stability of new democratic states in
ties. This section highlights the application of our strategy Central and Eastern Europe; stemming the destabilizing
to each of the world's regions; our broad objectives and flow of refugees from the conflict; halting the slaughter of
thrust, rather than an exhaustive list of all our policies and innocents; and helping to confirm NATO's central role in
interests. It illustrates how we integrate our commitment to post.Cold War Europe.
the promotion of democracy and the enhancement of
American prosperity with our security requirements to Our leadership paved the way to NATO's February
produce a mutually reinforcing policy. ultimatum that ended the Serb shelling of Sarajevo and

restored calm to Bosnia's capital. Our diplomatic leader-
ship brought an end to the fighting between the Muslims
and Croats in Bosnia and helped establish a bicommunal

**_Europe and Eurasia_**

Bosnian-Croat Federation. We have played a leading role

Our strategy of enlargement and engagement is central to in the Contact Group, in tandem with the European Union
u.s. policy towards post-Cold War Europe. European and the Russian Federation, in forging a plan for a compre-
stability is vital to our own security, a lesson we have hensive settlement to the Bosnian conflict. In addition, the
tearned twice at great cost this century. Vibrant European U.s., through the Sarajevo airlift and airdrops throughout
economies mean more jobs for Americans at home and Bosnia-Herzegovina, has provided the largest quantity of
investment opportunities abroad. With the collapse of the humanitarian aid of any nation. We have led the way in
Soviet empire and the emergence of new democracies in NATO's decisions to enforce the no-fly zone, to protect
its wake, the United States has an unparalleled opportunity UN troops if they are attacked, to enforce the economic
to contribute toward a free and undivided Europe. Our sanctions against Serbia on the Adriatic and, most recently,
goal is an integrated democratic Europe cooperating to end the Serb's assault on Gorazde. And we have
with the United States to keep the peace and promote deployed peacekeeping troops to the Former Yugoslav
prosperity. Republic of Macedonia to prevent the spillover of the

conflict, as well as laying down a firm warning to Serbia

The first and most important element of our strategy in against escalation of violence in Kosovo.
Europe must be security through military strength and
cooperation. The Cold War is over, but war itself is not The murderous conflict in Yugoslavia reminds us that mili-
over. tary forces remain relevant in a post-Cold War world. It

also reveals the difficulties of applying military force to

As we know, it rages in the former Yugoslavia. While that conflicts within as well as among states. And it teaches us
war does not pose an immediate threat to our security or that it is best to act early to prevent conflicts that we may
warrant unilateral U.S. involvement, U.S. policy is later not be able to control.

21


-----

As we work to resolve that tragedy and ease the suffering ended the siege of Gorazde. NATO stands ready to help
of its victims we also need to change our security institu- support the peace once the parties reach an agreement.
tions so they can better address such conflicts and advance
Europe's integration. Many institutions will playa role, With the adoption of the U.S. initiative, Partnership for
including the European Union, the Western European Peace, at the January 1994 summit, NATO is playing an
Union, the Council of Europe, the Conference for Security increasingly important role in our strategy of European
and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations. But integration, extending the scope of our security coopera-
NATO, history's greatest political-military alliance, must tion to the new democracies of Europe. Twenty-one
be central to that process. nations, including Russia, have already joined the partner-

ship, which will pave the way for a growing program of

Only NATO has the military forces, the integrated military cooperation and political consultation. Partner
command structure, the broad legitimacy and the habits of countries are sending representatives to NATO headquar-
cooperation that are essential to draw in new participants ters near Brussels and to a military coordination cell at
and respond to new challenges. One ofthe deepest trans- Mons - the site of SHAPE. Joint exercises will take place
formations within the transatlantic community over the later this year in Poland and the Netherlands.
past half-century occurred because the armed forces of our
respective nations trained, studied and marched through In keeping with our strategy of enlargement, PFP is open to
their careers together. It is not only the compatibility of our all former members of the Warsaw Pact as well as other
weapons, but the camaraderie of our warriors that provide European states. Each partner will set the scope and pace
the sinews behind our mutual security guarantees and our of its cooperation with NATO. During his trip to Europe in
best hope for peace. July, the President reaffirmed his commitment to NATO's

future expansion, with PFP the best path toward NATO

Since the end of the Cold War, the United States has membership. The aim of NATO's future expansion,
significantly reduced the level of U.S. military forces however, will not be to draw a new line in Europe further
stationed in Europe. We have determined that a force of east, but to expand stability, democracy, prosperity and
roughly 100,000 U.S. military personnel assigned to U.S. security cooperation to an ever-broader Europe.
European command will preserve U.s. influence and lead-
ership in NATO and provide a deterrent posture that is The second element of the new strategy for Europe is
visible to both Western and Eastern Europeans. While we economic. The United States seeks to bUild on vibrant and
continue to examine the proper mix of forces, this level of open market economies, the engines that have given us
permanent presence, augmented by forward deployed the greatest prosperity in human history over the last
naval forces and reinforcements available from the U.S., is several decades in Europe and in the United States. To this
sufficient to respond to plausible crises and contributes to end, we strongly support the process of European integra-
stability in the region. Such a force level also provides a tion embodied in the European Union, seek to deepen our
sound basis for u.s. participation in multinational training partnership with the EU in support of our economic goals
and preserves the capability to deter or respond to larger but also commit ourselves to the encouragement of bilat-
threats in Europe and to support limited NATO operations eral trade and investment in countries not part of the EU.

"out of area."

The nations of the European Union face particularly severe

With the end of the Cold War, NATO's mission is economic challenges with nearly 20 million people unem-
evolving; today NATO plays a crucial role helping to ployed and, in Germany's case, the extraordinarily high
manage ethnic and national conflict in Europe. With U.S. costs of unification. Among the Atlantic nations, economic
leadership, NATO has proVided the muscle that is helping stagnation has clearly eroded publiC support in finances for
to bring about a peaceful settlement in the former outward-looking foreign policies and for greater integra-
Yugoslavia. NATO air power enforces the UN-mandated tion. We are working closely with our West European part-
no-fly zone and proVides support to UN peacekeepers. ners to expand employment and promote longterm
Our firm ultimatum in February 1994 finally brought an growth, bUilding on the results of the Detroit Jobs
end to the shelling of Sarajevo, and NATO's April decision Conference and the Naples G-7 Summit.

22


-----

As we work to strengthen our own economies, we must This will be the work of generations. There will be wrong
know that we serve our own prosperity and our security by turns and even reversals, as there have been in all coun-
helping the new market reforms in the new ~en;ocracies in tries throughout history. But as long as these states
Europe's East that will help to deflate the regIon s dema- continue their progress toward democracy and respect the

gogues. It will help ease ethnic tensions. It will help new rights of their own and other people: tha~ they unders~nd
democracies take root. the rights of their minorities and their neighbors, we will

support their progress with a steady patience.

**In Russia, the economic transformation undertaken will go**
down as one of the great historical events of this century.
The Russian Government has made remarkable progresstoward privatizing the economy and reducing inflation. **fast Asia and the Pacific**
But much remains to be done to build on the reform

East Asia is a region of growing importance for U.S. secu-

momentum to assure durable economic recovery and

rity and prosperity; nowhere are the strands of our three-

social protection. President Clinton has given strong and

pronged strategy more intertwined, nor is the need for

consistent support to this unprecedented reform effort, and

continued u.s. engagement more evident. Now more than

has mobilized the international community to provide

ever, security, open markets and democracy go hand in

structural economic assistance.

hand in our approach to this dynamic region. President
Clinton envisions an integrated strategy - a New Pacific

The short-term. difficulties of taking Central and Eastern

Community - which links security requirements with

Europe into Western economic institutions will be more

economic realities and our concern for democracy and

than rewarded ifthey succeed and if they are customers

human rights.

for America's and Western Europe's goods and services
tomorrow. That is why this Administration has been

In thinking about Asia, we must remember that security

committed to increase support substantially for market

comes first. The United States intends to remain active in

reforms in the new states of the former Soviet Union, and

that region. We are a Pacific nation. We have fought three

why we have continued our support for economic transi-

wars there in this century. To deter regional aggression and

tion in Central and Eastern Europe, while also paying

secure our own interests, we will maintain an active pres-

attention to measures that can overcome the social dislo-

ence and we will continue to lead. Our deep bilateral ties

cations which have resulted largely from the collapse of

with allies such as Japan, South Korea, Australia, Thailand,

the Soviet-dominated regional trading system.

and the Philippines, and a continued, committed
American military presence will serve as a bedrock for .

Ultimately, the success of market reforms to the East will

America's security role in the Asia-Pacific region.

depend more on trade than aid. No one nation has

Currently, our forces number nearly 100,000 personnel in

enough money to markedly change the future of those

this critical region. In addition to performing the general

countries as they move to free market systems. One of our

forward deployment functions outlined above, they

priorities, therefore, is to reduce trade barriers with the

contribute to deterring aggression and adventurism by the

former communist states.

North Korean regi me.

The third and final imperative of this new strategy is to

As the first pillar of our New Pacific Community, we are

support the growth of democracy and individual freed?ms

pursuing stronger efforts to combat the proliferat~on of

that has begun in Russia, the nations of the former Soviet

weapons of mass destruction on the Korean penmsula and

Union and Europe's former communist states. The success

in South Asia. We have instituted new regional dialogues

of these democratic reforms makes us all more secure;

on the full range of common security challenges. Our.goal

they are the best answer to the aggressive nationalism and

is to integrate, not isolate the region's powers and to find.

ethnic hatreds unleashed by the end of the Cold War.

solutions, short of conflict, to the area's continuing secunty

Nowhere is democracy's success more important to us all

challenges.

than in these countries.

23


-----

The second pillar of our new Pacific Community and the military force, it is essential that China not become a secu-
challenge for the Asian Pacific region in this decade is to rity threat to the region. To that end, we are strongly
develop multiple new arrangements to meet multiple promoting China's participation in regional security mech-
threats and opportunities. These arrangements can function anisms to reassure its neighbors and assuage its own secu-

like overlapping plates of armor, individually providing rity concerns. And we are seeking to gain further coopera-
protection and together covering the full body of our tion from China in controlling the proliferation of weapons
common security concerns. of mass destruction.

Our strong commitment to the region, and our active We are also moving to take advantage of evolVing multilat-
engagement are the foundation of our efforts to secure eral mechanisms. The APEC summit, hosted by President
peace and stability on a nonnuclear Korean peninsula. We Clinton last year, is vivid testimony to the possibilities of
are prepared to engage in broad and thorough discussions stimulating regional economic cooperation.
with North Korea to resolve a variety of issues, provided
that the North acts in good faith and while it keeps major The third pillar of our policy in building a new Pacific
elements of its nuclear program "frozen." But if North community is to support the wave of democratic reform
Korea pursues nuclear weapons development, we will do sweeping the region. The new democratic states of Asia
what it takes, in concert with allies and friends, to assure wi 11 have our strong support as they move forward to
South Korea's security and maintain intemational pressure consolidate and expand democratic reforms.
on the Pyongyang regime. Our long run objective
continues to be a non-nuclear, peacefully reunified Korean Some have argued that democracy is somehow unsuited
Peninsula. for Asia or at least for some Asian nations - that human

rights are relative and that they simply mask Western

If security problems persist in Asia, so do new opportuni- culturalism and imperialism. These voices are wrong. It is
ties for economic progress. Just three decades ago, Asia not Western imperialism, but the aspirations of Asian
had only 8% of the world's GDP. Today, it exceeds 25%. peoples themselves that explain the growing number of
Asian economies are growing at three times the rate of the democracies and the growing strength of democracy
more established industrial nations. movements everywhere in Asia. It is an insult to the spirit,

the hopes, and the dreams of the people who live and

The growth of Asia can and will benefit our nation. Over struggle in those countries to assert otherwise.
the past five years, our exports to many Asian nations have
increased by 50% or more. Much of what Asia needs to Each nation must find its own form of democracy. But
continue its growth are goods and services in which we there is no cultural justification for torture or tyranny. We
are strong. Already, Asia is our largest trading partner. refuse to let repression cloak itself in moral relativism, for
Exports to Asia account for 2.5 million jobs. democracy and human rights are not occidental yearnings;

they are universal yearnings and universal norms. We will

We are working with Japan to bring about the implemen~ continue to press for respect for human rights in countries
tation of the 1993 Framework Agreement, to ensure that as diverse as China and Burma.
the economic leg of that relationship is as healthy and
vibrant as our political and security links.

**_The Western Hemisphere_**

We are developing a broader engagement with the
People's RepubliC of China that will encompass both our

The Western hemisphere, too, is a fertile field for a strategy

economic and strategic interests. That policy is best

of engagement and enlargement. Sustained improvements

reflected in our decision to delink China's Most Favored

in the security situation there, including the resolution of

Nation status from its record on human rights. We are also

border tensions, control of insurgencies and containment

working to facilitate China's development of a more open,

of pressures for arms proliferation, wilt be an essential

market economy that accepts international trade practices.

underpinning of political and economic progress in the

Given its growing economic potential and already sizable

hemisphere.

24


-----

The unprecedented triumph of democracy and market Arab friends, and maintaining the free flow of oil at
economies throughout the region offers an unparalleled reasonable prices. Our strategy is harnessed to the unique
opportunity to secure the benefits of peace and stability, characteristics of the region and our vital interests there, as
and to promote economic growth and trade. Ratification of we work to extend the range of peace and stability, while
NAFTA is one of our most important foreign policy implementing a strategy of dual containment of Iraq and
achievements, because it advances all three of our central Iran as long as those states pose a threat to u.s. interests,
objectives: not only does it mean new jobs and new to other states in the region, and to their own citizens.
opportunities for American workers and business, but it
also represents an important step in solidifying the hemi- We have made solid progress in the past year. The
spheric community of democracies. Vice President Gore President's efforts helped bring about an historic first - the
has called NAFTA "a starting point for dealing with the handshake of peace between Prime Minister Rabin and
common challenges of the Americas." Chairman Arafat on the White House lawn. The President

will bring Prime Minister Rabin and King Hussein to

At the Summit of the Americas this December, President Washington for an historic meeting to advance the peace
Clinton will bring together the region's leaders to explore process further. But our efforts have not stopped there; on
new ways to further this process of integration. The other bilateral tracks and through regional dialogue we are
Summit will address three broad themes: promoting working to foster a durable peace and a comprehensive
democracy, increasing prosperity and trade ties, and settlement, while our support for economic development
achieving sustainable development. can bring hope to all the peoples of the region.

At the same time, we remain committed to extending In Southwest Asia, the United States will maintain its long-
democracy to the handful of remaining outposts where the standing presence, which has been centered on naval
region's people are not free. Our overarching objective is vessels in and near the Persian Gulf and prepositioned
to preserve the dominance of civilian elected governments combat equipment. Since Operation Desert Storm, tempo-
and promote their evolution into functioning democratic rary deployments of land-based aviation forces, ground
societies respectful of human rights. In Haiti we are forces and amphibious units have supplemented our
working with the international community to reverse the posture in the Gulf region.
military coup and restore democracy. The Cuban
Democracy Act remains the framework for our policy While we hold out the hand of cooperation and assistance
toward Cuba; our goal is the peaceful establishment of to the nations of the region that choose peace, we are firm
democratic governance for the people of Cuba. in our determination to contain and resist those who foster

conflict We have instituted a new dual containment

We are working with our neighbors through the OAS to strategy aimed at both Iraq and Iran.
invigorate regional cooperation. Both bilaterally and
regionally, we seek to eliminate the scourge of drug traf- We have made clear to Iraq it must comply with all the
ficking, which poses a serious threat to democracy and relevant Security Council resolutions, and we continue to
security. We also seek to strengthen norms for defense support oppressed minorities in Iraq through Operations
establishments that are supportive of democracy, respect Provide Comfort and Southern Watch. Our policy is
for human rights, and civilian control in defense matters. directed not against the people of Iraq, but against its
Finally, protecting the region's precious environmental oppressive and dangerous leaders.
resources is an important priority.

Our policy toward Iran is aimed at changing the behavior
of the Iranian government in several key areas, including

**_The Middle fast, Southwest and_** Iran's efforts to obtain weapons of mass destruction andmissiles, its support for terrorism and groups that oppose

the peace process, its attempts to undermine friendly

**_South Asia_**

governments in the region and its dismal human rights

The United States has enduring interests in the Middle record. We remain willing to enter into an authoritative
East, especially pursuing a comprehensive breakthrough to dialogue with Iran to discuss the differences between us.
Middle East peace, assuring the security of Israel and our·

25


-----

South Asia has seen the spread of democracy, and our intend to focus on identifying and addressing the root
strategy is designed to help the peoples of that region causes of conflicts and disasters before they erupt.
enjoy the fruits of democracy and greater stability through
efforts aimed at resolving long-standing conflict and imple- The nexus of economic, political, social, ethnic and envi-
menting confidence building measures. This advances U.S. ronmental challenges facing Africa can lead to a sense of
interests in halting nuclear and ballistic missile prolifera- "Afro-pessimism." We will instead seek to simultaneously
tion. The United States has engaged India and Pakistan in address these challenges and create a synergy that can
seeking agreement on steps to cap, reduce, and ultimately stimulate development, resurrect societies and build hope.
eliminate their weapons of mass destruction and ballistic Throughout the continent - in Rwanda, Burundi,
missile capabilities. Regional stability and improved bilat- Mozambique, Angola, Liberia, Sudan ·and elsewhere -
eral ties are also important for America's economic interest we encourage peaceful resolution of internal disputes to
in a region that contains a quarter of the world's popula- promote long-term stability and development of the
tion and one of its most important emerging markets. region. We also encourage democratic reform in nations

like Nigeria and Zaire to allow the people of these coun-

A key objective of our policy in the Gulf is to reduce the tries to enjoy responsive government.
chances that another aggressor will emerge who would
threaten the independence of existing states. Therefore, we This year, South Africa took key steps towards democratic
will continue to encourage members of the Gulf reform with the holding of non-racial elections and
Cooperation Council to work closely on collective defense creation of a Government of National Unity. We will
and security arrangements, help individual GCC states remain committed to ensuring that democracy takes root
meet their appropriate defense requirements and maintain in South Africa in order to foster a new era of prosperity
our bilateral defense agreements. and stability for all the peoples of the region. We must

support the revolution of democracy sweeping the conti-

In both the Middle East and South Asia, the pressure of nent - on center stage in South Africa, and in quieter but
expanding populations on natural resources is enormous. no less dramatic ways in countries like Malawi, Benin,
Growing desertification in the Middle East has strained Niger and Mali. We need to encourage the creation of
relations over arable land. Pollution of the coastal areas in cultures of tolerance, flowering of civil society and the
the Eastern Mediterranean, the Red Sea, and the Gulf of protection of human rights and human dignity.
Aqaba has degraded fish catches and hindered develop-
ment. Water shortages stemming from overuse, contami- Our humanitarian interventions, along with the interna-
nated water aqUifers, and riparian disputes threaten tional community, will require continued active participa-
regional relations. tion to address the grave circumstances on the continent.

This has been particularly true in Somalia. The global

In South Asia, high population densities and rampant reach of U.S. forces in Somalia allowed us to break
pollution have exacted a tremendous toll on forests, biodi- through the chaos that had prevented the introduction of
versity, and the local environment. relief supplies and UN peacekeepers. u.s. forces

prevented the death of hundreds of thousands of Somalis,
established a logistics system and then turned over the

**_Africa_** mission to more than 25,000 UN peacekeepers from over

a score of nations.

Africa is one of our greatest challenges for a strategy of

In the end, however, such efforts by the U.S. and the inter-

engagement and enlargement. Throughout Africa, the U.s.

national community must be limited in duration and

policy seeks to help support democracy, sustainable

designed to give the peoples of a nation the means and

economic development and resolution of conflicts through

opportunity to put their own house in order. In Somalia

negotiation, diplomacy and peacekeeping. New policies

and elsewhere, the responsibility for the fate of a nation

will focus on efforts to strengthen civil societies and mech-

rests finally with its own people. In Rwanda,the United

anisms for conflict resolution, particularly where ethnic,

States has also taken an active role in providing relief to

religious, and political tensions are acute. In particular, we

those displaced by ethnic violence. And U.S. AID is

26


-----

leading international efforts to get ahead of the curve on Americans to enhance our nation's support for positive
potential famines that threaten up to 20 million people on change in Africa. The White House Conference on Africa,
the continent. the first such gathering of regional experts ever sponsored

by the White House, drew together more than 200

The United States is also working with regional organiza- Americans from the Administration, Congress, business,
tions, non-governmental organizations and governments labor, academia, religious groups, relief and development
throughout Africa to address the urgent issues of popula- agencies, human rights groups and others to discuss
tion growth, spreading disease (including AIDS), environ- Africa's future and the role that the United States can play
mental decline, enhancing the role of women in develop- in it. The President, Vice President, Secretary of State and
ment, eliminating support for terrorism, demobilization of National Security Advisor all participated in the confer-
bloated militaries, relieving burdensome debt, and ence, which produced a wealth of new ideas and new
expanding trade and investment ties to the countries of commitment to Africa.
Africa.

Central to all these efforts will be strengthening the
American constituency for Africa, drawing on the knowl-
edge, experience and commitment of millions of

27


-----

**IV. Conclusions**

The clear and present dangers of the Cold War made the We are committed to enhancing u.s. national security in
need for national security commitments and expenditures the most efficient and effective ways possible. We recog-
obvious to the American people. Today the task of mobi- nize that maintaining peace and ensuring our national
lizing public support for national security priorities has security in a volatile world are expensive. The cost of any
become more complicated. The complex array of new other course of action, however, would. be immeasurably
dangers, opportunities and responsibilities outlined in this higher.
strategy come at a moment in our history when Americans
are preoccupied with domestic concerns and when Our engagement abroad requires the active, sustained
budgetary constraints are tighter than at any point in the bipartisan support of the American people and the u.s.
last half century. Yet, in an integrating and interdependent Congress. Of all the elements contained in this strategy,
world, we simply cannot be successful in advancing our none is more important than this: our Administration is
interests - political, military and economic - without committed to explaining our security interests and objec-
active engagement in world affairs. tives to the nation; to seeking the broadest possible public

and congressional support for our security programs and

While Cold War threats have diminished, our nation can investments; and to exerting our leadership in the world in
never again isolate itself from global developments. a manner that reflects our best national values and protects
Domestic renewal will not succeed if we fail to engage the security of this great and good nation.
abroad in open foreign markets, to promote democracy in
key countries, and to counter and contain emerging
threats.

29


-----

