# The National     
 Military Strategy

## of the

# United States       
 of America

###### A Strategy for Today; A Vision for Tomorrow

#### 2004


-----

ii


-----

### The
 National Military Strategy

##### of the 
 United States of America

###### A Strategy for Today; A Vision for Tomorrow

#### 2004

iii


-----

CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20318-9999

The “National Military Strategy” conveys my message to the Joint Force on
the strategic direction the Armed Forces of the United States should follow to
support the National Security and Defense Strategies in this time of war.
This document describes the ways and means to protect the United States,
prevent conflict and surprise attack and prevail against adversaries who
threaten our homeland, deployed forces, allies and friends. Success rests on
three priorities:

First, while protecting the United States we must win the War on Terrorism.
The attacks of 11 September 2001 demonstrated that our liberties are
vulnerable. The prospect of future attacks, potentially employing weapons of
mass destruction, makes it imperative we act now to stop terrorists before they
can attack again. We must continue to root out transnational terrorist
networks, sever their connections with state sponsors, eliminate their bases of
operation, counter dangerous proliferation and establish a global antiterrorism
environment. This mission requires the full integration of all instruments of
national power, the cooperation and participation of friends and allies and the
support of the American people.

Second, we will enhance our ability to fight as a joint force. Joint teamwork is
an integral part of our culture and focus as we develop leaders, organizations,
systems and doctrine. We must continue to strengthen trust and confidence
among the Service components that comprise the Joint Force. Enhancing joint
warfighting requires the integration of our Active and Reserve Components and
our civilian work force to create a seamless total force that can meet future
challenges. We must strengthen collaboration among our joint forces, agencies
at all levels of government and multinational partners. Key to such
collaboration is an improved ability to collect, process and share information.


-----

Third, we will transform the Armed Forces “in stride” – fielding new
capabilities and adopting new operational concepts while actively taking the
fight to terrorists. Transformation requires a combination of technology,
intellect and cultural adjustments – adjustments that reward innovation and
creativity. In-stride transformation will ensure US forces emerge from the
struggle against terrorism with our joint force fully prepared to meet future
global challenges.

The NMS serves to focus the Armed Forces on maintaining US leadership in a
global community that is challenged on many fronts – from countering the
threat of global terrorism to fostering emerging democracies. In this
environment, US presence and commitment to partners are essential. Our
Armed Forces, operating at home and abroad, in peace and war, will continue
to serve as a constant, visible reminder of US resolve to protect common
interests. Our dedication to security and stability ensures that the United
States is viewed as an indispensable partner, encouraging other nations to join
us in helping make the world not just safer, but better.


-----

THIS PAGE BLANK


-----

###### Table of Contents


Executive Summary...............................................................................................................viii
I. Introduction.......................................................................................................................... 1

A. Strategic Guidance........................................................................................................... 1

1. The National Security Strategy ..................................................................................... 1
2. The National Defense Strategy ...................................................................................... 1

B. The Role of the National Military Strategy ........................................................................ 2
C. Key Aspects of the Security Environment......................................................................... 4

1. A Wider Range of Adversaries ....................................................................................... 4
2. A More Complex and Distributed Battlespace ............................................................... 5
3. Technology Diffusion and Access .................................................................................. 6

D. Strategic Principles.......................................................................................................... 7

1. Agility........................................................................................................................... 7
2. Decisiveness................................................................................................................. 7
3. Integration.................................................................................................................... 7

II. National Military Objectives ................................................................................................. 9

A. Protect the United States ................................................................................................. 9
B. Prevent Conflict and Surprise Attacks............................................................................ 11
C. Prevail Against Adversaries ............................................................................................ 13

III. A Joint Force for Mission Success..................................................................................... 15

A. Desired Attributes.......................................................................................................... 15
B. Functions and Capabilities ............................................................................................ 16

1. Applying Force............................................................................................................ 16
2. Deploying and Sustaining Military Capabilities........................................................... 17
3. Securing Battlespace .................................................................................................. 18
4. Achieving Decision Superiority ................................................................................... 19

IV. Force Design and Size....................................................................................................... 21

A. Force Design and Size.................................................................................................... 21
B. Risk and Force Assessments.......................................................................................... 22

V. Joint Vision for Future Warfighting.................................................................................... 23

A. Full Spectrum Dominance ............................................................................................. 23
B. Initiatives....................................................................................................................... 24

VI. Conclusion ....................................................................................................................... 27

ii


-----

###### Executive Summary

**Chairman’s Intent**
Our challenge for the coming year and
beyond is to stay the course in the War
on Terrorism as we continue to
transform our Armed Forces to conduct
future joint operations. We cannot afford
to let our recent successes cause us to
lose focus or lull us into satisfaction with
our current capabilities. The war is not
over, and there is still dangerous work to
do. To meet this challenge, we continue
to focus on three priorities: winning the
War on Terrorism, enhancing joint
warfighting and transforming for the
future.

**Strategic Guidance**
The National Military Strategy is guided
by the goals and objectives contained in
the President’s “National Security
Strategy” and serves to implement the
Secretary of Defense’s “National Defense
Strategy of the United States of America.”

**The Role of the NMS**
The NMS provides focus for military
activities by defining a set of interrelated
military objectives from which the
Service Chiefs and combatant
commanders identify desired capabilities
and against which CJCS assesses risk.

**Key Aspects of the Security**
**Environment**

-  A Wider Range of Adversaries

-  A More Complex and Distributed
Battlespace

-  Technology Diffusion and Access

**Principles guiding the development**
**of the Joint Force**

-  Agility

-  Decisiveness

-  Integration

viii


**Military Objectives**

The NMS establishes three military
objectives that support the National
Defense Strategy:

-  Protect the United States Against
External Attacks and Aggression

-  Prevent Conflict and Surprise Attack

-  Prevail Against Adversaries.

**Desired Attributes of the Force**

-  Fully Integrated

-  Expeditionary

-  Networked

-  Decentralized

-  Adaptable

-  Decision Superiority

-  Lethality

**Capabilities and Functions**

-  Applying Force

-  Deploying and Sustaining Military
Capabilities

-  Securing Battlespace

-  Achieving Decision Superiority

**Designing and Sizing the Force**
Executing the NMS requires a force able
to generate decisive effects in any
contingency and sustain multiple,
overlapping operations. The force must
have the capabilities necessary to create
and preserve an enduring peace.

**Joint Vision for Future Warfighting**
Sustaining and increasing the qualitative
military advantages the United States
enjoys today will require transformation a transformation achieved by combining
technology, intellect and cultural
changes across the joint community.
The goal is Full Spectrum Dominance –
the ability to control any situation or
defeat any adversary across the range of
military operations.


-----

###### I. Introduction 

The National Military Strategy (NMS) supports the aims of the National Security
Strategy (NSS) and implements the National Defense Strategy (NDS). It describes the
Armed Forces’ plan to achieve military objectives in the near term and provides the
vision for ensuring they remain decisive in the future.

**A. Strategic Guidance**

_1. The National Security Strategy_

The President’s NSS affirms the Nation’s commitment to “help make the world not
just safer but better.” This requires victory in the War on Terrorism (WOT) – a victory
that is enduring and contributes to defending, preserving and extending the peace.
The NSS directs an active strategy to counter transnational terrorist networks, rogue
nations and aggressive states that possess or are working to gain weapons of mass
destruction or effect (WMD/E).[ 1] It emphasizes activities to foster relationships
among US allies, partners and friends. Such relationships support efforts to strike
globally at terrorist organizations and create conditions inhospitable to terrorism and
rogue regimes. The NSS highlights the need to retain and improve capabilities to
prevent attacks against the United States, work cooperatively with other nations and
multinational organizations and transform America’s national security institutions.

_2. The National Defense Strategy_
**_Objectives_**

The NDS supports the NSS by establishing a set

Four Defense Objectives will

of overarching defense objectives that guide the

guide DOD security activities:

Department’s security activities and provide
direction for the National Military Strategy. The

-  Secure the United States

NDS objectives serve as links between military

from direct attack.

activities and those of other government agencies in

-  Secure strategic access and

pursuit of national goals. The Department must

retain global freedom of

take action to secure the United States from direct

action.

attack and counter, at a safe distance, those who

-  Establish security

seek to harm the country. The Department must conditions conducive to a
work to secure strategic access to key regions, lines favorable international
of communication and the “global commons” of order.
international waters, airspace, space and -  Strengthen alliances and
cyberspace. Defense activities must help establish partnerships to contend
security conditions favorable to the United States with common challenges.
and its partners while working to expand the

_The National Defense Strategy_


1 The term WMD/E relates to a broad range of adversary capabilities that pose potentially
devastating impacts. WMD/E includes chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, and
enhanced high explosive weapons as well as other, more asymmetrical “weapons”.  They may
rely more on disruptive impact than destructive kinetic effects. For example, cyber attacks on
US commercial information systems or attacks against transportation networks may have a
greater economic or psychological effect than a relatively small release of a lethal agent.


-----

community of like-minded nations. The Department will also work to strengthen
alliances and partnerships by helping other nations increase their ability to defend
themselves and protect common security interests.

The NDS focuses Department activities on actions that assure allies and friends,
dissuade potential adversaries, deter aggression and counter coercion and defeat
adversaries. These interconnected activities promote close cooperation with those
committed to the principles of freedom, democracy and opportunity. The NDS
provides four guidelines for implementing the strategy – create an active defense-indepth; conduct continuous transformation; adopt a capabilities-based approach; and
manage risks. These guidelines will structure strategic planning and decisionmaking across all segments of the Department.

**B. The Role of the National Military Strategy**

The NMS derives objectives, missions and capability requirements from an
analysis of the NSS, the NDS and the security environment. The NSS and NDS
provide a broad strategic context for employing military capabilities in concert with
other instruments of national power. The NMS provides focus for military activities
by defining a set of interrelated military objectives and joint operating concepts from
which the Service Chiefs and combatant commanders identify desired capabilities
and against which the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff assesses risk.

The NSS establishes homeland security as the first priority of the Nation. The
Armed Forces’ role in homeland security is complex, combining actions overseas and
at home to protect the United States. Our first line of defense is abroad and
includes mutually supporting activities with US allies to counter threats close to their
source. Closer to home, the Armed Forces use their capabilities to secure strategic
air, land, sea and space approaches to the United States and its territory. When
directed, the Armed Forces employ military capabilities at home to protect the nation,
the domestic population and critical infrastructure from direct attack. Protecting the
United States also requires integrating military capabilities with other government
and law enforcement agencies to manage the consequences of an attack or natural
disaster.

The President and Secretary of Defense continue to highlight the increasingly
dangerous nature and capabilities of adversaries. The threat posed by adversaries,
especially those that possess WMD/E, is so great that the United States must adopt a
global posture and take action to prevent conflict and surprise attack. Achieving
this objective includes actions to shape the security environment in ways that
enhance and expand multinational partnerships. Strong alliances and coalitions
contribute to mutual security, tend to deter aggression, and help set conditions for
success in combat if deterrence fails. Preventing conflict and surprise attack is not,
however, solely defensive. The potentially catastrophic impact of an attack against
the United States, its allies and its interests may necessitate actions in self-defense to
preempt adversaries before they can attack.


-----

Both the NSS and NDS envision a future environment that is safer and better than
today. When called upon, the military must be prepared to contribute to this goal
through campaigns to prevail against adversaries. While the Armed Forces’
foremost task is to fight and win wars, the character of conflict has changed,
necessitating capabilities to defeat a wide range of adversaries – from states to nonstate actors. The Armed Force must have the capability to swiftly defeat adversaries
in overlapping campaigns while preserving the option to expand operations in one of
those campaigns to achieve more comprehensive objectives. Prevailing against
adversaries includes integrating all instruments of national power within a campaign
to set the conditions for an enduring victory.

**Campaigns**

-  Campaigns to “swiftly defeat” the efforts of adversaries are undertaken to achieve
a circumscribed set of objectives aimed at altering an adversary’s unacceptable behavior
or policies, swiftly denying an adversary’s operational or strategic objectives, preventing
attacks or uncontrolled conflict escalation and/or rapidly re-establishing security
conditions favorable to the United States and its partners.

-  Campaigns to “win decisively” are undertaken to bring about fundamental,
favorable change in a crisis region and create enduring results. They may entail lengthy
periods of both major combat and stability operations; require regime change, defense,
or restoration; and entail significant investments of the nation’s resources and time.

_The National Defense Strategy_

Achieving the objectives of protect, prevent and prevail requires connected joint
operating concepts (JOCs) that provide direction on how the joint force will operate
and a foundation for defining military capabilities. The JOCs describe how the Joint
Force conducts key missions and are supported by functional concepts of force
**application, protection, focused logistics, battlespace awareness and command**
**and control. The JOCs serve to guide the continuous transformation of the Armed**
Forces and provide a key linkage to the Armed Forces’ vision[2] for future joint
warfighting. This vision establishes the ultimate goal of the transformed force – the
ability to achieve full spectrum dominance across the range of military operations.

Achieving the objectives of the NMS in an uncertain and complex environment
requires a capabilities-based approach to force design and planning that focuses less
on a specific adversary or where a conflict might occur and more on how an adversary
might fight. This capabilities-based approach uses operating concepts to drive
planning and to guide the development of warfighting capabilities. It ensures the
joint force can adapt and succeed across a broad range of scenarios. This approach
must anticipate and rapidly adjust to changes in the security environment to ensure
the United States improves its qualitative advantage over a more diverse set of
adversaries – now and in the future.

2 The NMS integrates the document formerly known as “Joint Vision.”


-----

The objectives of the NMS help define attributes and capabilities that the Joint
Force requires and directly contribute to objectives of the NDS. These attributes and
capabilities are important in determining the required size and design of the Armed
Forces. Protecting the United States, preventing conflict and surprise attacks, and
prevailing against adversaries will require forces appropriately sized and shaped in
accordance with the NDS force-planning construct. The force must be sized to defend
the US homeland while continuing to operate in and from four forward regions to
deter aggression and coercion and set conditions for future operations. Even when
committed to a limited number of lesser contingencies, the Armed Forces must retain
the capability to swiftly defeat adversaries in two overlapping military campaigns.
Additionally, when the President calls for an enduring result in one of the two, the
force must have the capability and capacity to win decisively.

Combatant commands must consider the effect of their current posture when
undertaking new operations. They will operate within a baseline security posture
that includes the WOT and other ongoing operations from which they may be unable
or unwilling to disengage. Planners must, therefore account for WOT campaign
objectives when developing their force requirements.

**C. Key Aspects of the Security Environment**

The United States faces a number

**Mature and Emerging Challenges**

of dangerous and pervasive threats.
Traditional, irregular, catastrophic, **Traditional** challenges are posed by states
and disruptive challenges will require employing recognized military capabilities and
the Armed Forces to adjust quickly forces in well-understood forms of military
and decisively to change and competition and conflict.
anticipate emerging threats. Three key

**Irregular** challenges come from those

aspects of the security environment employing “unconventional” methods to
have unique implications for executing counter the traditional advantages of stronger
this military strategy and will drive the opponents.
development of concepts and

**Catastrophic challenges involve the**

capabilities that ensure success in

acquisition, possession, and use of WMD or

future operations.

methods producing WMD-like effects.

**Disruptive** challenges may come from

_1. A Wider Range of Adversaries_

adversaries who develop and use
breakthrough technologies to negate current

Adversaries capable of threatening

U.S. advantages in key operational domains.

the United States, its allies, and its
interests range from states to non- _The National Defense Strategy_
state organizations to individuals.
There are states with traditional military forces and advanced systems, including
cruise and ballistic missiles, which could seek to control key regions of the world. A
few of these states are ‘rogues’ that violate treaties, secretly pursue and proliferate
WMD/E, reject peaceful resolution of disputes and display callous disregard for their
citizens. Some of these states sponsor terrorists, providing them financial support,
sanctuary and access to dangerous capabilities. There are non-state actors,
including terrorist networks, international criminal organizations and illegal armed


-----

groups that menace stability and security. Even some individuals may have the
means and will to disrupt international order. Some of these adversaries are
politically unconstrained and, particularly in the case of non-state actors, may be less
susceptible to traditional means of deterrence. Adversaries increasingly seek
asymmetric capabilities and will use them in innovative ways. They will avoid US
strengths like precision strike and seek to counter US power projection capabilities by
creating anti-access environments. Such adversaries will target civilian populations,
economic centers and symbolic locations as a way to attack US political will and
resolve.

This volatile mix of challenges requires new methods of deterrence and operational
approaches to defeat these threats should deterrence fail. Intelligence systems must
allow commanders to understand enemy intent, predict threat actions, and detect
adversary movements, providing them the time necessary to take preventive
measures. Long before conflict occurs these intelligence systems must help provide a
more thorough understanding of adversaries’ motivations, goals and organizations to
determine effective deterrent courses of action. There may, however, be adversaries
who remain undeterred. Should they acquire WMD/E or dangerous asymmetric
capabilities, or demonstrate the intent to mount a surprise attack, the United States
must be prepared to prevent them from striking.

_2. A More Complex and Distributed Battlespace_

Adversaries threaten the United States throughout a complex battlespace,
extending from critical regions overseas to the homeland and spanning the global
commons of international airspace, waters, space and cyberspace. There exists an
“arc of instability” stretching from the Western Hemisphere, through Africa and the
Middle East and extending to Asia. There are areas in this arc that serve as breeding
grounds for threats to our interests. Within these areas rogue states provide
sanctuary to terrorists, protecting them from surveillance and attack. Other
adversaries take advantage of ungoverned space and under-governed territories from
which they prepare plans, train forces and launch attacks. These ungoverned areas
often coincide with locations of illicit activities; such coincidence creates
opportunities for hostile coalitions of criminal elements and ideological extremists.

The United States will conduct operations in widely diverse locations – from
densely populated urban areas located in littoral regions to remote, inhospitable and
austere locations. Military operations in this complex environment may be
dramatically different than the high intensity combat missions for which US forces
routinely train. While US Armed Forces’ will continue to emphasize precision, speed,
lethality and distributed operations, commanders must expect and plan for the
possibility that their operations will produce unintended 2nd- and 3rd-order effects.
For example, US forces can precisely locate, track, and destroy discrete targets to
reduce collateral damage and conclude operations as quickly as possible. Operations
that rely on precision may result in large elements of an adversary’s military
remaining intact and segments of the population unaffected. Commanders must
prepare to operate in regions where pockets of resistance remain and there exists the
potential for continued combat operations amidst a large number of non-combatants.


-----

This battlespace places unique demands on military organizations and
interagency partners, requiring more detailed coordination and synchronization of
activities both overseas and at home. Our experiences in Afghanistan and Iraq
highlight the need for a comprehensive strategy to achieve longer-term national goals
and objectives. The United States must adopt an “active defense-in-depth” that
merges joint force, interagency, international non-governmental organizations, and
multinational capabilities in a synergistic manner. This defense does not rely solely
on passive measures. The United States must enhance security at home while
actively patrolling strategic approaches and extending defensive capabilities well
beyond US borders. An effective defense-in-depth must also include the capability to
strike swiftly at any target around the globe using forces at home as well as forwardbased, forward-deployed and rotational forces.

_3. Technology Diffusion and Access_

Global proliferation of a wide range of technology and weaponry will affect the
character of future conflict. Dual-use civilian technologies, especially information
technologies, high-resolution imagery and global positioning systems are widely
available. These relatively low cost, commercially available technologies will improve
the disruptive and destructive capabilities of a wide range of state and non-state
actors. Advances in automation and information processing will allow some
adversaries to locate and attack targets both overseas and in the United States.
Software tools for network-attack, intrusion and disruption are globally available over
the Internet, providing almost any interested adversary a basic computer network
exploitation or attack capability. Access to advanced weapons systems and
innovative delivery systems could fundamentally change warfighting and dramatically
increase an adversary’s ability to threaten the United States.

Technology diffusion and access to advanced weapons and delivery systems have
significant implications for military capabilities. The United States must have the
ability to deny adversaries such disruptive technologies and weapons. However, the
Armed Forces cannot focus solely on these threats and assume there are not other
challenges on the horizon. Ensuring current readiness while continuing to transform
and maintaining unchallenged military superiority will require investment. These are
not mutually exclusive goals.

The Armed Forces must remain ready to fight even as they transform and
transform even as they fight. Adopting an “in-stride” approach to transformation –
through rapid prototyping, field experimentation, organizational redesign and concept
development – will ensure US military superiority remains unmatched. Such an
approach requires effective balancing of resources to recapitalize critical capabilities
and modernize some elements of the force to maintain readiness while investing in
programs that extend US military advantages into the future.


-----

**D. Strategic Principles**

**Applying Strategic Principles**

Strategic agility, integration and decisiveness allow the Armed Forces to move at
great speed and distance to undertake combat operations quickly in sometimes
overlapping conflicts. They guide the development of tailored, joint operations
concepts that define how the Armed Forces employ capabilities across the range of
military operations.

Commanders must develop plans that ensure they retain the agility to contend
with uncertainty, apply effects decisively and integrate actions with other government
agencies and multinational partners. Combatant commanders should consider these
principles when planning and conducting operations. These principles guide the
development of joint operations concepts and the capabilities the joint force requires.

_1. Agility_

It is imperative that the Armed Forces retain the ability to contend with the
principal characteristic of the security environment – uncertainty. Agility is the
ability to rapidly deploy, employ, sustain and redeploy capabilities in geographically
separated and environmentally diverse regions. As commanders conduct operations
they must consider the effects of surprise and the possibility that their forces may
have to transition from one type or phase of an operation to another quickly, or
conduct phases simultaneously, regardless of location. Agility, as a planning
principle, allows commanders to conduct simultaneous missions while retaining the
ability to respond to emerging crises. Agility is key to quickly seizing the initiative
across the range of military operations and ensuring the Armed Forces can act swiftly
and decisively to protect US interests.

_2. Decisiveness_

Decisiveness allows combatant commanders to overwhelm adversaries, control
situations and achieve definitive outcomes. Decisiveness requires tailored packages
of joint capabilities designed to achieve specific effects and accomplish objectives.
Achieving decisiveness may not require large force deployments but rather employing
capabilities in innovative ways. Transforming the Armed Forces’ capacity to mass
effects while retaining the ability to mass forces, if needed, is key to achieving
decisiveness. By focusing on decisive outcomes, combatant commanders can more
precisely define the effects they must generate and determine the capabilities they
require.

_3. Integration_

Commanders must ensure military activities are integrated effectively with the
application of other instruments of national and international power to provide focus
and unity of effort. Integration focuses on fusing and synchronizing military
operations among the Services, other government agencies, the commercial sector,


-----

non-governmental organizations and those of partners abroad. Integration does not
preclude the unilateral use of force, but rather seeks to ensure unity of effort and
maximize the contribution of partners. Enabling multinational partners through
security cooperation and other engagement activities enhances the ability of the
Armed Forces to not only prevent conflict and deter aggression but also supports
combatant commanders’ plans to quickly undertake operations over great distances
and in sometimes overlapping conflicts.

Agility, decisiveness, and integration support simultaneous operations, the
application of overmatching power[3] and the fusion of US military power with other
instruments of power. These principles stress speed, allowing US commanders to
exploit an enemy’s vulnerabilities, rapidly seize the initiative and achieve endstates.
They support the concept of surging capabilities from widely dispersed locations to
mass effects against an adversary’s centers of gravity to achieve objectives. Our
strategic principles guide the application of military power to protect, prevent and
prevail in ways that contribute to longer-term national goals and objectives.

3 Overmatching power is the precise application of combat power to foreclose enemy options
and rapidly seize the initiative to achieve conclusive victories.


-----

###### II. National Military Objectives 

The NDS establishes four strategic objectives: secure the United States from direct
attack; secure strategic access and maintain global freedom of action; establish
security conditions conducive to a favorable international order; and strengthen
alliances and partnerships to contend with common challenges. The NMS establishes
three supporting military objectives: to protect the United States against external
attacks and aggression; prevent conflict and surprise attack; and prevail against
**adversaries. These are the ends of the strategy and help to assure allies and friends,**
dissuade adversaries and deter aggression and coercion while ensuring the Armed
Forces remain ready to defeat adversaries should deterrence and dissuasion fail.
They serve as benchmarks to assess levels of risk and help to define the types and
amounts of military capabilities required.

Joint operating concepts (JOCs), currently under development, support each
objective and link specific tasks to programmatic actions as well as guide the
development of plans and the execution of operations. The current set of JOCs –
**Homeland Security, Stability Operations, Strategic Deterrence and Major**
**Combat Operations – represent related actions that support all of the NMS**
objectives. While some of the JOCs may focus on specific elements of the strategy,
success requires integrated action and unity of effort across each of the concepts.
Although military objectives have enduring elements, the ways to achieve those goals
must evolve through experimentation, operational experience, and the development of
transformational capabilities.

Several considerations will guide combatant commanders in their planning.
First, NMS objectives are interrelated and require the application of capabilities
across the tactical, operational and strategic spectrum. Each of the objectives will
generally involve collaborative efforts with other agencies and departments in the US
government. Second, commanders will need to develop plans to achieve objectives
simultaneously. The ability to conduct simultaneous operations ensures the United
States retains its initiative even during multiple operations. Finally, commanders
cannot rely solely on reactive measures and a robust defensive posture to accomplish
objectives. This strategy requires a posture of anticipatory self-defense, which
reflects the need for prepared and proportional responses to imminent aggression.
When directed, commanders will preempt in self-defense those adversaries that pose
an unmistakable threat of grave harm and which are not otherwise deterrable.

**A. Protect the United States**

Today, our first priority is to protect the United States. Joint forces help to
secure the United States from direct attack through military activities overseas,
planning and execution of homeland defense and support to civil authorities. Our
experience in the WOT reinforces the fact that protecting the Nation and its global
interests requires more than passive defensive measures. The threats posed by
terrorist groups and rogue states, especially those that gain access to WMD/E,
mandate an active defense-in-depth. Achieving this objective requires actions to


-----

counter threats overseas and close to their source; to secure our air, sea, space and
land territorial approaches; and at home to defend against direct attacks. When
directed, the Armed Forces provide military support to civil authorities, including
capabilities to manage the consequences of an attack.

**Countering Threats Close to their Source. Our primary line of defense remains**
well forward. Forces operating in key regions are essential to the defense of the
United States and to the protection of allies and US interests. Our theater security
activities with multinational partners provide access to information and intelligence
critical to anticipating and understanding new threats. This access supports the
ability of the United States to project power against threats and support the
establishment of an environment that reduces the conditions that foster extremist
ideologies. Our forces, including those rotationally deployed and those stationed
forward, will work cooperatively with other nations to encourage regional partners to
eliminate threats and patrol ungoverned space. More directly, deployed military units
will work closely with international partners and other US government agencies to
take the battle to the enemy – engaging terrorist forces, terrorist collaborators and
those governments harboring terrorists.

**Protecting Strategic Approaches. The JOC for “Homeland Security” includes**
tasks to protect the United States from direct attack while securing the air, sea, land
and space approaches to the United States. We will join the efforts of multinational
partners and other US government agencies to form an integrated defense of the air,
land, sea and space approaches in and around US sovereign territory. Protecting
these strategic approaches requires persistent surveillance that allows the United
States to identify, continuously track and interdict potential threats. This integrated
defense is essential to securing strategic access and retaining US freedom of action.

**Defensive Actions at Home. While we will attempt to counter threats close to**
their source and interdict them along the strategic approaches, we must retain the
ability to defend the United States from an attack that penetrates our forward
defenses. At home the Armed Forces must defend the United States against air and
missile attacks, terrorism and other direct attacks.  As necessary, the Armed Forces
will protect critical infrastructure that supports our ability to project military power.
When directed, the Armed Forces will temporarily employ military capabilities to
support law enforcement agencies during special events. During emergencies the
Armed Forces may provide military support to civil authorities in mitigating the
consequences of an attack or other catastrophic event when civilian responders are
overwhelmed. Military responses under these conditions require a streamlined chainof-command that integrates the unique capabilities of active and reserve military
components and civilian responders. Effective defense in the face of adaptive
adversaries will also require the exploitation of future technologies to improve
capabilities to rapidly detect, assess and interdict WMD/E and emerging threats.

**Creating a Global Anti-Terrorism Environment. In addition to defending the**
US homeland and supporting civil authorities, our strategy will diminish the
conditions that permit terrorism to flourish. To defeat terrorists we will support
national and partner nation efforts to deny state sponsorship, support, and sanctuary

10


-----

to terrorist organizations. We will work to deny terrorists safe haven in failed states
and ungoverned regions. Working with other nations’ militaries and other
governmental agencies, the Armed Forces help to establish favorable security
conditions and increase the capabilities of partners. The relationships developed in
these interactions contribute to a global antiterrorism environment that further
reduces threats to the United States, its allies and its interests. For example,
intelligence partnerships with other nations can take advantage of foreign expertise
and areas of focus and provide access to previously denied areas. These relationships
are essential mission components to protecting the United States, contributing to
deterrence and conflict prevention, as well as preventing surprise attacks.

**B. Prevent Conflict and Surprise Attacks**

The United States must prevent conflict and surprise attacks through actions that
deter aggression and coercion while retaining the capability to act promptly in
defending the nation. Preventing conflict and deterring aggression rely in large part
on an integrated overseas presence. Overseas, US forces permanently based in
strategically important areas, rotationally deployed forward in support of regional
objectives, and temporarily deployed during contingencies convey a credible message
that the United States remains committed to preventing conflict. These forces also
clearly demonstrate that the United States will react forcefully should an adversary
threaten the United States, its interests, allies and partners. The United States must
remain vigilant in identifying conditions that can lead to conflict in anticipating
adversary actions and in reacting more swiftly than in the past. The Joint Force will
deploy forward with a purpose – on the ground, in the air, in space and at sea – and
work with other nations to promote security and to deter aggression. Preventing
conflict and surprise attacks requires that the Armed Forces take action to ensure
strategic access, establish favorable security conditions and work to increase the
capabilities of partners to protect common security interests.

**Forward Posture and Presence. Increasing the capabilities of partners and their**
willingness to cooperate in operations that ensure regional security requires an
integrated, global view of our long-term strategy and enhancements to our overseas
military posture. Combatant commanders, employing a mix of forward stationed,
rotational and temporarily deployed capabilities tailored to perform specific missions,
improve our ability to act within and across borders, strengthen the role of partners
and expand joint and multinational capabilities. Posture and presence
enhancements also serve to assure our friends; improve the ability to prosecute the
WOT; deter, dissuade and defeat other threats; and support transformation. These
changes, developed in anticipation of future threats, help to ensure strategic access
to key regions and lines of communications critical to US security and sustaining
operations throughout the battlespace. Within the process of adjusting our overseas
presence, combatant commanders must develop and recommend posture
adjustments that enable expeditionary, joint, and multinational forces to act promptly
and globally while establishing favorable security conditions. The value and utility of
having forces forward goes beyond winning on the battlefield. Employing forces in
instances short of war demonstrates the United States’ willingness to lead and
encourages others to help defend, preserve and extend the peace.

11


-----

**Promote Security. The visible and purposeful presence of US military**
capabilities is an integral part of an active global strategy to ensure security and
stability. Military forces engage in security cooperation (SC) activities to establish
important military interactions, building trust and confidence between the United
States and its multinational partners. These relatively small investments often
produce results that far exceed their cost.

SC complements other national-level efforts to prevent conflict and promote
mutual security interests. These activities encourage nations to develop, modernize
and transform their own capabilities, thereby increasing the capabilities of partners
and helping them to help themselves. SC helps resolve doctrinal employment
differences among military counterparts, enhances important intelligence and
communication linkages and facilitates rapid crisis response. Active SC contributes
to stability in key areas of the world while dissuading potential adversaries from
adopting courses of action that threaten stability and security. In this way, we
facilitate the integration of military operations with allies, contribute to regional
stability, reduce underlying conditions that foment extremism and set the conditions
for future success.

**Deterring Aggression. Deterrence rests on an adversary understanding that the**
United States has an unquestioned ability to deny strategic objectives and to impose
severe consequences in response to hostile or potentially hostile actions. Deterring
aggression and coercion must be anticipatory in nature to prevent the catastrophic
impact of attacks using biological, chemical or nuclear weapons on civilian
population centers in the United States or in partner nations. The Armed Forces
have the capability to exercise flexible deterrent options (FDOs) with appropriate
combat power to defuse a crisis or force an adversary to reevaluate its courses of
action. Combatant commanders build upon the capabilities of early arriving FDOs to
support the swift defeat of an adversary when necessary. Moreover, they employ
capabilities to establish favorable security conditions in which other, non-military
FDOs can succeed.

Effective deterrence requires a strategic communication plan that emphasizes the
willingness of the United States to employ force in defense of its interests. Combatant
commander participation is essential in developing a strategic communication plan
that conveys US intent and objectives, and ensures the success of the plan by
countering adversary disinformation and misinformation. Such strategic
communication can help avoid conflict or deescalate tensions among adversaries.

The United States requires a broad set of options to discourage aggression and
coercion. Nuclear capabilities continue to play an important role in deterrence by
providing military options to deter a range of threats, including the use of WMD/E
and large-scale conventional forces. Additionally, the extension of a credible nuclear
deterrent to allies has been an important nonproliferation tool that has removed
incentives for allies to develop and deploy nuclear forces. Deterring aggression by a
wider range of adversaries requires transforming existing US strategic nuclear forces
into a new triad composed of a diverse portfolio of capabilities. This new model for

12


-----

strategic deterrence includes non-nuclear and nuclear strike forces, active and
passive defenses, as well as infrastructure to build and maintain the force.
Improvements and enhancements to non-nuclear strike capabilities, information
operations, command and control, intelligence and space forces will contribute to a
more robust and effective deterrent capability. Future advances in targeting and
precision will provide the capabilities necessary to defeat a wider range of targets
while reducing collateral damage.

**Preventing Surprise Attacks. Military forces can no longer focus solely on**
responding to aggression. The potentially horrific consequences of an attack against
the United States demand action to secure the Nation from direct attack by
eliminating certain threats before they can strike. Deterring threats and preventing
surprise attacks will place increasing demands on intelligence assets, the agility and
decisiveness of the force and the ability to work time-critical issues in the interagency
setting. Preventative missions require shared, “actionable” intelligence, and rules of
engagement that allow commanders to make timely decisions. This decision making
process stresses collaboration, speed and responsiveness – key ingredients required
when exploiting time-sensitive opportunities as they arise, especially against mobile,
time critical targets. These missions require exacting analysis and synthesis of
intelligence gathered by a combination of capabilities, including human and technical
collectors. These operations will generally involve coordinated efforts with other
agencies and departments in the US government, placing a premium on information
sharing, intelligence fusion and collaborative planning.

JOCs for stability operations and strategic deterrence are essential to how
combatant commanders employ forces before, during and after conflict. Preventing
conflict requires the capability to perform stability operations to maintain or reestablish order, promote peace and security or improve existing conditions. This will
involve close coordination with other elements of the US government and
multinational partners. Such actions reduce the underlying conditions that foster
terrorism and the extremist ideologies that support terrorism. Stability operations
create favorable security conditions that allow other instruments of national and
international power to succeed. Preventing conflict and surprise attacks is a key
element to protecting the United States from direct attack and helps to set the
conditions in which the Armed Forces can prevail against adversaries.

**C. Prevail Against Adversaries**

When necessary, the Armed Forces will defeat adversaries. Developments in the
security environment necessitate a Joint Force that can achieve tactical and
operational success and prevail in a manner that establishes favorable security
conditions and ensures enduring victories. Terrorist attacks demonstrate that
conflict is not limited to geographic borders and that defeating root causes of
terrorism requires a total national effort. The United States will constantly strive to
enlist the support of the international community and increase the capabilities of
partners to contend with common challenges, but will not hesitate to act alone, if
necessary.

13


-----

**Swiftly Defeat Adversaries. Some operation plans will focus on achieving a**
limited set of objectives. Commanders’ plans to swiftly defeat adversaries will include
options to: alter the unacceptable behavior or policies of states; rapidly seize the
initiative or prevent conflict escalation; deny an adversary sanctuary, defeat his
offensive capabilities or objectives; and provide support to post-conflict stability. In
each case, the Joint Force must combine speed, agility and superior warfighting
ability to generate decisive effects. Moving forces into multiple geographic locations
will require assured strategic access as well as strategic and tactical lift systems
robust enough to conduct and sustain multiple, simultaneous operations. Swiftly
defeating adversaries in overlapping operations will require the ability to quickly
reconstitute, reconfigure and redeploy forces to conduct another campaign.

**Win Decisively. Where necessary, commanders’ plans will include options to**
rapidly transition to a campaign to win decisively and achieve enduring results. The
capabilities required for major combat operations must be applicable to the full
spectrum of threats ranging from state to non-state adversaries employing traditional
and/or asymmetric capabilities. A campaign to win decisively will include actions to:
destroy an adversary’s military capabilities through the integrated application of air,
ground, maritime, space and information capabilities; and potentially remove
adversary regimes when directed. Such campaigns require capabilities for
conventional warfighting, unconventional warfare, homeland security, stability and
post-conflict operations, countering terrorism and security cooperation activities.

**Stability Operations. Winning decisively will require synchronizing and**
integrating major combat operations, stability operations and significant post-conflict
interagency operations to establish conditions of stability and security favorable to
the United States. The Joint Force must be able to transition from major combat
operations to stability operations and to conduct those operations simultaneously. At
the operational level, military post-conflict operations will integrate conflict
termination objectives with diplomatic, economic, financial, intelligence, law
enforcement and information efforts. Joint forces will, where appropriate,
synchronize and coordinate their operations and activities with international partners
and non-governmental organizations. These missions render other instruments of
national power more effective and set the conditions for long-term regional stability
and sustainable development.

The JOCs for major combat operations and stability operations are
complementary and must be fully integrated and synchronized in campaign planning.
These concepts allow the Joint Force to conduct sequential, parallel or simultaneous
operations throughout the physical and information domains of the global
battlespace. The goal of these JOCs is to sustain increased operating tempo, place
continuous pressure on the adversary and synchronize military action with the
application of other instruments of national power.

14


-----

###### III. A Joint Force for Mission Success 

The objectives of protect, prevent and prevail provide the foundation for defining
military capabilities and creating a joint force that can contend effectively with
uncertainty. They support a capabilities-based approach that focuses on how
adversaries will fight in the future rather than on which specific adversaries we may
fight. The Armed Forces must have the ability to defeat opponents that possess
WMD/E, combine both low-tech and high-tech capabilities and merge traditional and
asymmetric capabilities in an attempt to overcome US military advantages.

Defeating adaptive adversaries requires flexible, modular and deployable joint
forces with the ability to combine the strengths of individual Services, combatant
commands, other government agencies and multinational partners. Joint forces will
require new levels of interoperability and systems that are “born joint,” i.e.,
conceptualized and designed with joint architectures and acquisition strategies. This
level of interoperability ensures that technical, doctrinal and cultural barriers do not
limit the ability of joint commanders to achieve objectives. The goal is to design joint
force capabilities that increase the range of options – from kinetic to non-kinetic –
available to the President and Secretary of Defense.

**Joint Force Attributes**

**(Characteristics Describing the Joint Force)**

**Fully Integrated—functions and capabilities focused toward a unified purpose.**

**Expeditionary—rapidly deployable, employable and sustainable throughout the global**
battlespace.

**Networked—linked and synchronized in time and purpose.**

**Decentralized—integrated capabilities operating in a joint manner at lower echelons.**

**Adaptable—prepared to quickly respond with the appropriate capabilities mix.**

**Decision superiority—better-informed decisions implemented faster than an adversary**
can react.

**Lethality—destroy an adversary and/or his systems in all conditions.**

_Joint Operations Concepts_

**A. Desired Attributes**

The challenge over the next decade will be to develop and enhance joint
capabilities in a time of global war, finite resources and multiple commitments. While
the United States enjoys an overwhelming qualitative advantage today, sustaining
and increasing this advantage will require transformation - a transformation achieved
by combining technology, intellect and cultural changes across the joint community.
The Armed Forces must be able to evaluate challenges, leverage innovation and
technology and act decisively in pursuit of national goals.

Joint forces operating in this complex battlespace must be fully integrated and
adaptable to anticipate and counter the most dangerous threats. They will also

15


-----

require expeditionary capabilities with highly mobile forces skilled in flexible, adaptive
planning and decentralized execution even when operating from widely dispersed
locations. Operational planning and execution requires decision superiority and the
prerequisite authority to take actions and exploit fleeting opportunities. The joint
force will use superior intelligence and the power of information technologies to
increase decision superiority, precision and lethality of the force. A networked force
capable of decision superiority can collect, analyze and rapidly disseminate
intelligence and other relevant information from the national to tactical levels, then
use that information to decide and act faster than opponents.

A joint force with these attributes requires more than technological solutions. It
relies on disciplined, skilled, dedicated and professional service men and women. It
also requires informed and empowered joint leaders who combine superior technical
skills, operational experience, intellectual understanding and cultural expertise to
employ capabilities and perform critical joint functions. A joint force, possessing the
attributes described and comprised of highly motivated professionals, will produce
creative solutions to the most difficult problems.

**B. Functions and Capabilities**

Inherent in each military objective is a series of functions that the Joint Force
must perform. Commanders derive their tasks and define required capabilities
through an analysis of these functions and the concepts that describe how the Armed
Forces will perform them. Capabilities that allow the Joint Force to perform these
functions result from combinations of joint doctrine, organization, training programs,
materiel solutions, leadership, personnel and facilities.

_1. Applying Force_

The application of military force to achieve the objectives of the NMS is the
primary task of the Armed Forces. It requires the integrated use of maneuver and
engagement to create precisely defined effects. Force application includes force
movement to gain positional and temporal advantage to rapidly seize the initiative
and complicate an adversary’s defensive plans. Force application integrates air, land,
sea, special operations, information and space capabilities. It also requires
unprecedented levels of persistence that allow commanders, even in a high-threat
environment, to assess results against mission objectives, adjust capabilities
accordingly and reengage as required.

Applying force requires power projection assets to move capabilities rapidly,
employ them precisely and sustain them even when adversaries employ anti-access
and counter power projection strategies. Such power projection requires assured
access to theaters of operation and enhanced expeditionary capabilities that support
operational maneuver from strategic distances. Strong regional alliances and
coalitions enhance expeditionary capabilities by providing physical access to host
nation infrastructure and other support. They also provide access to regional
intelligence that enables the precise application of military capabilities and allows the
United States to focus combat power more effectively at the critical time and place.

16


-----

Achieving shared situational awareness with allies and partners will require
compatible information systems and security processes that protect sensitive
information without degrading the ability of multinational partners to operate
effectively with US elements. Such information and intelligence sharing helps builds
trust and confidence essential to strong international partnerships.

Force application focuses more on generating the right effects to achieve objectives
than on generating overwhelming numbers of forces. The application of force against
widely dispersed adversaries, including transnational terrorist organizations, will
require improved intelligence collection and analysis systems. Effective global strike
to damage, neutralize or destroy any objective results from a combination of precision
and maneuver and the integration of new technologies, doctrine and organizations.
Defeating the most dangerous threats will require persistence in force application that
allows strikes against time-sensitive and time-critical targets. Ensuring capabilities
are positioned and ready to conduct strikes against these targets requires the ability
to sustain operations over time and across significant distances.

_2. Deploying and Sustaining Military Capabilities_

Force application in multiple overlapping operations will challenge sustainment
capabilities. Sustaining such operations requires the ability to support forces
operating in and from austere or unimproved forward locations. Additionally, the
increasing importance of mobility will necessitate more expeditionary logistics
capabilities. Focused logistics provides the right personnel, equipment and supplies
in the right quantities and at the right place and time. Such focused logistics
capabilities will place a premium on networking to create a seamless end-to-end
logistics system that synchronizes all aspects of the deployment and distribution
processes.

Overlapping major combat operations place major demands on strategic mobility.
Achieving objectives in such operations requires robust sealift, airlift, aerial refueling
and pre-positioned assets. Strategic mobility that supports these operations also
requires supporting equipment to store, move and distribute materiel and an
information infrastructure to provide real-time visibility of the entire logistics chain.

Sustainment includes force generation and management activities that ensure the
long-term viability of the force. Force generation includes recruiting, training,
educating and retaining highly qualified people in the Active and Reserve Components
as well as within the DOD civilian and contracted workforce. These personnel must
have the right skill sets to apply joint doctrine within their organizations. Force
generation requirements must include planning, programming, acquisition,
maintenance, repair and recapitalization of equipment and infrastructure to maintain
readiness.

Force management contributes to improving readiness levels even during highintensity operations. It considers the effects of modernization and transformation on
unit availability, readiness and integration. Force management policies, including
force rotation policies that reduce stress on the joint force, evolve from continuous

17


-----

assessments of operational requirements. They also help to determine appropriate
locations, capabilities and associated infrastructure required to support multiple,
simultaneous operations. Force management policies help define the right mix of
Active and Reserve Component forces and ensure a proper balance of capabilities.

_3. Securing Battlespace_

The Armed Forces must have the ability to operate across the air, land, sea, space
and cyberspace domains of the battlespace. Armed Forces must employ military
capabilities to ensure access to these domains to protect the Nation, forces in the field
and US global interests.  The non-linear nature of the current security environment
requires multi-layered active and passive measures to counter numerous diverse
conventional and asymmetric threats. These include conventional weapons, ballistic
and cruise missiles and WMD/E. They also include threats in cyberspace aimed at
networks and data critical to US information-enabled systems. Such threats require
a comprehensive concept of deterrence encompassing traditional adversaries,
terrorist networks and rogue states able to employ any range of capabilities.

The Armed Forces require new capabilities to detect and interdict a wide range of
threats close to their source and throughout the strategic approaches. The
availability of intelligence and dual use technology to a wider variety of potential
adversaries poses an increasing danger, providing them the ability to interrupt or
exploit US information systems. Adversaries may find new and innovative ways to
combine capabilities into effective weapons and enhance their ability to threaten the
United States. Military forces must have both the means and established rules of
engagement to take action ranging from active counter proliferation to military action
that supports non-proliferation policies. Securing battlespace will require cooperative
activities with other government agencies and multinational partners to deny the use
of these capabilities and to counter asymmetric attacks. This requires doctrine, tools
and training to more effectively synchronize military capabilities with non-DOD
assets.

Consequence management capabilities are essential in the aftermath of an attack,
especially an attack with WMD/E. Such capabilities limit damage and casualties and
include actions to counter the effects of WMD/E or the intentional or unintentional
release of toxic chemicals following military operations. Consequence management
helps restore affected areas through actions that contain, neutralize and
decontaminate weapon agents. When directed, the Joint Force extends consequence
management assistance to allies and other security partners.

Military operations require information assurance that guarantees access to
information systems and their products and the ability to deny adversaries access to
the same. Securing the battlespace includes actions to safeguard information and
command and control systems that support the precise application of force and
sustainment activities that ensure persistence across the full range of military
operations. Securing battlespace ensures the ability of the Armed Forces to collect,
process, analyze and disseminate all-source intelligence and other relevant
information that contribute to decision superiority.

18


-----

_4. Achieving Decision Superiority_

Decision superiority – the process of making decisions better and faster than an
adversary – is essential to executing a strategy based on speed and flexibility.
Decision superiority requires new ways of thinking about acquiring, integrating, using
and sharing information. It necessitates new ideas for developing architectures for
command, control, communications and computers (C4) as well as the intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance assets that provide knowledge of adversaries.
Decision superiority requires precise information of enemy and friendly dispositions,
capabilities, and activities, as well as other data relevant to successful campaigns.
Battlespace awareness, combined with responsive command and control systems,
supports dynamic decision-making and turns information superiority into a
competitive advantage adversaries cannot match.

Persistent surveillance, ISR management, collaborative analysis and on-demand
dissemination facilitate battlespace awareness. Developing the intelligence products
to support this level of awareness requires collection systems and assured access to
air, land, sea and space-based sensors. Human collectors are a critical element in
the collection system; they provide the ability to discern the intention of adversaries
and produce actionable intelligence for plans and orders. Intelligence analysts
operating well forward must have the ability to reach back to comprehensive,
integrated databases and to horizontally integrate information and intelligence. The
entire system must be supported by effective counterintelligence capabilities that
deny an adversary access to critical information.

Battlespace awareness requires the ability to share relevant information with
other government agencies and allies. Such information sharing requires multi-level
security capabilities that allow multinational partners and other government agencies
to access and use relevant information while reducing the probability of compromise.
Seamless multi-level security access will empower distributed command and control
and provide increased transparency in multinational operations. Decisions to apply
force in multiple, widely dispersed locations require highly flexible and adaptive joint
command and control processes. Commanders must communicate decisions to
subordinates, rapidly develop alternative courses of action, generate required effects,
assess results and conduct appropriate follow-on operations.

The Joint Force requires the ability to conduct information operations, including
electronic warfare, computer network operations, military deception, psychological
operations and operations security that enable information superiority. Information
operations must be adaptive – tailorable to specific audiences and requirements and
flexible enough to accommodate operational adjustments. Should deterrence fail,
information operations can disrupt an enemy’s network and communicationsdependent weapons, infrastructure and command and control and battlespace
management functions. Information operations, both offensive and defensive, are key
to ensuring US freedom of action across the battlespace.

19


-----

A decision superior joint force must employ decision-making processes that allow
commanders to attack time-sensitive and time-critical targets. Dynamic decisionmaking brings together organizations, planning processes, technical systems and
commensurate authorities that support informed decisions. Such decisions require
networked command and control capabilities and a tailored common operating
picture of the battlespace. Networking must also provide increased transparency in
multinational operations and support the integration of other government agencies
and multinational partners into joint operations. Force application, sustainment and
actions to secure battlespace will rely on these capabilities.

20


-----

###### IV. Force Design and Size 

**A. Implications for Force Design and Size**

The NDS directs a force sized to defend the homeland, deter forward in and from
four regions, and conduct two, overlapping “swift defeat” campaigns. Even when
committed to a limited number of lesser contingencies, the force must be able to “win
decisively” in one of the two campaigns. This “1-4-2-1” force-sizing construct places a
premium on increasingly innovative and efficient methods to achieve objectives. The
construct establishes mission parameters for the most demanding set of potential
scenarios and encompasses the full range of military operations. It does not
represent a specific set of scenarios nor reflect temporary conditions. As a result,
planners and programmers should take into account the following implications of the
construct.

**Baseline Security Posture. Combatant commanders will perform their missions**
within a baseline security posture that includes the WOT, ongoing operations and
other day-to-day activities to which US forces remain committed and from which they
are unlikely to disengage entirely. The extremely demanding circumstances
associated with the ongoing WOT are likely to endure for the foreseeable future.
Because post-conflict and WOT operations are likely of long duration and will vary in
intensity, planners must account for the capabilities required to achieve campaign
objectives. Commanders must develop options to achieve success given this baseline
security posture and identify capability trade-offs necessary to manage increased
risks.

**Adequacy and Presence. Determining the size of the force requires assessing the**
adequacy of the force to meet current and future challenges and the optimization of
current end strength and force/capabilities mix. Sizing the force must consider the
allocation, location, distribution and support of overseas forces. Sizing must account
for sustaining permanently stationed, rotationally and temporarily deployed forward
forces; overseas infrastructure; and resources, including the strategic lift and security
necessary to project and sustain these capabilities over time. Some crises may prove
more difficult than anticipated or may escalate quickly. Reducing this risk and
ensuring the ability of the Armed Forces to prevail will require “early-entry”
capabilities forward for rapid action, while relying on surge capacity to provide followon forces.

**Disengagement. While the force-planning construct assumes that the United**
States will disengage from some contingencies when faced with a second overlapping
campaign, there may be some lesser contingencies that the United States is unwilling
or unable to terminate quickly. There may be forces conducting long-term stability
operations to reestablish favorable post conflict security conditions from which the
United States cannot disengage. Under such circumstance some important
capabilities may not be readily available at the outset of a subsequent conflict.
Combatant commanders must consider this possibility when preparing to undertake
operations, as many of the same capabilities critical to campaigns are required to
conduct lesser contingency operations.

21


-----

**Escalation. Actions to size the force must take into account the fact that lesser**
contingencies have the potential to escalate to more demanding campaigns.
Providing a wider range of military options during crises requires a force sized for a
probable level of commitment across the full range of military operations – while
ensuring that continued commitment to such contingencies does not preclude the
ability of the United States to conduct major campaigns.

**Force Generation and Transformation. Force sizing and design must look**
beyond current operations. The health of the force rests on the ability to generate,
sustain and transform capabilities over the long term. Sizing the force must include
an appreciation of the force requirements to support ongoing training activities, “instride” transformation and other programs that may restrict the availability of forces
and capabilities provided to combatant commanders. Assessments of acceptable
levels of risk will dictate the type and kinds of capabilities that Armed Forces must
possess to surge to meet the most demanding set of requirements.

**B. Risk and Force Assessments**

Given current force levels and appropriate resources, this strategy is executable.
While US conventional military capabilities are, and will likely remain, unmatched for
the foreseeable future, demands on the Armed Forces across the range of military
operations remain considerable. Pursuing the WOT, conducting stability operations
in Afghanistan and Iraq, ensuring power projection from the Homeland and
sustaining global commitments while protecting the long-term health of the Armed
Forces will require actions to mitigate risk. Commanders must develop options to
balance demands like transformation, modernization and recapitalization that, if
unrealized over the longer-term, could make it increasingly difficult to execute this
military strategy.

At present, the Armed Forces remain optimized for high-intensity conflict and
combat operations in mature theaters. Our experience in the WOT has provided
insights on both the strengths and deficiencies in our concepts for employing military
force as well as some of the capabilities the Armed Forces must improve. The Armed
Forces remain fully capable of conducting major combat operations and a range of
lesser contingencies. While we have adapted these forces successfully in OEF and
OIF, success in future operations will require further and more substantive changes.
Additionally, changes in the security environment will necessitate adaptations in the
Joint Force. These changes include evolution of threats and an assessment of the
ability of our allies and partners to contribute capabilities in support of US
operational requirements.

22


-----

###### V. Joint Vision for Future Warfighting

The attributes and capabilities of the Joint Force provide the foundation for the
force of the future. They provide the basis for adjustments to organizational design
and doctrine as changes and challenges arise. They support the goals of the
Department of Defense in ways that complement other instruments of national
power. The goal is full spectrum dominance (FSD) – the ability to control any
situation or defeat any adversary across the range of military operations.

**A. Full Spectrum Dominance**
**Focusing Transformation**

FSD is the overarching concept for

The National Defense Strategy

applying force today and provides a vision for

identifies eight capability areas

future joint operations. Achieving FSD that “provide a transformation
requires the Armed Forces to focus focus for the Department.”
transformation efforts on key capability areas
that enhance the ability of the joint force to -  Strengthening Intelligence
achieve success across the range of military -  Protecting Critical Bases of
operations. FSD requires joint military Operation
capabilities, operating concepts, functional -  Operating from the Commons:
concepts and critical enablers adaptable to Space, International Waters

and Airspace, and Cyberspace

diverse conditions and objectives.

-  Projecting and Sustaining US
Forces in Distant Anti-Access

FSD recognizes the need to integrate

Environments

military activities with those of other

-  Denying Enemies Sanctuary

government agencies, the importance of

-  Conducting Network-Centric

interoperability with allies and other partners Operations
and the criticality of transforming in-stride. -  Improving Proficiency for
FSD will serve to strengthen the trust and Irregular Warfare
confidence that exists among Service -  Increasing Capabilities of
components by acknowledging their Partners – International and
interdependence and developing concepts Domestic
that reduce gaps and seams among
organizations. It requires a capabilities-based approach that balances near-term
capabilities with longer-term requirements and incorporates a global perspective on
military and strategic risk. This integrative concept ensures military forces possess
capabilities to rapidly conduct globally dispersed, simultaneous operations; foreclose
adversary options; and, if required, generate the desired effects necessary to
decisively defeat adversaries.

Along with technological solutions to improve joint warfighting, we must also
examine our doctrine, organizations, training systems, materiel procurement,
leadership preparation, personnel programs and facilities to ensure military
superiority. This requires a more holistic approach to countering today’s threats and
preparing for those likely to emerge in the future. Reducing lead times associated
with research, development and fielding of new capabilities must be a priority. Such
actions are essential to an in-stride approach to transforming the Joint Force and

23


-----

executing concepts for future joint warfighting. Research and development programs
are equally important to FSD, providing a hedge against the more uncertain aspects
of the security environment.

**B. Initiatives**

The Services and combatant commands are actively involved in a number of
initiatives to ensure military superiority. US Armed Forces must remain superior to
any other nation’s while engaging in interagency and international efforts that
continue to set the conditions to protect the United States and win the WOT. The
following initiatives represent some of the ongoing activities that enhance joint
warfighting and support transformation.

**Organizational Adaptation. Adaptive organizations must be more modular and**
support rapid reconfiguration of joint capabilities for specific missions. Modular
forces build on the core competencies of each Service component while enhancing the
strength of joint operations. Organizational adaptation will require actions to balance
Active and Reserve Components to sustain an appropriate mix of capabilities.
Additionally, the creation of Standing Joint Force Headquarters (SJFHQ) will provide
the core capability for a Joint Task Force (JTF) Headquarters within each combatant
command. SJFHQs facilitate rapid employment of cross-service capabilities to
respond to contingencies and crises around the world. Selectively manned, trained,
and equipped, these SJFHQs will have the tools to operate effectively in any
contingency. At the same time, the creation of a Joint National Training Capability
will allow the Joint Force to train and gain experience at the tactical and operational
levels of warfare. Once established, it will provide realistic training for joint forces
and support battlespace awareness functions. This new training capability will better
prepare the Joint Force for asymmetric challenges and a diverse array of threats.

**Interagency Integration and Information Sharing. Implementing Counter-**
Terrorist (CT) Joint Interagency Coordination Groups (JIACGs) at five regional and
two global combatant commands facilitates interagency integration. The JIACGs are
multifunctional elements that have dramatically increased information sharing across
the interagency community. Continuing the experimentation process supports the
Armed Forces’ goal to develop and field a “full spectrum” JIACG that will tap
interagency expertise to address the many transnational issues facing the combatant
commanders. In the near term the Armed Forces will facilitate information sharing
and common situational awareness between elements of the JIACG with the DOD
standard collaboration toolset that enables virtual collaboration. Interagency
integration enables a strategic communications plan that includes elements of public
affairs and public diplomacy. In addition to military information operations, this
strategic communication plan ensures unity of themes and messages, emphasizes
success, accurately confirms or refutes external reporting on US operations, and
reinforces the legitimacy of US goals. Combatant commanders must be actively
involved in the development, execution and support of this strategic communication
campaign.

24


-----

**Global Information Grid. The DOD is further developing a fully interoperable,**
interagency-wide global information grid (GIG). The GIG has the potential to be the
single most important enabler of information and decision superiority. The GIG
supports the creation of a collaborative information environment that facilitates
information sharing, effective synergistic planning, and execution of simultaneous,
overlapping operations. It will be a globally interconnected, end-to-end set of
information capabilities, associated processes, and personnel for collecting,
processing, storing, disseminating and managing information on demand to defense
policymakers, warfighters and support personnel. Other initiatives include the
transformation of battlespace awareness systems to include the Operational Net
Assessment (ONA) Concept, the Multinational Information Sharing (MNIS)
Transformation Change Package (TCP) and several Advanced Concept Technology
Demonstrations (ACTDs). They respectively address information and knowledge for
decision-making; technical, policy, and organization issues; and innovative
capabilities. These activities are among the ongoing efforts related to improving
information sharing among coalition partners.

**Intelligence Campaign Planning. Achieving decision superiority in a dynamic**
environment requires the synchronization and integration of all sources of
intelligence and information to include those from DOD and non-DOD agencies, law
enforcement and multinational partners. Intelligence support must also be
continuous across the entire spectrum of conflict, and span the range of all military
operations from daily cooperative security and WOT requirements; pre-hostility,
crisis, and major combat operations; to post-conflict stability operations. Intelligence
operations strategies that support conflict prevention, mitigate against surprise
attack, and position intelligence to best answer warfighting needs are an essential
element of this support. Intelligence campaign plans implement these strategies by
defining the comprehensive intelligence needs for all phases of operations and
campaigns, including intelligence all-source analysis and production, multi-discipline
collection, processing, and supporting information architecture. Such plans also
provide for the widest possible dissemination and sharing of relevant information to
ensure national and international unity of effort without compromising security. By
addressing all aspects of intelligence operations, these plans focus the intelligence
capabilities of the Department and the broader intelligence community on providing
the critical information that leads to decision superiority.

**Enhancing Overseas Presence Posture. An integrated global presence and**
basing strategy provides the context for actions that enhance warfighting while
strengthening and expanding the United States’ network of partnerships. Such a
strategy provides rationale for adjustments in permanent and rotational presence,
prepositioned equipment, global sourcing and surge capabilities that support these
goals. Posture adjustments must support winning the WOT while setting the
conditions that will ensure an enduring peace. Enhancing US overseas presence and
global footprint must improve the ability of regional forces to employ an expeditionary
approach in response to regional and global contingencies. They must remain
“scaleable,” supporting plans to surge forces during crises when and where they are
needed. Modifications to US overseas presence and posture must enhance the Armed
Forces’ ability to deal with uncertainty, enable rapid operations and allow forces to

25


-----

respond with greater speed than in the past. US overseas presence must also
improve conditions in key regions and support conflict prevention. An integrated
global presence and basing strategy serves to strengthen existing alliances while
helping to create new partnerships. Strengthening regional alliances and coalitions
helps to create favorable regional balances of power that help bring pressure to bear
on hostile or uncooperative regimes. Multinational partnerships expand
opportunities for coalition building through combined training, experimentation and
transformation. An integrated global presence and basing strategy will expand the
range of pre-conflict options to deter aggression and control conflict escalation while
setting the conditions for a sustainable peace.

**Joint Leader Development. We continue to improve joint professional military**
education to provide more joint experiences, education and training to warfighters –
junior and senior officers and noncommissioned officers. At the senior officer level, a
modified capstone course will increase the emphasis on jointness while preparing
senior officers to lead joint task forces and other joint operations. For junior officers
and noncommissioned officers, incorporating joint education and training early in
their careers ensures future leaders will more effectively integrate tactical operations
with interagency and multinational components.

26


-----

###### VI.  Conclusion 

This strategy focuses the Armed Forces on winning the WOT and enhancing joint
warfighting while supporting actions to create a joint, network-centric, distributed
force, capable of full spectrum dominance. Achieving decision superiority and
generating tailored effects across the battlespace allows the Joint Force to control any
situation over a range of military operations. To succeed, the Armed Forces must
integrate Service capabilities in new and innovative, reduce seams between
combatant commands and develop more collaborative relationships with partners at
home and abroad.

The NMS defines specific tasks for the Joint Force that allow commanders to
assess military and strategic risk. It guides adjustments to plans and programs to
generate, employ and sustain joint capabilities effectively. Additionally, it provides
insights on operational matters, institutional issues, force management programs,
future challenges and recommends courses of action to mitigate risk.

While engaged in multiple worldwide operations to meet these requirements, the
Armed Forces of the United States must maintain force quality, enhance joint
warfighting capabilities and transform to meet the challenges of the 21st century.
Executing this strategy will require a truly joint, full spectrum force – with a seamless
mix of active forces, the Reserve Component, DOD civilians, and contracted workforce
– fully grounded in a culture of innovation. It will require the highest quality people –
disciplined, dedicated, professional – well trained, well educated, and well led.

**The Mission of the**

**Armed Forces**

In support of the objectives of the NDS the Armed Forces
conduct military activities globally to:

-  **Protect the United States against external attacks and**
aggression.

-  **Prevent conflict and surprise attacks.**

-  **Prevail against adversaries.**

Appropriately resourced, this strategy will achieve the goals of the NSS and NDS,
effectively balancing military and strategic risk over the long term. It will enable us to
counter the threats of today and transform the Joint Force to master the challenges
of the future.

27


-----

(INTENTIONALLY BLANK)

28


-----

29


-----

30


-----

