-----

[Type text]


-----

**I. Introduction.**

The ongoing shifts in relative power and increasing interconnectedness in the
international order indicate a strategic inflection point. This requires America’s
foreign policy to employ an adaptive blend of diplomacy, development, and
defense. While the strength of our military will continue to underpin national
security, we must continuously adapt our approaches to how we exercise
power. Leadership is how we exercise the full spectrum of power to defend our
national interests and advance international security and stability.

Our Nation’s security and prosperity are inseparable. They are sustained by
our values and leadership in the international order. In this interdependent
world, the enduring interests of the United States are increasingly tied to those
of other state and non-state actors. The complexity of this global system and
the challenges therein demand that we – the Joint
Force – think anew about how we lead. _Leadership is how we_

_exercise the full_

In support of our civilian-led foreign policy, this _spectrum of power to_
strategy acknowledges the need for military _defend our national_
leadership that is redefined for an increasingly _interests and advance_
complex strategic environment. Our leadership will _international security_
emphasize mutual responsibility and respect. _and stability._
Accomplishing this strategy will require a full
spectrum of direct and indirect leadership approaches – facilitator, enabler,
convener, and guarantor – sometimes simultaneously.

Leveraging our capabilities and forward presence, we must play a supporting
role in facilitating U.S. government agencies and other organizations’ efforts to
advance our Nation’s interests. In some cases, we will serve in an enabling
capacity to help other nations achieve security goals that can advance common
interests. As a convener, our relationships, values, and military capabilities
provide us, often uniquely, with the ability to bring others together to help
deepen security ties between them and cooperatively address common security
challenges. Lastly, we will be prepared to act as security guarantor – preferably
with partners and allies, but alone if necessary – to deter and defeat acts of
aggression. For all of these leadership approaches, we will pursue wider and
more constructive partnerships.

Let us not forget, the Nation remains at war abroad to defend against and
defeat threats to our homeland. Our foremost priority is the security of the
American people, our territory, and our way of life. In the current operational
environment, this means each component of our Joint Force will remain
aligned to achieve success in our ongoing campaign in Afghanistan and
security cooperation efforts with Pakistan, and against violent extremism
worldwide. We must continue to prevent attacks against the United States and
its allies, strengthen international and regional security, and be prepared to


-----

deter and defeat aggression that would undermine international stability as we
fight these campaigns.

We must carefully manage the impact of the wars on our military – especially
our people – and shape our military for the future. Defense budget projections
indicate that leaders must continue to plan for and make difficult choices
between current and future challenges. We underestimate at our peril the
stresses of sustained combat operations on our equipment and people.
Likewise, potential adversaries who underestimate our continued military
strength and will to protect our national interests do so at their peril.

**II. Strategic Environment.**

_Overview – The United States remains the world’s preeminent power, even as a_
growing number of state and non-state actors
exhibit consequential influence. This

_This changing distribution of_

changing distribution of power indicates

_power indicates evolution to_

evolution to a "multi-nodal" world

_a "multi-nodal" world_

characterized more by shifting, interest-driven

_characterized more by_

coalitions based on diplomatic, military, and

_shifting, interest-driven_

economic power, than by rigid security

_coalitions based on_

competition between opposing blocs. There

_diplomatic, military, and_

are global and regional powers exhibiting

_economic power, than by_

nationalism and assertiveness that tests our

_rigid security competition_

partners’ resilience and U.S. leadership.

_between opposing blocs._

There exist in Asia two rising global powers
and a large number of consequential regional powers. The Middle East
features a number of emerging and influential regional powers. Dynamics in
Asia and the Middle East, in particular, may challenge regional stability.

_Demographic Trends – The world will become more populated and urbanized._
Global population will increase by approximately 1.2 billion and there will be
more than a billion new urban dwellers by 2025. Most population growth will
occur in the developing world. Conversely, in Europe and parts of Asia,
populations are projected to decline and age with long term impacts to the
global share of their economic output. Population growth and urbanization in
the Middle East, Africa, and South Central Asia will contribute to increased
water scarcity and may present governance challenges. The uncertain impact
of global climate change combined with increased population centers in or near
coastal environments may challenge the ability of weak or developing states to
respond to natural disasters.

_Prosperity and Security – The United States will remain the foremost economic_
and military power for the foreseeable future, though national debt poses a
significant national security risk. Asia will increase its regional share of global
wealth. Though it faces a number of domestic challenges, continuation of


-----

China’s decades-long economic growth is expected to facilitate its continued
military modernization and expansion of its interests within and beyond the
region. Other states in Asia, too, are becoming more militarily capable as they
grow more prosperous. NATO will remain the most powerful military alliance,
though some of its states are reducing defense spending as part of broader
austerity measures. These reductions may impact partner nations’
contributions to our collective security. Energy-state relationships will
intersect geopolitical concerns as state-run companies will control an
increasing share of the world's hydrocarbon resources and the persistent
challenge of resource scarcity may overlap with territorial disputes.

_Weapons of Mass Destruction – The intersection between states, state-_
sponsored, and non-state adversaries is most dangerous in the area of WMD
proliferation and nuclear terrorism. In Asia, North Korea’s nuclear capability
and potentially unstable transition of power poses a risk to regional stability
and international non-proliferation efforts. In the Middle East, a nuclear
armed Iran could set off a cascade of states in the region seeking nuclear parity
or increased conventional capabilities; that could lead to regional conflict. The
prospect of multiple nuclear armed regimes in the Middle East with nascent
security and command and control mechanisms amplifies the threat of conflict,
and significantly increases the probability of miscalculation or the loss of
control of a nuclear weapon to non-state actors.

_Global Commons and Globally Connected Domains – Assured access to and_
freedom of maneuver within the global
commons – shared areas of sea, air, and
space – and globally connected domains
such as cyberspace are being
increasingly challenged by both state and
non-state actors. Non-state actors such
as criminal organizations, traffickers, and
terrorist groups find a nexus of interests
in exploiting the commons. States are
developing anti-access and area-denial
capabilities and strategies to constrain
U.S. and international freedom of action. _The Nimitz-class aircraft carrier USS Carl Vinson_
These states are rapidly acquiring _Lekir (FF 26) and corvette KD Kelantan (FFL 175) and_
technologies, such as missiles and _the Ticonderoga-class guided-missile cruiser USS_
autonomous and remotely-piloted

_The Nimitz-class aircraft carrier USS Carl Vinson_
_(CVN 70) leads the Royal Malaysian Navy frigate KD_
_Lekir (FF 26) and corvette KD Kelantan (FFL 175) and_
_the Ticonderoga-class guided-missile cruiser USS_
_Bunker Hill (CG 52) during a passing exercise._

platforms that challenge our ability to project power from the global commons
and increase our operational risk. Meanwhile, enabling and war-fighting
domains of space and cyberspace are simultaneously more critical for our
operations, yet more vulnerable to malicious actions. The space environment
is becoming more congested, contested, and competitive. Some states are
conducting or condoning cyber intrusions that foreshadow the growing threat
in this globally connected domain. The cyber threat is expanded and


-----

exacerbated by lack of international norms, difficulties of attribution, low
barriers to entry, and the relative ease of developing potent capabilities.

_Non-state Actors – State-sponsored and non-state actors complicate deterrence_
and accountability by extending their reach through advanced technologies
that were once solely the domain of states. They are using technology to
coordinate and operate globally to spread extremist ideologies and attack the
United States and our allies. States with weak, failing, and corrupt
governments will increasingly be used as a safe haven for an expanding array
of non-state actors that breed conflict and endanger stability, particularly in
Africa and the broader Middle East. Terrorists, criminal networks, and pirates
undermine the rule of law, perpetuate and accelerate violence in the
international system, and challenge states’ ability to respond.

**III. Enduring National Interests and National Military Objectives.**

U.S. foreign policy and the international security architecture must continue to
adapt to this dynamic security environment. The 2010 National Security
_Strategy reaffirmed America’s commitment to retaining its global leadership_
role and defined our enduring national interests:

-  The security of the United States, its citizens, and U.S. allies and
partners;

-  A strong, innovative and growing U.S. economy in an open international
economic system that promotes opportunity and prosperity;

-  Respect for universal values at home and around the world; and

-  An international order advanced by U.S. leadership that promotes peace,
security, and opportunity through stronger cooperation to meet global
challenges.

The 2010 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) took an important step towards
institutionalizing reform in the Defense Department and rebalancing the urgent
needs of today with preparation for future challenges. The QDR also defined
the main elements of U.S. force structure and provided a construct for sizing
and shaping the Joint Force to accomplish the Nation’s defense objectives. The
_Nuclear Posture Review addressed these areas with respect to nuclear forces._

The NSS and QDR guide the establishment of our National Military Objectives:

-  Counter Violent Extremism

-  Deter and Defeat Aggression

-  Strengthen International and Regional Security

-  Shape the Future Force


-----

In pursuing these objectives, America’s Joint Force makes critical contributions
to U.S. leadership and national security. The
United States, allies, and our partners will _In this multi-nodal world, the_
often compete with others for influence in an _military’s contribution to_
environment where persistent tension is the _American leadership must be_
norm. In conjunction with U.S. diplomatic _about more than power – it_
efforts, we seek to prevent this tension from _must be about our approach_
escalating into conflict. This requires _to exercising power._
America’s Joint Force possesses the reach,
resolve, and ability to project decisive military power.

However, military power alone is insufficient to fully address the complex
security challenges we face. Military power and our Nation’s other instruments
of statecraft are more effective when applied in concert. Trends in the strategic
environment do not suggest this will change. In this multi-nodal world, the
military’s contribution to American leadership must be about more than power
– it must be about our approach to exercising power. And regardless of our
leadership approach, we must always demonstrate our core values through the
persuasive power of example.

**A. Counter Violent Extremism.**

There are no more vital interests than the security of the American people, our
territory, and our way of life. This is why we are at war in South Central Asia,
the epicenter of violent extremism. Afghanistan is where al Qaida, given
sanctuary by the Taliban, planned the attacks that murdered more than 3,000
innocent people on 11 September 2001. Al Qaida senior leadership remains in
Pakistan and intends to continue to attack the United States, allies, and our
partners.

The Nation’s strategic objective in this
campaign is to disrupt, dismantle, and
defeat al Qaida and its affiliates in
Afghanistan and Pakistan and prevent their
return to either country. Success requires
the Joint Force to closely work with NATO,
our coalition partners, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan. We will continue to erode Taliban
influence, work with the Afghan government
to facilitate reintegration and reconciliation _American K-9 Detection Services (AMK9) dog_
of former insurgents, continue to strengthen _Nepal native and his Explosive Detector Dog,_
the capacity of Afghan security forces, and _Tinus, lead a partnered dismounted patrol with_
enable Pakistan to ultimately defeat al Qaida _through Panwai'i district of Kandahar Oct 8._
and its extremist allies.


_American K-9 Detection Services (AMK9) dog_
_handler Ambar Limbu, (center) a Panchkhal,_
_Nepal native and his Explosive Detector Dog,_
_Tinus, lead a partnered dismounted patrol with_
_the Afghan National Army and Canadian forces_
_through Panwai'i district of Kandahar Oct 8._


-----

The threat of violent extremism is not limited to South Central Asia. Groups
such as Al Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, Al Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
al-Shabaab, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, and others emanate from Somalia, Yemen, and
elsewhere around the globe. Terrorists’ abilities to remotely plan and
coordinate attacks is growing, sometimes facilitated by global illicit trafficking
routes, extending their operational reach while rendering targeting of their
sanctuaries more difficult. Undeterred by the complexity of terrorist networks
and in concert with our Allies and partners, we will be prepared to find,
capture, or kill violent extremists wherever they reside when they threaten
interests and citizens of America and our allies.

While such operations disrupt in the short-term, they cannot be decisive and
do not constitute a viable long-term strategy for combating extremism. We
must continue to support and facilitate whole-of-nation approaches to
countering extremism that seek and sustain regional partnerships with
responsible states to erode terrorists’ support and sources of legitimacy.
Military power complements economic development, governance, and rule of
law – the true bedrocks of counterterrorism efforts. In the long run, violent
ideologies are ultimately discredited and defeated when a secure population
chooses to reject extremism and violence in favor of more peaceful pursuits.

We will strengthen and expand our network of
partnerships to enable partner capacity to
enhance security. This will help reduce
potential safe-havens before violent extremism
can take root. We will nest our efforts to build
partner capacity with broader national
security priorities, consolidate our
institutional processes, and improve
coordination across agencies. Military-tomilitary relationships must be reliable to be
effective, and persevere through political _College of International Security Affairs on_
upheavals or even disruption. _10 June, 2010 at National Defense_

We will adapt deterrence principles to our _military officers to study national security_
efforts in countering extremists. Though _military's educational institutions._
terrorists are very difficult to deter directly,

_These students prepare to graduate from the_
_College of International Security Affairs on_
_10 June, 2010 at National Defense_
_University, Fort McNair, Washington D.C._
_Each year, over 135 countries send their_
_military officers to study national security_
_affairs and operational matters at our_
_military's educational institutions._

they make cost/benefit calculations and are dependent on states and other
stakeholders we are capable of influencing. When directed, we will provide
capabilities to hold accountable any government or entity complicit in attacks
against the United States or allies to raise the cost of their support. And we
must take further steps to deny terrorists the benefits they seek through their
attacks. We will, on order, be prepared to respond to any attack across the full
spectrum of military capabilities with an appropriate and measured response
at a time and place of our Nation’s choosing.


-----

As we conduct this difficult campaign, we will employ military force in concert
with other instruments of power and in a precise and principled manner.
Precise does not mean perfect, and principled does not mean uncompromising.
But we must recognize the inherent complexity in war among peoples. The risk
we assume by minimizing collateral damage to innocents is balanced by a
reduction of risk to turning even more people against our broader mission.
Thus, the disciplined application of force is consistent with our values and
international law, increases our chances of strategic and operational success,
and more effectively advances national policy.

**B. Deter and Defeat Aggression.**

Preventing wars is as important as winning them, and far less costly. A
prosperous and interconnected world requires a stable and secure
environment, the absence of territorial aggression or conflict between states,
and reliable access to resources and cyberspace for stable markets.
Conventional or unconventional conflict between states interrupts commerce
and triggers market volatility. Instantaneous information systems and the
global economy’s interconnectedness exacerbate and amplify these effects. In
our role as security guarantor, and in concert with our allies and partners
whenever possible, the Joint Force will be prepared to deter and defeat regional
aggression that would threaten our national interests.

_Deter Aggression:  The United States seeks the peace and security of a world_
without nuclear weapons. However, as long as nuclear weapons exist,
deterring nuclear attack on the United States, our allies, and partners will
continue to be the fundamental role of U.S. nuclear weapons. In support of the
President’s vision, we will reduce the role and numbers of nuclear weapons,
while maintaining a safe, secure, and effective strategic deterrent. The Joint
Force will provide capabilities to deter aggression and assure our allies and
partners through our nuclear arsenal and
overseas missile defense capabilities. We
will continue to lead in advancing Ballistic
Missile Defense capabilities against limited
attacks and we seek opportunities for
cooperation with allies and partners in this
area.

We will counter WMD proliferation as it
presents a grave and common threat to our
Nation and others. Working through _Hazardous material decontamination operators_
institutions, alliances and coalitions, we will _await the arrival of contaminated patients during_

_a simulated nuclear attack during Operation_

dismantle proliferation networks, interdict _Vibrant Response at Muscatatuck Urban Training_
movement of materials, further improve _Center, Butlerville, Ind., Nov. 8, 2009._
nuclear forensics capabilities, and secure
nuclear, chemical, and biological materials


-----

worldwide. We will help allies and partners to develop WMD detection and
elimination capabilities to protect their own populations. Combatant
Commanders shall conduct prudent planning and be prepared to eliminate
sources of WMD, providing the President with an array of options for military
action when and where necessary.

We must also maintain a robust conventional deterrent. Deterrence and
assurance requires the ability to rapidly and globally project power in all
domains. In turn, force posture – both rotational and forward based – shall be
geographically distributed, operationally resilient, and politically sustainable
through visible partnering efforts.

We will support whole-of-nation deterrence approaches that blend economic,
diplomatic, and military tools to influence adversary behavior. Denying an
aggressor the benefits of achieving its objectives can be just as effective as in
altering its strategic calculus through the threat of retaliation. The most
effective deterrence approaches make use of both techniques, while also
providing potential adversaries acceptable alternative courses of action.

We must also adapt deterrence principles to

_A prosperous and_

21st century security challenges. We will

_interconnected world_

enhance deterrence in air, space, and

_requires a stable and secure_

cyberspace by possessing the capability to

_environment, the absence of_

fight through a degraded environment and

_territorial aggression or_

improving our ability to attribute and defeat

_conflict between states, and_

attacks on our systems or supporting

_reliable access to resources_

infrastructure.

_and cyberspace for stable_
_markets._

_Defeat Aggression: The core task of our_
Armed Forces remains to defend our Nation and win its wars. To do so, we
must provide capabilities to defeat adversary aggression. Military force, at
times, may be necessary to defend our Nation and allies or to preserve broader
peace and security. Seeking to adhere to international standards, the United
States will use military force in concert with allies and partners whenever
possible, while reserving the right to act alone if necessary. Across a wide
range of contingencies, military leaders will provide our Nation’s leadership
with options of how the military can help achieve the Nation’s objectives.

Defeating adversary aggression will require the Joint Force to support National
approaches to counter anti-access and area-denial strategies. Anti-access
strategies seek to prevent our Nation’s ability to project and sustain combat
power into a region, while area denial strategies seek to constrain our Nation’s
freedom of action within the region. Defeating these strategies will require
Joint Force doctrine to better integrate core military competencies across all
domains and account for geographic considerations and constraints. These
core military competencies include complementary, multi-domain power


-----

projection, joint forcible entry, the ability to maintain joint assured access to
the global commons and cyberspace should they become contested, and the
ability to fight and win against adversaries.

Joint assured access to the global commons and cyberspace constitutes a core
aspect of U.S. national security and remains an enduring mission for the Joint
Force. The global commons and globally connected domains constitute the
connective tissue upon which all nations' security and prosperity depend. The
maritime domain enables the bulk of the joint force's forward deployment and
sustainment, as well as the commerce that underpins the global economic
system. The interlinked domains of air, space, and cyberspace allow for the
high-speed, high-volume exchange of people, ideas, goods, information and
capital that are equally critical to the global economy. These collective domains
are essential and interdependent mediums for the Joint Force's projection and
sustainment of power and ability to deter and defeat aggression.

In support of our Nation's interests, the Joint Force will take a strong role in
international efforts to safeguard access, sustain security, provide oversight
and accountability, and promote responsible norms in the global commons and
cyberspace. The Joint Force will adhere to conventions, laws, and regulations
our Nation supports to underpin collective security and govern conduct. We
will also facilitate cooperation in the commons and cyberspace with
transparent, routine, and predictable practices as part of our theater
strategies.

Our ability to operate effectively in space
and cyberspace, in particular, is
increasingly essential to defeating
aggression. The United States faces
persistent, widespread, and growing threats
from state and non-state actors in space
and cyberspace. We must grow capabilities
that enable operations when a common
domain is unusable or inaccessible. Space _The Soyuz TMA-17 spacecraft approaches the_
and cyberspace enable effective global war- _International Space Station, Dec. 22, 2009,_
fighting in the air, land, and maritime _commander and Expedition 22 flight engineer;_
domains, and have emerged as war-fighting _along with NASA Astronaut Col. T.J. Creamer_
domains in their own right. _Astronaut Soichi Noguchi, both flight engineers._

_The Soyuz TMA-17 spacecraft approaches the_
_International Space Station, Dec. 22, 2009,_
_carrying Russian Cosmonaut Oleg Kotov, Soyuz_
_commander and Expedition 22 flight engineer;_
_along with NASA Astronaut Col. T.J. Creamer_
_and Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency_
_Astronaut Soichi Noguchi, both flight engineers._

-  _Space - We will support whole-of-nation approaches to establishing and_
promoting norms, enhancing space situational awareness, and fostering
greater transparency and information sharing. We will work with allies
and partners to enhance space capabilities enabling coalitions and
improving space architecture resiliency. We will also train for power
projection operations in space-degraded environments that minimize the


-----

incentives to attack space capabilities, and will maintain a range of
options to deter or punish such activities.

-  _Cyberspace – Cyberspace capabilities enable Combatant Commanders to_
operate effectively across all domains. Strategic Command and Cyber
Command will collaborate with U.S. government agencies, nongovernment entities, industry, and international actors to develop new
cyber norms, capabilities, organizations, and skills. Should a large-scale
cyber intrusion or debilitating cyber attack occur, we must provide a
broad range of options to ensure our access and use of the cyberspace
domain and hold malicious actors accountable. We must seek executive
and Congressional action to provide new authorities to enable effective
action in cyberspace.

**C. Strengthen International and Regional Security.**

As a global power, U.S. interests are deeply intertwined with the security and
stability of the broader international system – a system of alliances,
partnerships, and multi-national institutions. The disposition, strength, and
readiness of our Joint Force form a global defense posture that provides
unsurpassed capabilities allowing us, uniquely, to lead efforts that strengthen
security across all regions. Our approach to leading will differ according to the
unique combination of challenges we face. We must address immediate
challenges and posture ourselves to account for long-term trends.

_Strengthening_

Strengthening international and regional security

_international and_

requires that our forces be globally-available, yet

_regional security_

regionally-focused. Missions can change rapidly and

_requires that our_

we will continue to shape our joint force to be able to

_forces be globally-_

aggregate capabilities quickly. We will improve

_available, yet_

synchronized planning and force flow between

_regionally-focused._

regional theaters. With partner nation support, we
will preserve forward presence and access to the commons, bases, ports, and
airfields commensurate with safeguarding our economic and security interests
worldwide. We must thoughtfully address cultural and sovereignty concerns in
host countries. Global posture remains our most powerful form of commitment
and provides us strategic depth across domains and regions.

_North America – Our Nation’s most vital interests are the safety and security of_
our people and territory and our way of life. We will defend the homeland and
play a critical role in supporting homeland security. We will work with the
Department of Homeland Security, particularly the Coast Guard, to improve
air, maritime, space, cyberspace and land domain awareness to help secure the
approaches to our continent and Nation. In response to an attack, cyber
incident, or natural disaster, we will focus on rapidly providing planning,


-----

command and control, consequence
management, and logistics support to the
Department of Homeland Security, state and
local governments, and non-governmental
organizations. We will continue to dedicate,
fund, and train a portion of the National
Guard for homeland defense and defense
support of civil authorities.

Working with Canada and Mexico, we will _Soldiers of the Alabama National Guard build_
remain prepared to deter and defeat direct _protect Dauphin Island, Ala., beaches from the_
threats to our North American homeland. _BP oil spill, July 23, 2010._

_Soldiers of the Alabama National Guard build_
_and maintain miles of HESCO barriers to_
_protect Dauphin Island, Ala., beaches from the_
_BP oil spill, July 23, 2010._

We will also partner with Canada on regional security issues such as an
evolving Arctic, and look to build an increasingly close security partnership
with Mexico. As part of our shared responsibility to ensure security on both
sides of our border, we shall assist Mexican security forces in combating
violent transnational criminal organizations. Efforts to disrupt illicit trafficking
sources and transit zones must be coordinated across North, Central and
South America, and the Caribbean.

_Caribbean, South and Central America – Our Nation seeks progress on bilateral,_
hemispheric and global issues with South America. In support of this, the
Joint Force will help build regional security cooperation in South and Central
America and the Caribbean to enhance security and stability in the Western
Hemisphere. We welcome efforts by Brazil and our other regional partners to
establish economic and security mechanisms, such as the South American
Defense Council. These efforts can help build interdependence and further
integrate partner states into a South American security architecture that will
improve regional stability.

_Broader Middle East – Our Nation has_
important interests in the greater Middle
East. The most significant threat to
regional stability remains an Iranian
regime that continues to seek the
development of nuclear weapons, as well
as continuing to provide support to
terrorist organizations throughout the
broader Middle East. To support and
advance our Nation’s interests, the Joint _U.S. Soldiers assigned to 3rd Platoon, Charlie_
Force will pursue security cooperation _3rd Brigade Combat Team, 4th Infantry Division_
and help strengthen the defense _provide support to the 2nd Battalion, 50th Brigade,_
capabilities of our allies and regional _outside Joint Security Station Basra Operations_
partners. We will support efforts to _Command, Iraq, July 25, 2010._

_U.S. Soldiers assigned to 3rd Platoon, Charlie_
_Company, 1st Battalion, 68th Armored Regiment,_
_3rd Brigade Combat Team, 4th Infantry Division_
_provide support to the 2nd Battalion, 50th Brigade,_
_14th Iraqi Army Division in a cordon and search_
_outside Joint Security Station Basra Operations_
_Command, Iraq, July 25, 2010._

counter transnational and sub-state militant groups, and combat the spread of
WMD and related materials. We will maintain an appropriate presence capable


-----

of reassuring partners and allies and preventing Iran from acquiring nuclear
arms.

Our Nation seeks a long-term partnership with Iraq, including in security
affairs. The Joint Force must continue to transition well as we shift the focus
of our assistance from Iraq’s internal domestic security to its external national
defense. We will help build an Iraqi defense force while carefully considering
the interests of all Iraqis as well as Iraq’s neighbors. We will help to further
strengthen security relations between Iraq and its neighbors.

_Africa – Our Nation continues to embrace effective partnerships in Africa. The_
United Nations and African Union play a critical role in humanitarian,
peacekeeping and capacity-building efforts, which help preserve stability,
facilitate resolutions to political tensions that underlie conflicts, and foster
broader development. To support this, the
Joint Force will continue to build partner
capacity in Africa, focusing on critical states
where the threat of terrorism could pose a
threat to our homeland and interests. We
will continue to counter violent extremism in
the Horn of Africa, particularly Somalia and
the Trans-Sahel. We will work in other areas
to help reduce the security threat to
innocent civilians. We must identify and
encourage states and regional organizations
that have demonstrated a leadership role to _from U.S. Coast Guard Cutter Legare (WMEC_
continue to contribute to Africa's security. _912) and representatives of the Cape Verde_
We will help facilitate the African Union’s _fishing boat during boarding operations in the_
and the Regional Economic Communities’ _Atlantic Ocean Sept. 3, 2009."_

_A boarding team made up of crew members_
_from U.S. Coast Guard Cutter Legare (WMEC_
_912) and representatives of the Cape Verde_
_Coast Guard and Judiciary Police approach a_
_fishing boat during boarding operations in the_
_Atlantic Ocean Sept. 3, 2009."_

development of their military capacity, including the African Stand-by Force, to
address the continent’s many security challenges.

_Europe – NATO will remain our Nation’s preeminent multilateral alliance and_
continue to drive our defense relations with Europe. The Joint Force will
continue to cooperate to combat violent extremism, focusing on our mission in
Afghanistan and support to Pakistan. We will also support the new strategic
concept including space and cyberspace security, Ballistic Missile Defense,
counter-trafficking, and nonproliferation – and pursue mission specialization
that contributes to complementary capabilities. We will pay close attention to
how this institution adjusts to its members’ reductions in defense expenditures
to ensure the Alliance maintains the capability for full spectrum operations.

NATO members act as a stabilizing force on its perimeter, which ranges from
the Middle East and the Levant, Northern Africa, the Balkans, and the
Caucasus. Turkey can play a uniquely critical role in this regard. We will
actively support closer military-to-military relations between the Alliance and


-----

Europe’s non-NATO nations, some of which have reliably contributed to transAtlantic security for decades. As we strengthen our European alliance, we will
increase dialogue and military-to-military relations with Russia, building on
our successful efforts in strategic arms reduction. We seek to cooperate with
Russia on counter-terrorism, counter-proliferation, space, and Ballistic Missile
Defense, and welcome it playing a more active role in preserving security and
stability in Asia.

_Asia and Pacific – The Nation’s strategic_
priorities and interests will increasingly
emanate from the Asia-Pacific region. The
region's share of global wealth is growing,
enabling increased military capabilities.
This is causing the region’s security
architecture to change rapidly, creating
new challenges and opportunities for our
national security and leadership. Though
still underpinned by the U.S. bilateral
alliance system, Asia's security architecture _Four F-16 Fighting Falcons fly over the Piung_
is becoming a more complex mix of formal _Harbor during a U.S. and Republic of Korea Air_

_Force Coalition flight in celebration of the 60th_

and informal multilateral relationships and _anniversary of the Korean War._
expanded bilateral security ties among
states.

We expect to maintain a strong military presence in Northeast Asia for decades.
We will work with the Japan Self-Defense Forces to improve their out-of-area
operational capabilities as the nation adjusts its defense posture. The Republic
of Korea has proven a steadfast ally supporting U.S. security efforts around the
world; our commitment to the Republic of Korea is unwavering as North Korea
remains a provocative threat to regional stability. We will retain operational
control over combined forces on the Korean peninsula through 2015 and
provide assistance to South Korea as it expands its security responsibilities.
We will continue to work with Japan and South Korea to help improve security
ties between them, enhance military cooperation, and preserve regional
stability.

As our presence and alliance commitments remain the key to preserving
stability in Northeast Asia, we must also invest new attention and resources in
Southeast and South Asia. We will look for security opportunities to support
our Nation’s increased emphasis on its relationship with ASEAN and other
multilateral forums. Bilaterally, Australia's leadership in regional security
affairs, and our shared values and longstanding historical ties provide the
basis for an increasingly important relationship. We will make our alliance a
model for interoperability, transparency, and meaningful combined fullspectrum activities.


-----

As military capability and capacity increases in Asia, we will seek new ways to
catalyze greater regional security cooperation.
Leveraging our convening power, we will
expand the scope and participation of
multilateral exercises across the region. We
seek expanded military cooperation with India
on nonproliferation, safeguarding the global
commons, countering terrorism, and
elsewhere. We will expand our military

security cooperation, exchanges, and exercises _A Royal Thai Marine Corps reconnaissance_
with the Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam, _team conducts jump training with Marines_
Malaysia, Pakistan, Indonesia, Singapore, and _3rd Reconnaissance Battalion during exercise_
other states in Oceania – working with them to _Cobra Gold 2011 at U-Tapao Royal Thai Navy_
address domestic and common foreign threats _21, 2011._
to their nation’s integrity and security. This

_A Royal Thai Marine Corps reconnaissance_
_team conducts jump training with Marines_
_assigned to Force Reconnaissance Company,_
_3rd Reconnaissance Battalion during exercise_
_Cobra Gold 2011 at U-Tapao Royal Thai Navy_
_Airfield, Chanthaburi province, Thailand, Jan._
_21, 2011._

will also help ensure we maintain a sustainable and diversified presence and
operational access in the region. Lastly, we strongly encourage the
development of security ties and commitments that are emerging among our
allies and partners in the region. This helps strengthen regional norms and
demonstrates increased responsibility and cooperation in addressing regional
security challenges.

Our Nation seeks a positive, cooperative, and comprehensive relationship with
China that welcomes it to take on a responsible leadership role. To support
this, the Joint Force seeks a deeper military-to-military relationship with China
to expand areas of mutual interest and benefit, improve understanding, reduce
misperception, and prevent miscalculation. We will promote common interests
through China’s cooperation in countering piracy and proliferation of WMD,
and using its influence with North Korea to preserve stability on the Korean
peninsula. We will continue to monitor carefully China’s military developments
and the implications those developments have on the military balance in the
Taiwan Strait. We remain concerned about the extent and strategic intent of
China’s military modernization, and its assertiveness in space, cyberspace, in
the Yellow Sea, East China Sea, and South China Sea. To safeguard U.S. and
partner nation interests, we will be prepared to demonstrate the will and
commit the resources needed to oppose any nation’s actions that jeopardize
access to and use of the global commons and cyberspace, or that threaten the
security of our allies.


-----

_Transnational Challenges – In combination_
with U.S. diplomatic and development efforts,
we will leverage our convening power to foster
regional and international cooperation in
addressing transnational security challenges.
Response to natural disasters and
transnational threats such as trafficking,
piracy, proliferation of WMD, terrorism, _While conducting counterpiracy operations in_
cyber-aggression, and pandemics are often _the Gulf of Aden as part of Combined_
best addressed through cooperative security _Maritime Forces (CMF) Task Force 151, the Royal Navy Type 23 Frigate HMS Portland (F_
approaches that create mutually beneficial _79) detected, intercepted and boarded two_
outcomes. Working to address these threats _suspicious skiffs preventing a possible pirate attack._
provides a rough but adaptable agenda
Combatant Commanders can tailor to their region and coordinate across
regional seams.

_Theater Security Cooperation and Humanitarian Assistance – The Joint Force,_
Combatant Commanders, and Service Chiefs shall actively partner with other
U.S. Government agencies to pursue theater security cooperation to increase
collective security skills with a wider range of partners. We seek to facilitate
interagency and enable international interoperability before crises occur.
Preparation is indispensable when conditions demand collaboration. In turn,
we must plan and exercise extensively across Combatant Commanders’ seams
of responsibility for full spectrum contingencies to support U.S. diplomatic and
development efforts and help mitigate and contain the human and economic
impact of crises. Humanitarian assistance and disaster relief activities employ
the Joint Force to address partner needs and sometimes provide opportunities
to build confidence and trust between erstwhile
adversaries. They also help us gain and maintain
access and relationships that support our broader
national interests. We must be prepared to support
and facilitate the response of the United States Agency
for International Development and other U.S.
government agencies’ to humanitarian crises.

_Security Sector Assistance – Security assistance_
encompasses a group of programs through which we
provide defense articles and services to international
organizations and foreign governments in support of
national policies and objectives. To improve the
effectiveness of our security assistance, our internal
procedures need comprehensive reform. To form _Coalition special operations forces_
better and more effective partnerships, we require _assault a building in search of a_
more flexible resources, and less cumbersome _Darwsko, Poland, Sept. 20, 2010,_
processes. We seek authorities for a pooled-resources _during the opening ceremony for_
approach to facilitate more complementary efforts


_Coalition special operations forces_
_assault a building in search of a_
_mock high-value target in_
_Darwsko, Poland, Sept. 20, 2010,_
_during the opening ceremony for_
_exercise Jackal Stone 2010_


-----

across departments and programs, integrating defense, diplomacy,
development, law enforcement, and intelligence capacity-building activities.

**D. Shape the Future Force.**

Our focus on leadership, not simply power, necessitates that we emphasize our
values and our people as much as our platforms and capabilities. The allvolunteer force will remain our greatest strategic asset and the best example of
the values we represent. In addition, we must continue to find innovative and
affordable ways to provide the full range of capabilities necessary to fulfill this
strategy while making difficult tradeoffs between modernization, capacity,
capability, posture, and risk.

_Our People_

To shape the future force, we must grow leaders who can truly out-think and
out innovate adversaries while gaining trust, understanding, and cooperation
from our partners in an ever-more complex and dynamic environment. The
enduring challenges we face and the whole-of-nation approaches they require
demand leaders that have the qualities of flexibility, agility, and adaptability,
and the ability to build unique teams of teams to accomplish missions.

We must think and engage more broadly _Our focus on leadership, not_
about the civil-military continuum and the _simply power, necessitates_
commitments embedded within. Just as our _that we emphasize our_
Service members commit to the Nation when _values and our people as_
they volunteer to serve, we incur an equally _much as our platforms and_
binding pledge to return them to society as _capabilities._
better citizens. We must safeguard Service
members’ pay and benefits, provide family support, and care for our wounded
warriors. We will place increased emphasis on helping our Service members
master the challenging upheavals of returning home from war and
transitioning out of the military back to civilian life. Through the power of their
example, the success of our veterans can inspire young Americans to serve. In
all these endeavors, we must constantly reinforce our connection to U.S. values
and society.

We will maintain the trust and confidence of our elected leaders and the public
by providing frank, professional military advice; being good stewards of public
resources; and vigorously executing lawful orders. The military’s adherence to
the ideals comprised in our Constitution is a profound example for other
nations. We will continue to affirm the foundational values in our oath:
civilian control of the military remains a core principle of our Republic and we
will preserve it. We will remain an apolitical institution and sustain this
position at all costs.


-----

An all-volunteer force must represent the country it defends. We will
strengthen our commitment to the values of diversity and inclusivity, and
continue to treat each other with dignity
and respect. We benefit immensely from
the different perspectives, and linguistic
and cultural skills of all Americans. We
will develop leaders who are capable of
operating in interagency and multinational environments and providing
liaison to other U.S. agencies, allies, and
partners.

Our leaders are the strongest advocate
for our Nation’s commitment to caring for _U.S. Army Maj. Gen. Vincent K. Brooks, the United_

_States Division-South commander, administers the_

our wounded veterans and their families. _oath of enlistment during a mass re-enlistment_
We will build greater resilience into our _ceremony to Soldiers from 3rd Armored Cavalry_

_Regiment in Babil province, Iraq, Nov. 11, 2010._

Service members and their families from
the first day they enter the military. But we must balance this commitment by
better managing the increased costs of health care. We will focus on early
preventive actions to diminish the tragic risks of suicide, traumatic brain
injury, substance abuse, homelessness, domestic violence, and other
challenges. Despite increased attention, suicide remains a severe challenge for
every service. Traumatic brain injury and post traumatic stress have become
similarly devastating, affecting hundreds of thousands of service members and
veterans. In many ways, these issues are the greatest threat to our people and
present a strategic risk to our institution.

We must work to end the stigma that prevents our service members, veterans,
and their families from seeking help early, and simplify the number and
complexity of programs we currently offer to help. This is a difficult, vexing,
and complex problem that only leadership can reverse. To do so, we will tap
into the capabilities of other government agencies and civil organizations
(community, state, and national) to improve care for veterans. We must focus
on and expand those programs that work best and eliminate those that do not
perform. While we must and will do more, we can only effectively move forward
by establishing care that includes public and private partnerships.

We will carefully review legacy personnel systems, particularly whether we have
the appropriate balance between uniformed, civilian, and contract
professionals, and active and reserve components. The emerging war-fighting
domain of cyberspace requires special attention in this regard. The Reserve
component, too, is essential as it provides strategic and operational depth to
the Joint Force. In turn, preserving it as an accessible, operational force also
requires sustained attention.


-----

We have made significant progress in the readiness of our reserve component,
and this will remain a key focus area. The missions we undertake are growing
more diverse as we work more with our civilian counterparts. In turn, the
skills and experiences of our Reserve and National Guard forces have become
ever more relevant. To capitalize on the progress made, we must continue to
utilize the Reserve Component and National Guard in an operational capacity
as a trained, equipped, ready, and available force for routine, predictable
deployments.

_Capabilities and Readiness_

Both our Nation and military will face increased budget pressures and we
cannot assume an increase in the defense budget. As we adjust to these
pressures, we must not become a hollow force with a large force structure
lacking the readiness, training, and modern equipment it needs. Instead, we
will maintain a whole, Joint Force that retains quality people, sustains and
develops the right capabilities, and maintains a sustainable tempo to effectively
mitigate operational, institutional, force management, and future challenges
risk. We must continue to maintain our margin of technological superiority
and ensure our Nation’s industrial base is able to field the capabilities and
capacity necessary for our forces to succeed in any contingency. At the same
time, we will pursue deliberate acquisition process improvements and selective
force modernization with the cost effective introduction of new equipment and
technology.

_Our strategy, forged in war,_

_Capabilities – Our strategy, forged in war, is_

_is focused on fielding_

focused on fielding modular, adaptive, general

_modular, adaptive, general_

purpose forces that can be employed in the

_purpose forces that can be_

full range of military operations. Joint Forces

_employed in the full range of_

will improve their ability to surge on short

_military operations._

notice, deploy agile command and control
systems, and be increasingly interoperable with other U.S. government
agencies. Forces will operate with an aptitude for precise and discriminate
action and increasingly possess security force assistance expertise. Joint
Forces must become more expeditionary in nature and will require a smaller
logistical footprint in part by reducing large fuel and energy demands.
Additionally, Joint Forces must train and exercise in degraded air, sea, cyber,
and space environments.

The Joint Force must ensure access, freedom of maneuver, and the ability to
project power globally through all domains:

-  _Land – Joint Forces will be capable of full spectrum operations, and be_
organized to provide a versatile mix of tailorable and networked
organizations operating on a sustainable rotational cycle.


-----

-  _Maritime – Joint forces will include an appropriate mix of small, mission-_
tailored and large, multi-mission capable units, formations and
platforms. This will provide the ability to conduct the full range of naval
operations across the spectrum of maritime environments.

-  _Air –_ Joint Forces will perform full spectrum operations to secure,
maintain, and assure unhindered domain access, global strike, rapid
global mobility, globally integrated intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance (ISR), command and control, and retain the ability to
project power into distant, anti-access environments.

-  _Space – Joint Forces will pursue resilient architectures, space situational_
awareness, provide options for self-defense and reconstitution, maintain
symmetric and asymmetric capabilities to deter adversaries, and train for
operations in space-degraded environments.

-  _Cyberspace – Joint Forces will secure the ‘.mil’ domain, requiring a_
resilient DoD cyberspace architecture that employs a combination of
detection, deterrence, denial, and multi-layered defense. We will improve
our cyberspace capabilities so they can often achieve significant and
proportionate effects with less cost and lower collateral impact.

Joint nuclear forces will continue to support strategic stability through
maintenance of an assured second-strike capability. We will ensure our
nuclear forces remain effective, safe, and secure. We will retain sufficient
nuclear force structure to hedge against unexpected geopolitical change,
technological problems, and operational vulnerabilities.

Joint special operations forces will remain decentralized and flexible, have
regional expertise, and maintain a wide range of capabilities to support our
Nation’s counter-terrorism efforts and other missions that require their unique
attributes. We will increase enablers critical for the success of special
operations forces.

In today’s knowledge-based environment, the
weight of operational efforts is increasingly
prioritized not only by the assignment of
forces, but also by the allocation of ISR
capabilities. The ability to create precise,
desirable effects with a smaller force and a
lighter logistical footprint depends on a
robust ISR architecture. Across all domains, _RQ-1 Predators, like the one shown here, are_
we will improve sharing, processing, analysis, _Nev., to provide intelligence, surveillance_
and dissemination of information to better _and reconnaissance capabilities in support_
support decision makers. We will make our

_RQ-1 Predators, like the one shown here, are_
_being deployed from Creech Air Force Base,_
_Nev., to provide intelligence, surveillance_
_and reconnaissance capabilities in support_
_of relief efforts in Haiti._

command and control more survivable and resilient through redundancy, and
improve human intelligence capabilities. To do so, we must change our
mindset from simply increasing the density of ISR capabilities to evaluating our


-----

methodologies for employing and integrating ISR assets. Joint Force processes
must efficiently employ and allocate all ISR assets from across the Services,
and strengthen the linkage between ISR and cyberspace operations where they
leverage each other or operate in the same space.

No other military can match the Joint
Force’s strike, logistics, strategic
mobility, planning, and command and
control capabilities. We will explore joint
operational concepts leveraging mobile
and more survivable bases, sea-borne
mobility, and innovative uses of space.
We will maintain this superiority and the


capacity to extend these competitive
advantages to others – our unique
capabilities amplify their efforts.


_U.S. Service members retrieve cargo dropped from a_
_U.S. Air Force C-17 Globemaster III near Forward_
_Operating Base Todd in Afghanistan's Badghis_
_province on Jan. 6, 2011._


Lending these niche capabilities to partners, or surging them in times of crisis,
is the right partnering investment, and builds long-lasting goodwill.

_Readiness – Readiness, too, must remain a top priority, as our forces, systems,_
and capabilities will continue to be under extraordinary stress. Readiness is
the ability to provide and integrate capabilities required by Combatant
Commanders to execute their assigned missions. Restoring readiness will help
improve our strategic depth to conduct full-spectrum operations, which has
been degraded by sustained combat.

Short term efforts to improve readiness will focus on resetting equipment and
reconstituting units, in some cases--most notably rotational and expeditionary
forces--this will be in stride. As we reset, we will conduct more full-spectrum
joint, combined, interagency, and multinational training, exercises and
experimentation. Forward presence and engagement will take on greater
importance during this time. Long-term modernization efforts will improve
readiness by developing essential capabilities and capacity to outpace emerging
threats. A further degradation of readiness for the full range of military
operations would undermine our ability to fulfill our national defense objectives
– an unacceptable risk.

We will develop more effective ways to assess joint and unit readiness that
emphasize “joint” capabilities and concepts. While accounting for missions
that require continual readiness, we must develop strategic concepts that
measure joint readiness across the services to deter conflict and respond
promptly during contingencies. We will streamline the requirements-tocapabilities process, synchronizing force-providers with force-commander
needs.


-----

**IV. Conclusion.**

This strategy is derived from a thorough assessment of the strategic
environment and how to advance our national interests within it. It describes
how the Joint Force will redefine America’s military leadership by enabling
whole-of-nation approaches to address national security challenges. It calls for
a broad portfolio of leadership approaches – facilitator, enabler, convener, and
guarantor - to address problems that are truly international in nature. Our
leadership approaches magnify the capabilities we possess, making them just
as important to assuring favorable outcomes. Our ability to lead will determine
how well we advance America’s interests through this strategic inflection point.

This strategy also sets a vector toward transition from a force that has been
engaged in sustained combat operations to a Joint Force that is shaped for the
future. As the challenges we face require a Joint Force that is flexible, agile,
and adaptive, it emphasizes people as much as platforms. It recognizes that
the unique character of our Service members, working hand-in-hand with
other government agencies and in support of public-private partnerships, is a
formidable advantage. We must continue to care for Service members and
their families, and set conditions for their continued success – in and out of
uniform. This will require significant support from Congress, the American
people, and a thoughtful, reflective military leadership. By successfully
contributing to America’s security and prosperity, we will continue to advance
our Nation’s enduring interests well into the 21st Century.


-----

-----

