## The National Security Strategy
##### of the
## United States of America

##### September 2002


-----

# The National Security Strategy
### of the
# United States of America

#### September 2002


-----

the white house
washington

The great struggles of the twentieth century between liberty and totalitarianism ended with a

decisive victory for the forces of freedom—and a single sustainable model for national success:

freedom, democracy, and free enterprise. In the twenty-first century, only nations that share a

commitment to protecting basic human rights and guaranteeing political and economic

freedom will be able to unleash the potential of their people and assure their future prosperity.

People everywhere want to be able to speak freely; choose who will govern them; worship as they

please; educate their children—male and female; own property; and enjoy the benefits of their

labor. These values of freedom are right and true for every person, in every society—and the

duty of protecting these values against their enemies is the common calling of freedom-loving

people across the globe and across the ages.

Today, the United States enjoys a position of unparalleled military strength and great economic

and political influence. In keeping with our heritage and principles, we do not use our strength

to press for unilateral advantage. We seek instead to create a balance of power that favors human

freedom: conditions in which all nations and all societies can choose for themselves the rewards

and challenges of political and economic liberty. In a world that is safe, people will be able to

make their own lives better. We will defend the peace by fighting terrorists and tyrants. We will

preserve the peace by building good relations among the great powers. We will extend the peace

by encouraging free and open societies on every continent.

Defending our Nation against its enemies is the first and fundamental commitment of the

Federal Government. Today, that task has changed dramatically. Enemies in the past needed

great armies and great industrial capabilities to endanger America. Now, shadowy networks of

individuals can bring great chaos and suffering to our shores for less than it costs to purchase

a single tank. Terrorists are organized to penetrate open societies and to turn the power of

modern technologies against us.

To defeat this threat we must make use of every tool in our arsenal—military power, better

homeland defenses, law enforcement, intelligence, and vigorous efforts to cut off terrorist

financing. The war against terrorists of global reach is a global enterprise of uncertain duration.

America will help nations that need our assistance in combating terror. And America will hold


-----

to account nations that are compromised by terror, including those who harbor terrorists—

because the allies of terror are the enemies of civilization. The United States and countries

cooperating with us must not allow the terrorists to develop new home bases. Together, we will

seek to deny them sanctuary at every turn.

The gravest danger our Nation faces lies at the crossroads of radicalism and technology. Our

enemies have openly declared that they are seeking weapons of mass destruction, and evidence

indicates that they are doing so with determination. The United States will not allow these

efforts to succeed. We will build defenses against ballistic missiles and other means of delivery.

We will cooperate with other nations to deny, contain, and curtail our enemies’ efforts to acquire

dangerous technologies. And, as a matter of common sense and self-defense, America will act

against such emerging threats before they are fully formed. We cannot defend America and our

friends by hoping for the best. So we must be prepared to defeat our enemies’ plans, using the

best intelligence and proceeding with deliberation. History will judge harshly those who saw this

coming danger but failed to act. In the new world we have entered, the only path to peace and

security is the path of action.

As we defend the peace, we will also take advantage of an historic opportunity to preserve the

peace. Today, the international community has the best chance since the rise of the nation-state

in the seventeenth century to build a world where great powers compete in peace instead of

continually prepare for war. Today, the world’s great powers find ourselves on the same side—

united by common dangers of terrorist violence and chaos. The United States will build on

these common interests to promote global security. We are also increasingly united by common

values. Russia is in the midst of a hopeful transition, reaching for its democratic future and a

partner in the war on terror. Chinese leaders are discovering that economic freedom is the only

source of national wealth. In time, they will find that social and political freedom is the only

source of national greatness. America will encourage the advancement of democracy and

economic openness in both nations, because these are the best foundations for domestic stability

and international order. We will strongly resist aggression from other great powers—even as we

welcome their peaceful pursuit of prosperity, trade, and cultural advancement.

Finally, the United States will use this moment of opportunity to extend the benefits of freedom

across the globe. We will actively work to bring the hope of democracy, development, free

markets, and free trade to every corner of the world. The events of September 11, 2001, taught

us that weak states, like Afghanistan, can pose as great a danger to our national interests as

strong states. Poverty does not make poor people into terrorists and murderers. Yet poverty,

weak institutions, and corruption can make weak states vulnerable to terrorist networks and

drug cartels within their borders.


-----

The United States will stand beside any nation determined to build a better future by seeking

the rewards of liberty for its people. Free trade and free markets have proven their ability to lift

whole societies out of poverty—so the United States will work with individual nations, entire

regions, and the entire global trading community to build a world that trades in freedom and

therefore grows in prosperity. The United States will deliver greater development assistance

through the New Millennium Challenge Account to nations that govern justly, invest in their

people, and encourage economic freedom. We will also continue to lead the world in efforts to

reduce the terrible toll of HIV/AIDS and other infectious diseases.

In building a balance of power that favors freedom, the United States is guided by the conviction

that all nations have important responsibilities. Nations that enjoy freedom must actively fight

terror. Nations that depend on international stability must help prevent the spread of weapons

of mass destruction. Nations that seek international aid must govern themselves wisely, so that

aid is well spent. For freedom to thrive, accountability must be expected and required.

We are also guided by the conviction that no nation can build a safer, better world alone.

Alliances and multilateral institutions can multiply the strength of freedom-loving nations.

The United States is committed to lasting institutions like the United Nations, the World Trade

Organization, the Organization of American States, and NATO as well as other long-standing

alliances. Coalitions of the willing can augment these permanent institutions. In all cases,

international obligations are to be taken seriously. They are not to be undertaken symbolically

to rally support for an ideal without furthering its attainment.

Freedom is the non-negotiable demand of human dignity; the birthright of every person—in

every civilization. Throughout history, freedom has been threatened by war and terror; it has

been challenged by the clashing wills of powerful states and the evil designs of tyrants; and it

has been tested by widespread poverty and disease. Today, humanity holds in its hands the

opportunity to further freedom’s triumph over all these foes. The United States welcomes our

responsibility to lead in this great mission.

[POTUS SIGNATURE]


THE WHITE HOUSE,
September 17, 2002


-----

###### Table of Contents

i. Overview of America’s International Strategy...............................................1

ii. Champion Aspirations for Human Dignity .....................................................3

iii. Strengthen Alliances to Defeat Global Terrorism and Work
to Prevent Attacks Against Us and Our Friends...............................................5

iv. Work with others to Defuse Regional Conflicts........................................9

v. Prevent Our Enemies from Threatening Us, Our Allies,
and Our Friends with Weapons of Mass Destruction ....................................13

vi. Ignite a New Era of Global Economic Growth through
Free Markets and Free Trade................................................................................17

vii. Expand the Circle of Development by Opening Societies
and Building the Infrastructure of Democracy .............................................21

viii. Develop Agendas for Cooperative Action with the
Other Main Centers of Global Power ...............................................................25

ix. Transform America’s National Security Institutions to Meet
the Challenges and Opportunities of the Twenty-First Century .............29


-----

i. Overview of America’s
International Strategy

_“Our Nation’s cause has always been larger than our Nation’s defense._
_We fight, as we always fight, for a just peace—a peace that favors liberty._
_We will defend the peace against the threats from terrorists and tyrants._
_We will preserve the peace by building good relations among the great powers._
_And we will extend the peace by encouraging free and open societies on every continent.”_

President Bush
West Point, New York
June 1, 2002

The United States possesses unprecedented— The U.S. national security strategy will be based
and unequaled—strength and influence in the on a distinctly American internationalism that
world. Sustained by faith in the principles of reflects the union of our values and our national
liberty, and the value of a free society, this position interests. The aim of this strategy is to help make
comes with unparalleled responsibilities, obliga- the world not just safer but better. Our goals on
tions, and opportunity. The great strength of this the path to progress are clear: political and
nation must be used to promote a balance of economic freedom, peaceful relations with other
power that favors freedom. states, and respect for human dignity.

For most of the twentieth century, the world And this path is not America’s alone. It is open
was divided by a great struggle over ideas: destruc- to all.
tive totalitarian visions versus freedom and equality.

To achieve these goals, the United States will:

That great struggle is over. The militant visions

-  champion aspirations for human dignity;

of class, nation, and race which promised utopia
and delivered misery have been defeated and -  strengthen alliances to defeat global
discredited. America is now threatened less by terrorism and work to prevent attacks
conquering states than we are by failing ones. against us and our friends;
We are menaced less by fleets and armies than by

-  work with others to defuse regional conflicts;

catastrophic technologies in the hands of the
embittered few. We must defeat these threats to -  prevent our enemies from threatening us,
our Nation, allies, and friends. our allies, and our friends, with weapons of

mass destruction;

This is also a time of opportunity for America.
We will work to translate this moment of influ- -  ignite a new era of global economic growth
ence into decades of peace, prosperity, and liberty. through free markets and free trade;


-----

-  expand the circle of development by
opening societies and building the
infrastructure of democracy;

-  develop agendas for cooperative action with
other main centers of global power; and

-  transform America’s national security
institutions to meet the challenges and
opportunities of the twenty-first century.


-----

ii. Champion Aspirations for Human Dignity

_“Some worry that it is somehow undiplomatic or impolite to_
_speak the language of right and wrong. I disagree. Different circumstances_
_require different methods, but not different moralities.”_

President Bush
West Point, New York
June 1, 2002

In pursuit of our goals, our first imperative is America’s experience as a great multi-ethnic
to clarify what we stand for: the United States democracy affirms our conviction that people of
must defend liberty and justice because these many heritages and faiths can live and prosper in
principles are right and true for all people every- peace. Our own history is a long struggle to live
where. No nation owns these aspirations, and no up to our ideals. But even in our worst moments,
nation is exempt from them. Fathers and mothers the principles enshrined in the Declaration of
in all societies want their children to be educated Independence were there to guide us. As a result,
and to live free from poverty and violence. No America is not just a stronger, but is a freer and
people on earth yearn to be oppressed, aspire to more just society.
servitude, or eagerly await the midnight knock of

Today, these ideals are a lifeline to lonely

the secret police.

defenders of liberty. And when openings arrive,

America must stand firmly for the nonnego- we can encourage change—as we did in central
tiable demands of human dignity: the rule of law; and eastern Europe between 1989 and 1991,
limits on the absolute power of the state; free or in Belgrade in 2000. When we see democratic
speech; freedom of worship; equal justice; respect processes take hold among our friends in Taiwan
for women; religious and ethnic tolerance; and or in the Republic of Korea, and see elected
respect for private property. leaders replace generals in Latin America and

Africa, we see examples of how authoritarian

These demands can be met in many ways.

systems can evolve, marrying local history and

America’s constitution has served us well.

traditions with the principles we all cherish.

Many other nations, with different histories and
cultures, facing different circumstances, have Embodying lessons from our past and using
successfully incorporated these core principles the opportunity we have today, the national security
into their own systems of governance. History has strategy of the United States must start from these
not been kind to those nations which ignored or core beliefs and look outward for possibilities to
flouted the rights and aspirations of their people. expand liberty.


-----

Our principles will guide our government’s -  make freedom and the development of
decisions about international cooperation, the democratic institutions key themes in our
character of our foreign assistance, and the bilateral relations, seeking solidarity and
allocation of resources. They will guide our cooperation from other democracies while
actions and our words in international bodies. we press governments that deny human

rights to move toward a better future; and

We will:

-  take special efforts to promote freedom of

-  speak out honestly about violations of the

religion and conscience and defend it from

nonnegotiable demands of human dignity

encroachment by repressive governments.

using our voice and vote in international
institutions to advance freedom; We will champion the cause of human dignity

and oppose those who resist it.

-  use our foreign aid to promote freedom and
support those who struggle non-violently
for it, ensuring that nations moving toward
democracy are rewarded for the steps they take;


-----

iii. Strengthen Alliances to Defeat
Global Terrorism and Work to Prevent
Attacks Against Us and Our Friends

_“Just three days removed from these events, Americans do not yet have_
_the distance of history. But our responsibility to history is already clear:_
_to answer these attacks and rid the world of evil. War has been_
_waged against us by stealth and deceit and murder. This nation is peaceful,_
_but fierce when stirred to anger. The conflict was begun on the timing and terms_
_of others. It will end in a way, and at an hour, of our choosing.”_

President Bush
Washington, D.C. (The National Cathedral)
September 14, 2001

The United States of America is fighting will come through the persistent accumulation of
a war against terrorists of global reach. The successes—some seen, some unseen.
enemy is not a single political regime or person

Today our enemies have seen the results of

or religion or ideology. The enemy is terrorism—

what civilized nations can, and will, do against

premeditated, politically motivated violence

regimes that harbor, support, and use terrorism to

perpetrated against innocents.

achieve their political goals. Afghanistan has been

In many regions, legitimate grievances prevent liberated; coalition forces continue to hunt down
the emergence of a lasting peace. Such grievances the Taliban and al-Qaida. But it is not only this
deserve to be, and must be, addressed within a battlefield on which we will engage terrorists.
political process. But no cause justifies terror. The Thousands of trained terrorists remain at large
United States will make no concessions to terrorist with cells in North America, South America,
demands and strike no deals with them. We make Europe, Africa, the Middle East, and across Asia.
no distinction between terrorists and those who

Our priority will be first to disrupt and destroy

knowingly harbor or provide aid to them.

terrorist organizations of global reach and attack

The struggle against global terrorism is different their leadership; command, control, and commu-
from any other war in our history. It will be fought nications; material support; and finances. This will
on many fronts against a particularly elusive have a disabling effect upon the terrorists’ ability
enemy over an extended period of time. Progress to plan and operate.


-----

We will continue to encourage our regional We will also wage a war of ideas to win the battle
partners to take up a coordinated effort that against international terrorism. This includes:
isolates the terrorists. Once the regional campaign

-  using the full influence of the United States,

localizes the threat to a particular state, we will

and working closely with allies and friends,

help ensure the state has the military, law enforce-

to make clear that all acts of terrorism are

ment, political, and financial tools necessary to

illegitimate so that terrorism will be viewed

finish the task.

in the same light as slavery, piracy, or

The United States will continue to work with genocide: behavior that no respectable
our allies to disrupt the financing of terrorism. We government can condone or support and
will identify and block the sources of funding for all must oppose;
terrorism, freeze the assets of terrorists and those

-  supporting moderate and modern

who support them, deny terrorists access to the

government, especially in the Muslim

international financial system, protect legitimate

world, to ensure that the conditions and

charities from being abused by terrorists, and

ideologies that promote terrorism do not

prevent the movement of terrorists’ assets through

find fertile ground in any nation;

alternative financial networks.

-  diminishing the underlying conditions

However, this campaign need not be sequential

that spawn terrorism by enlisting the

to be effective, the cumulative effect across all

international community to focus its efforts

regions will help achieve the results we seek.

and resources on areas most at risk; and

We will disrupt and destroy terrorist

-  using effective public diplomacy to promote

organizations by:

the free flow of information and ideas to

-  direct and continuous action using all the kindle the hopes and aspirations of freedom
elements of national and international of those in societies ruled by the sponsors of
power. Our immediate focus will be those global terrorism.
terrorist organizations of global reach and

While we recognize that our best defense is a

any terrorist or state sponsor of terrorism

good offense, we are also strengthening America’s

which attempts to gain or use weapons of

homeland security to protect against and deter attack.

mass destruction (WMD) or their precursors;

This Administration has proposed the largest

-  defending the United States, the American

government reorganization since the Truman

people, and our interests at home and

Administration created the National Security

abroad by identifying and destroying the

Council and the Department of Defense. Centered

threat before it reaches our borders. While

on a new Department of Homeland Security and

the United States will constantly strive to

including a new unified military command and a

enlist the support of the international

fundamental reordering of the FBI, our compre-

community, we will not hesitate to act alone,

hensive plan to secure the homeland encompasses

if necessary, to exercise our right of self-

every level of government and the cooperation

defense by acting preemptively against such

of the public and the private sector.

terrorists, to prevent them from doing harm
against our people and our country; and This strategy will turn adversity into

opportunity. For example, emergency management

-  denying further sponsorship, support,

systems will be better able to cope not just with

and sanctuary to terrorists by convincing

terrorism but with all hazards. Our medical

or compelling states to accept their

system will be strengthened to manage not just

sovereign responsibilities.


-----

bioterror, but all infectious diseases and organizations such as the United Nations, as well
mass-casualty dangers. Our border controls will as non-governmental organizations, and other
not just stop terrorists, but improve the efficient countries to provide the humanitarian, political,
movement of legitimate traffic. economic, and security assistance necessary to

rebuild Afghanistan so that it will never again

While our focus is protecting America, we

abuse its people, threaten its neighbors, and

know that to defeat terrorism in today’s globalized

provide a haven for terrorists.

world we need support from our allies and
friends. Wherever possible, the United States will In the war against global terrorism, we will
rely on regional organizations and state powers to never forget that we are ultimately fighting for our
meet their obligations to fight terrorism. Where democratic values and way of life. Freedom and
governments find the fight against terrorism fear are at war, and there will be no quick or easy
beyond their capacities, we will match their end to this conflict. In leading the campaign
willpower and their resources with whatever help against terrorism, we are forging new, productive
we and our allies can provide. international relationships and redefining existing

ones in ways that meet the challenges of the

As we pursue the terrorists in Afghanistan,

twenty-first century.

we will continue to work with international


-----

iv. Work with others to
Defuse Regional Conflicts

_“We build a world of justice, or we will live in a world of coercion._
_The magnitude of our shared responsibilities makes our disagreements look so small.”_

President Bush
Berlin, Germany
May 23, 2002

Concerned nations must remain actively The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is critical
engaged in critical regional disputes to avoid because of the toll of human suffering, because of
explosive escalation and minimize human America’s close relationship with the state of Israel
suffering. In an increasingly interconnected world, and key Arab states, and because of that region’s
regional crisis can strain our alliances, rekindle importance to other global priorities of the United
rivalries among the major powers, and create States. There can be no peace for either side
horrifying affronts to human dignity. When without freedom for both sides. America stands
violence erupts and states falter, the United States committed to an independent and democratic
will work with friends and partners to alleviate Palestine, living beside Israel in peace and security.
suffering and restore stability. Like all other people, Palestinians deserve a

government that serves their interests and listens

No doctrine can anticipate every circumstance

to their voices. The United States will continue

in which U.S. action—direct or indirect—is

to encourage all parties to step up to their respon-

warranted. We have finite political, economic, and

sibilities as we seek a just and comprehensive

military resources to meet our global priorities.

settlement to the conflict.

The United States will approach each case with
these strategic principles in mind: The United States, the international donor

community, and the World Bank stand ready to

-  The United States should invest time and

work with a reformed Palestinian government on

resources into building international rela-

economic development, increased humanitarian

tionships and institutions that can help

assistance, and a program to establish, finance,

manage local crises when they emerge.

and monitor a truly independent judiciary. If

-  The United States should be realistic about Palestinians embrace democracy, and the rule of
its ability to help those who are unwilling or law, confront corruption, and firmly reject terror,
unready to help themselves. Where and they can count on American support for the
when people are ready to do their part, we creation of a Palestinian state.
will be willing to move decisively.


-----

Israel also has a large stake in the success of a In the Western Hemisphere we have formed
democratic Palestine. Permanent occupation flexible coalitions with countries that share our
threatens Israel’s identity and democracy. So the priorities, particularly Mexico, Brazil, Canada,
United States continues to challenge Israeli leaders Chile, and Colombia. Together we will promote a
to take concrete steps to support the emergence of truly democratic hemisphere where our integra-
a viable, credible Palestinian state. As there is tion advances security, prosperity, opportunity,
progress towards security, Israel forces need to and hope. We will work with regional institutions,
withdraw fully to positions they held prior to such as the Summit of the Americas process, the
September 28, 2000. And consistent with the Organization of American States (OAS), and the
recommendations of the Mitchell Committee, Defense Ministerial of the Americas for the benefit
Israeli settlement activity in the occupied territo- of the entire hemisphere.
ries must stop. As violence subsides, freedom of

Parts of Latin America confront regional

movement should be restored, permitting inno-

conflict, especially arising from the violence of

cent Palestinians to resume work and normal life.

drug cartels and their accomplices. This conflict

The United States can play a crucial role but,

and unrestrained narcotics trafficking could

ultimately, lasting peace can only come when

imperil the health and security of the United

Israelis and Palestinians resolve the issues and end

States. Therefore we have developed an active

the conflict between them.

strategy to help the Andean nations adjust their

In South Asia, the United States has also economies, enforce their laws, defeat terrorist
emphasized the need for India and Pakistan to organizations, and cut off the supply of drugs,
resolve their disputes. This Administration while—as important—we work to reduce the
invested time and resources building strong demand for drugs in our own country.
bilateral relations with India and Pakistan.

In Colombia, we recognize the link between

These strong relations then gave us leverage to

terrorist and extremist groups that challenge the

play a constructive role when tensions in the

security of the state and drug trafficking activities

region became acute. With Pakistan, our bilateral

that help finance the operations of such groups.

relations have been bolstered by Pakistan’s choice

We are working to help Colombia defend its

to join the war against terror and move toward

democratic institutions and defeat illegal armed

building a more open and tolerant society. The

groups of both the left and right by extending

Administration sees India’s potential to become

effective sovereignty over the entire national

one of the great democratic powers of the twenty-

territory and provide basic security to the

first century and has worked hard to transform

Colombian people.

our relationship accordingly. Our involvement in
this regional dispute, building on earlier invest- In Africa, promise and opportunity sit side by
ments in bilateral relations, looks first to concrete side with disease, war, and desperate poverty. This
steps by India and Pakistan that can help defuse threatens both a core value of the United States—
military confrontation. preserving human dignity—and our strategic

priority—combating global terror. American

Indonesia took courageous steps to create a

interests and American principles, therefore, lead

working democracy and respect for the rule of law.

in the same direction: we will work with others for

By tolerating ethnic minorities, respecting the rule

an African continent that lives in liberty, peace,

of law, and accepting open markets, Indonesia may

and growing prosperity. Together with our

be able to employ the engine of opportunity that

European allies, we must help strengthen Africa’s

has helped lift some of its neighbors out of poverty

fragile states, help build indigenous capability to

and desperation. It is the initiative by Indonesia that

secure porous borders, and help build up the law

allows U.S. assistance to make a difference.


-----

enforcement and intelligence infrastructure to -  coordination with European allies and
deny havens for terrorists. international institutions is essential for

constructive conflict mediation and

An ever more lethal environment exists in

successful peace operations; and

Africa as local civil wars spread beyond borders to
create regional war zones. Forming coalitions of -  Africa’s capable reforming states and
the willing and cooperative security arrangements sub-regional organizations must be strength-
are key to confronting these emerging transna- ened as the primary means to address
tional threats. transnational threats on a sustained basis.

Africa’s great size and diversity requires a Ultimately the path of political and economic
security strategy that focuses on bilateral engage- freedom presents the surest route to progress in
ment and builds coalitions of the willing. This sub-Saharan Africa, where most wars are conflicts
Administration will focus on three interlocking over material resources and political access often
strategies for the region: tragically waged on the basis of ethnic and

religious difference. The transition to the African

-  countries with major impact on their

Union with its stated commitment to good

neighborhood such as South Africa, Nigeria,

governance and a common responsibility for

Kenya, and Ethiopia are anchors for regional

democratic political systems offers opportunities

engagement and require focused attention;

to strengthen democracy on the continent.


-----

v. Prevent Our Enemies from Threatening Us,
Our Allies, and Our Friends
with Weapons of Mass Destruction

_“The gravest danger to freedom lies at the crossroads of radicalism and technology._
_When the spread of chemical and biological and nuclear weapons,_
_along with ballistic missile technology—when that occurs, even weak states_
_and small groups could attain a catastrophic power to strike great nations._
_Our enemies have declared this very intention, and have been caught seeking_
_these terrible weapons. They want the capability to blackmail us, or to harm us,_
_or to harm our friends—and we will oppose them with all our power.”_

President Bush
West Point, New York
June 1, 2002

The nature of the Cold War threat required the But new deadly challenges have emerged from
United States—with our allies and friends—to rogue states and terrorists. None of these contem-
emphasize deterrence of the enemy’s use of force, porary threats rival the sheer destructive power
producing a grim strategy of mutual assured that was arrayed against us by the Soviet Union.
destruction. With the collapse of the Soviet Union However, the nature and motivations of these new
and the end of the Cold War, our security envi- adversaries, their determination to obtain destruc-
ronment has undergone profound transformation. tive powers hitherto available only to the world’s

strongest states, and the greater likelihood that

Having moved from confrontation to coopera-

they will use weapons of mass destruction against

tion as the hallmark of our relationship with Russia,

us, make today’s security environment more

the dividends are evident: an end to the balance of

complex and dangerous.

terror that divided us; an historic reduction in the
nuclear arsenals on both sides; and cooperation in In the 1990s we witnessed the emergence of a
areas such as counterterrorism and missile defense small number of rogue states that, while different
that until recently were inconceivable. in important ways, share a number of attributes.

These states:


-----

-  brutalize their own people and squander Our comprehensive strategy to combat
their national resources for the personal gain WMD includes:
of the rulers;

-  _Proactive counterproliferation efforts. We_

-  display no regard for international law, must deter and defend against the threat
threaten their neighbors, and callously before it is unleashed. We must ensure that
violate international treaties to which they key capabilities—detection, active and
are party; passive defenses, and counterforce

capabilities—are integrated into our defense

-  are determined to acquire weapons of mass

transformation and our homeland security

destruction, along with other advanced

systems. Counterproliferation must also be

military technology, to be used as threats or

integrated into the doctrine, training, and

offensively to achieve the aggressive designs

equipping of our forces and those of our

of these regimes;

allies to ensure that we can prevail in any

-  sponsor terrorism around the globe; and conflict with WMD-armed adversaries.

-  reject basic human values and hate the United -  _Strengthened nonproliferation efforts to_
States and everything for which it stands. _prevent rogue states and terrorists from_

_acquiring the materials, technologies, and_

At the time of the Gulf War, we acquired

_expertise necessary for weapons of mass_

irrefutable proof that Iraq’s designs were not

_destruction. We will enhance diplomacy,_

limited to the chemical weapons it had used

arms control, multilateral export controls,

against Iran and its own people, but also extended

and threat reduction assistance that impede

to the acquisition of nuclear weapons and biolog-

states and terrorists seeking WMD, and

ical agents. In the past decade North Korea has

when necessary, interdict enabling technolo-

become the world’s principal purveyor of ballistic

gies and materials. We will continue to build

missiles, and has tested increasingly capable

coalitions to support these efforts, encour-

missiles while developing its own WMD arsenal.

aging their increased political and financial

Other rogue regimes seek nuclear, biological, and

support for nonproliferation and threat

chemical weapons as well. These states’ pursuit of,

reduction programs. The recent G-8

and global trade in, such weapons has become a

agreement to commit up to $20 billion to a

looming threat to all nations.

global partnership against proliferation

We must be prepared to stop rogue states and marks a major step forward.
their terrorist clients before they are able to

-  _Effective consequence management to respond_

threaten or use weapons of mass destruction

_to the effects of WMD use, whether by terror-_

against the United States and our allies and

_ists or hostile states. Minimizing the effects of_

friends. Our response must take full advantage of

WMD use against our people will help deter

strengthened alliances, the establishment of new

those who possess such weapons and

partnerships with former adversaries, innovation

dissuade those who seek to acquire them by

in the use of military forces, modern technologies,

persuading enemies that they cannot attain

including the development of an effective missile

their desired ends. The United States must

defense system, and increased emphasis on

also be prepared to respond to the effects of

intelligence collection and analysis.

WMD use against our forces abroad, and to
help friends and allies if they are attacked.


-----

It has taken almost a decade for us to For centuries, international law recognized that
comprehend the true nature of this new threat. nations need not suffer an attack before they can
Given the goals of rogue states and terrorists, the lawfully take action to defend themselves against
United States can no longer solely rely on a reac- forces that present an imminent danger of attack.
tive posture as we have in the past. The inability Legal scholars and international jurists often
to deter a potential attacker, the immediacy of conditioned the legitimacy of preemption on the
today’s threats, and the magnitude of potential existence of an imminent threat—most often a
harm that could be caused by our adversaries’ visible mobilization of armies, navies, and air
choice of weapons, do not permit that option. We forces preparing to attack.
cannot let our enemies strike first.

We must adapt the concept of imminent

-  In the Cold War, especially following the threat to the capabilities and objectives of today’s
Cuban missile crisis, we faced a generally adversaries. Rogue states and terrorists do not
status quo, risk-averse adversary. Deterrence seek to attack us using conventional means.
was an effective defense. But deterrence They know such attacks would fail. Instead, they
based only upon the threat of retaliation is rely on acts of terror and, potentially, the use of
less likely to work against leaders of rogue weapons of mass destruction—weapons that can
states more willing to take risks, gambling be easily concealed, delivered covertly, and used
with the lives of their people, and the wealth without warning.
of their nations.

The targets of these attacks are our military

-  In the Cold War, weapons of mass destruc- forces and our civilian population, in direct viola-
tion were considered weapons of last resort tion of one of the principal norms of the law of
whose use risked the destruction of those warfare. As was demonstrated by the losses on
who used them. Today, our enemies see September 11, 2001, mass civilian casualties is the
weapons of mass destruction as weapons of specific objective of terrorists and these losses
choice. For rogue states these weapons are would be exponentially more severe if terrorists
tools of intimidation and military aggression acquired and used weapons of mass destruction.
against their neighbors. These weapons may

The United States has long maintained the

also allow these states to attempt to black-

option of preemptive actions to counter a suffi-

mail the United States and our allies to

cient threat to our national security. The greater

prevent us from deterring or repelling the

the threat, the greater is the risk of inaction—

aggressive behavior of rogue states. Such

and the more compelling the case for taking

states also see these weapons as their best

anticipatory action to defend ourselves, even if

means of overcoming the conventional

uncertainty remains as to the time and place of

superiority of the United States.

the enemy’s attack. To forestall or prevent such

-  Traditional concepts of deterrence will not hostile acts by our adversaries, the United States
work against a terrorist enemy whose will, if necessary, act preemptively.
avowed tactics are wanton destruction and

The United States will not use force in all cases

the targeting of innocents; whose so-called

to preempt emerging threats, nor should nations

soldiers seek martyrdom in death and whose

use preemption as a pretext for aggression. Yet in

most potent protection is statelessness. The

an age where the enemies of civilization openly

overlap between states that sponsor terror and

and actively seek the world’s most destructive

those that pursue WMD compels us to action.

technologies, the United States cannot remain idle
while dangers gather.


-----

We will always proceed deliberately, weighing -  continue to transform our military forces to
the consequences of our actions. To support ensure our ability to conduct rapid and
preemptive options, we will: precise operations to achieve decisive results.

-  build better, more integrated intelligence The purpose of our actions will always be to
capabilities to provide timely, accurate infor- eliminate a specific threat to the United States or
mation on threats, wherever they may emerge; our allies and friends. The reasons for our actions

will be clear, the force measured, and the cause just.

-  coordinate closely with allies to form a
common assessment of the most dangerous
threats; and


-----

vi. Ignite a New Era of Global Economic
Growth through Free Markets and Free Trade

_“When nations close their markets and opportunity is hoarded by a_
_privileged few, no amount—no amount—of development aid is ever enough._
_When nations respect their people, open markets, invest in better_
_health and education, every dollar of aid, every dollar of_
_trade revenue and domestic capital is used more effectively.”_

President Bush
Monterrey, Mexico
march 22, 2002

A strong world economy enhances our national -  rule of law and intolerance of corruption so
security by advancing prosperity and freedom in that people are confident that they will be
the rest of the world. Economic growth supported able to enjoy the fruits of their economic
by free trade and free markets creates new jobs endeavors;
and higher incomes. It allows people to lift their

-  strong financial systems that allow capital to

lives out of poverty, spurs economic and legal

be put to its most efficient use;

reform, and the fight against corruption, and it
reinforces the habits of liberty. -  sound fiscal policies to support business

activity;

We will promote economic growth and
economic freedom beyond America’s shores. All -  investments in health and education that
governments are responsible for creating their improve the well-being and skills of the
own economic policies and responding to their labor force and population as a whole; and
own economic challenges. We will use our

-  free trade that provides new avenues for

economic engagement with other countries to

growth and fosters the diffusion of technolo-

underscore the benefits of policies that generate

gies and ideas that increase productivity

higher productivity and sustained economic

and opportunity.

growth, including:

The lessons of history are clear: market

-  pro-growth legal and regulatory policies to

economies, not command-and-control economies

encourage business investment, innovation,

with the heavy hand of government, are the best

and entrepreneurial activity;

way to promote prosperity and reduce poverty.

-  tax policies—particularly lower marginal tax Policies that further strengthen market incentives
rates—that improve incentives for work and and market institutions are relevant for all
investment; economies—industrialized countries, emerging

markets, and the developing world.


-----

A return to strong economic growth in Europe monetary policy, exchange rate policy, and
and Japan is vital to U.S. national security inter- financial sector policy.
ests. We want our allies to have strong economies

The concept of “free trade” arose as a moral

for their own sake, for the sake of the global

principle even before it became a pillar of

economy, and for the sake of global security.

economics. If you can make something that others

European efforts to remove structural barriers in

value, you should be able to sell it to them. If

their economies are particularly important in this

others make something that you value, you should

regard, as are Japan’s efforts to end deflation and

be able to buy it. This is real freedom, the freedom

address the problems of non-performing loans in

for a person—or a nation—to make a living. To

the Japanese banking system. We will continue to

promote free trade, the Unites States has devel-

use our regular consultations with Japan and our

oped a comprehensive strategy:

European partners—including through the Group
of Seven (G-7)—to discuss policies they are -  _Seize the global initiative. The new global_
adopting to promote growth in their economies trade negotiations we helped launch at Doha
and support higher global economic growth. in November 2001 will have an ambitious

agenda, especially in agriculture, manufac-

Improving stability in emerging markets is also

turing, and services, targeted for completion

key to global economic growth. International

in 2005. The United States has led the way in

flows of investment capital are needed to expand

completing the accession of China and a

the productive potential of these economies. These

democratic Taiwan to the World Trade

flows allow emerging markets and developing

Organization. We will assist Russia’s

countries to make the investments that raise living

preparations to join the WTO.

standards and reduce poverty. Our long-term
objective should be a world in which all countries -  _Press regional initiatives. The United States_
have investment-grade credit ratings that allow and other democracies in the Western
them access to international capital markets and Hemisphere have agreed to create the Free
to invest in their future. Trade Area of the Americas, targeted for

completion in 2005. This year the United

We are committed to policies that will help

States will advocate market-access negotia-

emerging markets achieve access to larger capital

tions with its partners, targeted on

flows at lower cost. To this end, we will continue

agriculture, industrial goods, services, invest-

to pursue reforms aimed at reducing uncertainty

ment, and government procurement. We will

in financial markets. We will work actively with

also offer more opportunity to the poorest

other countries, the International Monetary Fund

continent, Africa, starting with full use of

(IMF), and the private sector to implement the

the preferences allowed in the African

G-7 Action Plan negotiated earlier this year for

Growth and Opportunity Act, and leading

preventing financial crises and more effectively

to free trade.

resolving them when they occur.

-  _Move ahead with bilateral free trade_

The best way to deal with financial crises is to

_agreements. Building on the free trade_

prevent them from occurring, and we have

agreement with Jordan enacted in 2001,

encouraged the IMF to improve its efforts doing

the Administration will work this year to

so. We will continue to work with the IMF to

complete free trade agreements with Chile

streamline the policy conditions for its lending

and Singapore. Our aim is to achieve free

and to focus its lending strategy on achieving

trade agreements with a mix of developed

economic growth through sound fiscal and


-----

and developing countries in all regions of -  _Enforce trade agreements and laws against_
the world. Initially, Central America, _unfair practices. Commerce depends on the_
Southern Africa, Morocco, and Australia will rule of law; international trade depends on
be our principal focal points. enforceable agreements. Our top priorities

are to resolve ongoing disputes with the

-  _Renew the executive-congressional partner-_

European Union, Canada, and Mexico and

_ship. Every administration’s trade strategy_

to make a global effort to address new tech-

depends on a productive partnership with

nology, science, and health regulations that

Congress. After a gap of 8 years, the

needlessly impede farm exports and

Administration reestablished majority

improved agriculture. Laws against unfair

support in the Congress for trade liberaliza-

trade practices are often abused, but the

tion by passing Trade Promotion Authority

international community must be able to

and the other market opening measures for

address genuine concerns about government

developing countries in the Trade Act of

subsidies and dumping. International

2002. This Administration will work with

industrial espionage which undermines fair

Congress to enact new bilateral, regional,

competition must be detected and deterred.

and global trade agreements that will be
concluded under the recently passed Trade -  _Help domestic industries and workers adjust._
Promotion Authority. There is a sound statutory framework for

these transitional safeguards which we have

-  _Promote the connection between trade and_

used in the agricultural sector and which we

_development. Trade policies can help devel-_

are using this year to help the American steel

oping countries strengthen property rights,

industry. The benefits of free trade depend

competition, the rule of law, investment, the

upon the enforcement of fair trading prac-

spread of knowledge, open societies, the effi-

tices. These safeguards help ensure that the

cient allocation of resources, and regional

benefits of free trade do not come at the

integration—all leading to growth, opportu-

expense of American workers. Trade adjust-

nity, and confidence in developing countries.

ment assistance will help workers adapt to

The United States is implementing The

the change and dynamism of open markets.

Africa Growth and Opportunity Act to
provide market-access for nearly all goods -  _Protect the environment and workers. The_
produced in the 35 countries of sub- United States must foster economic growth
Saharan Africa. We will make more use of in ways that will provide a better life along
this act and its equivalent for the Caribbean with widening prosperity. We will incorpo-
Basin and continue to work with multilat- rate labor and environmental concerns into
eral and regional institutions to help poorer U.S. trade negotiations, creating a healthy
countries take advantage of these opportuni- “network” between multilateral environ-
ties. Beyond market access, the most mental agreements with the WTO, and use
important area where trade intersects with the International Labor Organization, trade
poverty is in public health. We will ensure preference programs, and trade talks to
that the WTO intellectual property rules are improve working conditions in conjunction
flexible enough to allow developing nations with freer trade.
to gain access to critical medicines for

-  _Enhance energy security. We will strengthen_

extraordinary dangers like HIV/AIDS,

our own energy security and the shared

tuberculosis, and malaria.

prosperity of the global economy by
working with our allies, trading partners,


-----

and energy producers to expand the sources -  obtain agreements with key industries to cut
and types of global energy supplied, espe- emissions of some of the most potent
cially in the Western Hemisphere, Africa, greenhouse gases and give transferable
Central Asia, and the Caspian region. We credits to companies that can show real cuts;
will also continue to work with our partners

-  develop improved standards for measuring

to develop cleaner and more energy efficient

and registering emission reductions;

technologies.

-  promote renewable energy production and

Economic growth should be accompanied by

clean coal technology, as well as nuclear

global efforts to stabilize greenhouse gas concen-

power—which produces no greenhouse gas

trations associated with this growth, containing

emissions, while also improving fuel

them at a level that prevents dangerous human

economy for U.S. cars and trucks;

interference with the global climate. Our overall
objective is to reduce America’s greenhouse gas -  increase spending on research and new
emissions relative to the size of our economy, conservation technologies, to a total of
cutting such emissions per unit of economic $4.5 billion—the largest sum being spent on
activity by 18 percent over the next 10 years, by climate change by any country in the world
the year 2012. Our strategies for attaining this goal and a $700 million increase over last year’s
will be to: budget; and

-  remain committed to the basic U.N. -  assist developing countries, especially the
Framework Convention for international major greenhouse gas emitters such as China
cooperation; and India, so that they will have the tools

and resources to join this effort and be able
to grow along a cleaner and better path.


-----

vii. Expand the Circle of Development by
Opening Societies and Building
the Infrastructure of Democracy

_“In World War II we fought to make the world safer, then worked to rebuild it._
_As we wage war today to keep the world safe from terror,_
_we must also work to make the world a better place for all its citizens.”_

President Bush
Washington, D.C. (Inter-American Development Bank)
March 14, 2002

A world where some live in comfort and This Administration’s goal is to help unleash
plenty, while half of the human race lives on less the productive potential of individuals in all
than $2 a day, is neither just nor stable. Including nations. Sustained growth and poverty reduction
all of the world’s poor in an expanding circle of is impossible without the right national policies.
development—and opportunity—is a moral Where governments have implemented real policy
imperative and one of the top priorities of U.S. changes, we will provide significant new levels of
international policy. assistance. The United States and other developed

countries should set an ambitious and specific

Decades of massive development assistance

target: to double the size of the world’s poorest

have failed to spur economic growth in the

economies within a decade.

poorest countries. Worse, development aid has
often served to prop up failed policies, relieving The United States Government will pursue
the pressure for reform and perpetuating misery. these major strategies to achieve this goal:
Results of aid are typically measured in dollars

-  _Provide resources to aid countries that have_

spent by donors, not in the rates of growth and

_met the challenge of national reform. We_

poverty reduction achieved by recipients. These

propose a 50 percent increase in the core

are the indicators of a failed strategy.

development assistance given by the United

Working with other nations, the United States States. While continuing our present
is confronting this failure. We forged a new programs, including humanitarian assistance
consensus at the U.N. Conference on Financing based on need alone, these billions of new
for Development in Monterrey that the objectives dollars will form a new Millennium
of assistance—and the strategies to achieve those Challenge Account for projects in countries
objectives—must change. whose governments rule justly, invest in


-----

their people, and encourage economic obligation to measure the success of our
freedom. Governments must fight corrup- development assistance by whether it is
tion, respect basic human rights, embrace delivering results. For this reason, we will
the rule of law, invest in health care and continue to demand that our own develop-
education, follow responsible economic ment assistance as well as assistance from the
policies, and enable entrepreneurship. The multilateral development banks has measur-
Millennium Challenge Account will reward able goals and concrete benchmarks for
countries that have demonstrated real policy achieving those goals. Thanks to U.S.
change and challenge those that have not to leadership, the recent IDA replenishment
implement reforms. agreement will establish a monitoring and

evaluation system that measures recipient

-  _Improve the effectiveness of the World Bank_

countries’ progress. For the first time,

_and other development banks in raising living_

donors can link a portion of their contribu-

_standards. The United States is committed to_

tions to IDA to the achievement of actual

a comprehensive reform agenda for making

development results, and part of the U.S.

the World Bank and the other multilateral

contribution is linked in this way. We will

development banks more effective in

strive to make sure that the World Bank and

improving the lives of the world’s poor. We

other multilateral development banks build

have reversed the downward trend in U.S.

on this progress so that a focus on results is

contributions and proposed an 18 percent

an integral part of everything that these

increase in the U.S. contributions to the

institutions do.

International Development Association
(IDA)—the World Bank’s fund for the -  _Increase the amount of development assistance_
poorest countries—and the African _that is provided in the form of grants instead_
Development Fund. The key to raising living _of loans. Greater use of results-based grants_
standards and reducing poverty around the is the best way to help poor countries make
world is increasing productivity growth, productive investments, particularly in the
especially in the poorest countries. We will social sectors, without saddling them with
continue to press the multilateral develop- ever-larger debt burdens. As a result of
ment banks to focus on activities that U.S. leadership, the recent IDA agreement
increase economic productivity, such as provided for significant increases in grant
improvements in education, health, rule of funding for the poorest countries for educa-
law, and private sector development. Every tion, HIV/AIDS, health, nutrition, water,
project, every loan, every grant must be sanitation, and other human needs. Our goal
judged by how much it will increase is to build on that progress by increasing the
productivity growth in developing countries. use of grants at the other multilateral

development banks. We will also challenge

-  _Insist upon measurable results to ensure that_

universities, nonprofits, and the private

_development assistance is actually making a_

sector to match government efforts by using

_difference in the lives of the world’s poor._

grants to support development projects that

When it comes to economic development,

show results.

what really matters is that more children are
getting a better education, more people have -  _Open societies to commerce and investment._
access to health care and clean water, or Trade and investment are the real engines of
more workers can find jobs to make a better economic growth. Even if government aid
future for their families. We have a moral increases, most money for development


-----

must come from trade, domestic capital, and -  _Emphasize education. Literacy and learning_
foreign investment. An effective strategy are the foundation of democracy and devel-
must try to expand these flows as well. Free opment. Only about 7 percent of World
markets and free trade are key priorities of Bank resources are devoted to education.
our national security strategy. This proportion should grow. The United

States will increase its own funding for

-  _Secure public health. The scale of the public_

education assistance by at least 20 percent

health crisis in poor countries is enormous.

with an emphasis on improving basic educa-

In countries afflicted by epidemics and

tion and teacher training in Africa. The

pandemics like HIV/AIDS, malaria, and

United States can also bring information

tuberculosis, growth and development will

technology to these societies, many of whose

be threatened until these scourges can be

education systems have been devastated by

contained. Resources from the developed

HIV/AIDS.

world are necessary but will be effective only
with honest governance, which supports -  _Continue to aid agricultural development._
prevention programs and provides effective New technologies, including biotechnology,
local infrastructure. The United States has have enormous potential to improve crop
strongly backed the new global fund for yields in developing countries while using
HIV/AIDS organized by U.N. Secretary fewer pesticides and less water. Using sound
General Kofi Annan and its focus on science, the United States should help bring
combining prevention with a broad strategy these benefits to the 800 million people,
for treatment and care. The United States including 300 million children, who still
already contributes more than twice as much suffer from hunger and malnutrition.
money to such efforts as the next largest
donor. If the global fund demonstrates its
promise, we will be ready to give even more.


-----

viii. Develop Agendas for Cooperative Action
with the Other Main Centers of Global Power

_“We have our best chance since the rise of the nation-state in the 17th century_
_to build a world where the great powers compete in peace instead of prepare for war.”_

President Bush
West Point, New York
June 1, 2002

America will implement its strategies by build a capability to field, at short notice, highly
organizing coalitions—as broad as practicable— mobile, specially trained forces whenever they are
of states able and willing to promote a balance of needed to respond to a threat against any member
power that favors freedom. Effective coalition of the alliance.
leadership requires clear priorities, an appreciation

The alliance must be able to act wherever our

of others’ interests, and consistent consultations

interests are threatened, creating coalitions under

among partners with a spirit of humility.

NATO’s own mandate, as well as contributing to

There is little of lasting consequence that the mission-based coalitions. To achieve this, we must:
United States can accomplish in the world without

-  expand NATO’s membership to those

the sustained cooperation of its allies and friends

democratic nations willing and able to share

in Canada and Europe. Europe is also the seat of

the burden of defending and advancing our

two of the strongest and most able international

common interests;

institutions in the world: the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), which has, since its incep- -  ensure that the military forces of NATO
tion, been the fulcrum of transatlantic and nations have appropriate combat
inter-European security, and the European Union contributions to make in coalition warfare;
(EU), our partner in opening world trade.

-  develop planning processes to enable

The attacks of September 11 were also an those contributions to become effective
attack on NATO, as NATO itself recognized when multinational fighting forces;
it invoked its Article V self-defense clause for the

-  take advantage of the technological opportu-

first time. NATO’s core mission—collective

nities and economies of scale in our defense

defense of the transatlantic alliance of democra-

spending to transform NATO military forces

cies—remains, but NATO must develop new

so that they dominate potential aggressors

structures and capabilities to carry out that

and diminish our vulnerabilities;

mission under new circumstances. NATO must


-----

-  streamline and increase the flexibility -  look to Japan to continue forging a leading
of command structures to meet new role in regional and global affairs based on
operational demands and the associated our common interests, our common values,
requirements of training, integrating, and our close defense and diplomatic
and experimenting with new force cooperation;
configurations; and

-  work with South Korea to maintain vigilance

-  maintain the ability to work and fight towards the North while preparing our
together as allies even as we take the alliance to make contributions to the
necessary steps to transform and modernize broader stability of the region over the
our forces. longer term;

If NATO succeeds in enacting these changes, -  build on 50 years of U.S.-Australian alliance
the rewards will be a partnership as central to the cooperation as we continue working
security and interests of its member states as was together to resolve regional and global
the case during the Cold War. We will sustain a problems—as we have so many times from
common perspective on the threats to our soci- the Battle of the Coral Sea to Tora Bora;
eties and improve our ability to take common

-  maintain forces in the region that reflect

action in defense of our nations and their inter-

our commitments to our allies, our require-

ests. At the same time, we welcome our European

ments, our technological advances, and the

allies’ efforts to forge a greater foreign policy and

strategic environment; and

defense identity with the EU, and commit
ourselves to close consultations to ensure that -  build on stability provided by these alliances,
these developments work with NATO. We cannot as well as with institutions such as ASEAN
afford to lose this opportunity to better prepare and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
the family of transatlantic democracies for the forum, to develop a mix of regional and
challenges to come. bilateral strategies to manage change in this

dynamic region.

The attacks of September 11 energized
America’s Asian alliances. Australia invoked the We are attentive to the possible renewal of old
ANZUS Treaty to declare the September 11 was an patterns of great power competition. Several
attack on Australia itself, following that historic potential great powers are now in the midst of
decision with the dispatch of some of the world’s internal transition—most importantly Russia,
finest combat forces for Operation Enduring India, and China. In all three cases, recent devel-
Freedom. Japan and the Republic of Korea opments have encouraged our hope that a truly
provided unprecedented levels of military global consensus about basic principles is slowly
logistical support within weeks of the terrorist taking shape.
attack. We have deepened cooperation on counter-

With Russia, we are already building a new

terrorism with our alliance partners in Thailand

strategic relationship based on a central reality of

and the Philippines and received invaluable

the twenty-first century: the United States and

assistance from close friends like Singapore and

Russia are no longer strategic adversaries. The

New Zealand.

Moscow Treaty on Strategic Reductions is

The war against terrorism has proven that emblematic of this new reality and reflects a crit-
America’s alliances in Asia not only underpin ical change in Russian thinking that promises to
regional peace and stability, but are flexible and lead to productive, long-term relations with the
ready to deal with new challenges. To enhance our Euro-Atlantic community and the United States.
Asian alliances and friendships, we will: Russia’s top leaders have a realistic assessment of


-----

their country’s current weakness and the as well. We have a common interest in the free
policies—internal and external—needed to reverse flow of commerce, including through the vital sea
those weaknesses. They understand, increasingly, lanes of the Indian Ocean. Finally, we share an
that Cold War approaches do not serve their interest in fighting terrorism and in creating a
national interests and that Russian and American strategically stable Asia.
strategic interests overlap in many areas.

Differences remain, including over the develop-

United States policy seeks to use this turn in ment of India’s nuclear and missile programs, and
Russian thinking to refocus our relationship on the pace of India’s economic reforms. But while in
emerging and potential common interests and the past these concerns may have dominated our
challenges. We are broadening our already exten- thinking about India, today we start with a view
sive cooperation in the global war on terrorism. of India as a growing world power with which we
We are facilitating Russia’s entry into the World have common strategic interests. Through a
Trade Organization, without lowering standards strong partnership with India, we can best address
for accession, to promote beneficial bilateral trade any differences and shape a dynamic future.
and investment relations. We have created the

The United States relationship with China is

NATO-Russia Council with the goal of deepening

an important part of our strategy to promote a

security cooperation among Russia, our European

stable, peaceful, and prosperous Asia-Pacific

allies, and ourselves. We will continue to bolster

region. We welcome the emergence of a strong,

the independence and stability of the states of the

peaceful, and prosperous China. The democratic

former Soviet Union in the belief that a pros-

development of China is crucial to that future. Yet,

perous and stable neighborhood will reinforce

a quarter century after beginning the process of

Russia’s growing commitment to integration into

shedding the worst features of the Communist

the Euro-Atlantic community.

legacy, China’s leaders have not yet made the next

At the same time, we are realistic about the series of fundamental choices about the character
differences that still divide us from Russia and of their state. In pursuing advanced military
about the time and effort it will take to build an capabilities that can threaten its neighbors in the
enduring strategic partnership. Lingering distrust Asia-Pacific region, China is following an outdated
of our motives and policies by key Russian elites path that, in the end, will hamper its own pursuit
slows improvement in our relations. Russia’s of national greatness. In time, China will find that
uneven commitment to the basic values of social and political freedom is the only source of
free-market democracy and dubious record in that greatness.
combating the proliferation of weapons of mass

The United States seeks a constructive relation-

destruction remain matters of great concern.

ship with a changing China. We already cooperate

Russia’s very weakness limits the opportunities

well where our interests overlap, including the

for cooperation. Nevertheless, those opportunities

current war on terrorism and in promoting

are vastly greater now than in recent years—or

stability on the Korean peninsula. Likewise, we

even decades.

have coordinated on the future of Afghanistan

The United States has undertaken a transfor- and have initiated a comprehensive dialogue on
mation in its bilateral relationship with India counterterrorism and similar transitional
based on a conviction that U.S. interests require a concerns. Shared health and environmental
strong relationship with India. We are the two threats, such as the spread of HIV/AIDS, challenge
largest democracies, committed to political us to promote jointly the welfare of our citizens.
freedom protected by representative government.

Addressing these transnational threats will

India is moving toward greater economic freedom

challenge China to become more open with


-----

information, promote the development of civil we have profound disagreements. Our commitment
society, and enhance individual human rights. to the self-defense of Taiwan under the Taiwan
China has begun to take the road to political Relations Act is one. Human rights is another. We
openness, permitting many personal freedoms and expect China to adhere to its nonproliferation
conducting village-level elections, yet remains commitments. We will work to narrow differences
strongly committed to national one-party rule by where they exist, but not allow them to preclude
the Communist Party. To make that nation truly cooperation where we agree.
accountable to its citizen’s needs and aspirations,

The events of September 11, 2001, fundamentally

however, much work remains to be done. Only by

changed the context for relations between the

allowing the Chinese people to think, assemble,

United States and other main centers of global

and worship freely can China reach its full potential.

power, and opened vast, new opportunities. With

Our important trade relationship will benefit our long-standing allies in Europe and Asia, and
from China’s entry into the World Trade with leaders in Russia, India, and China, we must
Organization, which will create more export develop active agendas of cooperation lest these
opportunities and ultimately more jobs for relationships become routine and unproductive.
American farmers, workers, and companies. China

Every agency of the United States Government

is our fourth largest trading partner, with over

shares the challenge. We can build fruitful habits

$100 billion in annual two-way trade. The power

of consultation, quiet argument, sober analysis,

of market principles and the WTO’s requirements

and common action. In the long-term, these are

for transparency and accountability will advance

the practices that will sustain the supremacy of

openness and the rule of law in China to help

our common principles and keep open the path

establish basic protections for commerce and for

of progress.

citizens. There are, however, other areas in which


-----

ix. Transform America’s National Security
Institutions to Meet the Challenges and
Opportunities of the Twenty-First Century

_“Terrorists attacked a symbol of American prosperity._
_They did not touch its source. America is successful because of the_
_hard work, creativity, and enterprise of our people.”_

President Bush
Washington, D.C. (Joint Session of Congress)
September 20, 2001

The major institutions of American national to focus more on how an adversary might fight
security were designed in a different era to meet rather than where and when a war might occur.
different requirements. All of them must be We will channel our energies to overcome a host
transformed. of operational challenges.

It is time to reaffirm the essential role of The presence of American forces overseas is
American military strength. We must build and one of the most profound symbols of the U.S.
maintain our defenses beyond challenge. Our commitments to allies and friends. Through our
military’s highest priority is to defend the United willingness to use force in our own defense and in
States. To do so effectively, our military must: defense of others, the United States demonstrates

its resolve to maintain a balance of power that

-  assure our allies and friends;

favors freedom. To contend with uncertainty and

-  dissuade future military competition; to meet the many security challenges we face, the

United States will require bases and stations

-  deter threats against U.S. interests, allies, and

within and beyond Western Europe and Northeast

friends; and

Asia, as well as temporary access arrangements for

-  decisively defeat any adversary if deterrence the long-distance deployment of U.S. forces.
fails.

Before the war in Afghanistan, that area was

The unparalleled strength of the United States low on the list of major planning contingencies.
armed forces, and their forward presence, have Yet, in a very short time, we had to operate across
maintained the peace in some of the world’s most the length and breadth of that remote nation,
strategically vital regions. However, the threats and using every branch of the armed forces. We must
enemies we must confront have changed, and so prepare for more such deployments by developing
must our forces. A military structured to deter assets such as advanced remote sensing,
massive Cold War-era armies must be transformed long-range precision strike capabilities, and


-----

transformed maneuver and expeditionary forces. systems and coordinated with our allies and
This broad portfolio of military capabilities must friends. We need to protect the capabilities we
also include the ability to defend the homeland, have so that we do not arm our enemies with the
conduct information operations, ensure U.S. knowledge of how best to surprise us. Those who
access to distant theaters, and protect critical would harm us also seek the benefit of surprise to
U.S. infrastructure and assets in outer space. limit our prevention and response options and to

maximize injury.

Innovation within the armed forces will rest on
experimentation with new approaches to warfare, We must strengthen intelligence warning and
strengthening joint operations, exploiting U.S. analysis to provide integrated threat assessments
intelligence advantages, and taking full advantage for national and homeland security. Since the
of science and technology. We must also trans- threats inspired by foreign governments and
form the way the Department of Defense is run, groups may be conducted inside the United States,
especially in financial management and recruit- we must also ensure the proper fusion of informa-
ment and retention. Finally, while maintaining tion between intelligence and law enforcement.
near-term readiness and the ability to fight the

Initiatives in this area will include:

war on terrorism, the goal must be to provide the
President with a wider range of military options -  strengthening the authority of the Director
to discourage aggression or any form of coercion of Central Intelligence to lead the develop-
against the United States, our allies, and our friends. ment and actions of the Nation’s foreign

intelligence capabilities;

We know from history that deterrence can fail;
and we know from experience that some enemies -  establishing a new framework for intelli-
cannot be deterred. The United States must and gence warning that provides seamless and
will maintain the capability to defeat any attempt integrated warning across the spectrum of
by an enemy—whether a state or non-state threats facing the nation and our allies;
actor—to impose its will on the United States, our

-  continuing to develop new methods of

allies, or our friends. We will maintain the forces

collecting information to sustain our

sufficient to support our obligations, and to

intelligence advantage;

defend freedom. Our forces will be strong enough
to dissuade potential adversaries from pursuing a -  investing in future capabilities while working
military build-up in hopes of surpassing, or to protect them through a more vigorous
equaling, the power of the United States. effort to prevent the compromise of intelli-

gence capabilities; and

Intelligence—and how we use it—is our first
line of defense against terrorists and the threat -  collecting intelligence against the terrorist
posed by hostile states. Designed around the danger across the government with all-
priority of gathering enormous information about source analysis.
a massive, fixed object—the Soviet bloc—the

As the United States Government relies on the

intelligence community is coping with the

armed forces to defend America’s interests, it must

challenge of following a far more complex and

rely on diplomacy to interact with other nations.

elusive set of targets.

We will ensure that the Department of State

We must transform our intelligence capabilities receives funding sufficient to ensure the success of
and build new ones to keep pace with the nature American diplomacy. The State Department takes
of these threats. Intelligence must be appropriately the lead in managing our bilateral relationships
integrated with our defense and law enforcement with other governments. And in this new era, its


-----

people and institutions must be able to interact We will make hard choices in the coming year
equally adroitly with non-governmental organiza- and beyond to ensure the right level and alloca-
tions and international institutions. Officials tion of government spending on national security.
trained mainly in international politics must The United States Government must strengthen
also extend their reach to understand complex its defenses to win this war. At home, our most
issues of domestic governance around the important priority is to protect the homeland for
world, including public health, education, law the American people.
enforcement, the judiciary, and public diplomacy.

Today, the distinction between domestic and

Our diplomats serve at the front line of foreign affairs is diminishing. In a globalized
complex negotiations, civil wars, and other world, events beyond America’s borders have a
humanitarian catastrophes. As humanitarian greater impact inside them. Our society must be
relief requirements are better understood, we open to people, ideas, and goods from across the
must also be able to help build police forces, globe. The characteristics we most cherish—our
court systems, and legal codes, local and provin- freedom, our cities, our systems of movement, and
cial government institutions, and electoral modern life—are vulnerable to terrorism. This
systems. Effective international cooperation is vulnerability will persist long after we bring to
needed to accomplish these goals, backed by justice those responsible for the September 11
American readiness to play our part. attacks. As time passes, individuals may gain

access to means of destruction that until now

Just as our diplomatic institutions must adapt

could be wielded only by armies, fleets, and

so that we can reach out to others, we also need a

squadrons. This is a new condition of life. We

different and more comprehensive approach to

will adjust to it and thrive—in spite of it.

public information efforts that can help people
around the world learn about and understand In exercising our leadership, we will respect the
America. The war on terrorism is not a clash of values, judgment, and interests of our friends and
civilizations. It does, however, reveal the clash partners. Still, we will be prepared to act apart
inside a civilization, a battle for the future of the when our interests and unique responsibilities
Muslim world. This is a struggle of ideas and this require. When we disagree on particulars, we will
is an area where America must excel. explain forthrightly the grounds for our concerns

and strive to forge viable alternatives. We will not

We will take the actions necessary to ensure

allow such disagreements to obscure our determi-

that our efforts to meet our global security

nation to secure together, with our allies and

commitments and protect Americans are not

our friends, our shared fundamental interests

impaired by the potential for investigations,

and values.

inquiry, or prosecution by the International
Criminal Court (ICC), whose jurisdiction does Ultimately, the foundation of American
not extend to Americans and which we do not strength is at home. It is in the skills of our
accept. We will work together with other nations people, the dynamism of our economy, and the
to avoid complications in our military operations resilience of our institutions. A diverse, modern
and cooperation, through such mechanisms as society has inherent, ambitious, entrepreneurial
multilateral and bilateral agreements that will energy. Our strength comes from what we do
protect U.S. nationals from the ICC. We will with that energy. That is where our national
implement fully the American Servicemembers security begins.
Protection Act, whose provisions are intended to
ensure and enhance the protection of U.S.
personnel and officials.


-----

The National Security Strategy
of the United States of America

S e p t e m b e r 2 0 0 2


-----

