# Vanuatu

#### National Security Strategy

 Secure & Resilient


-----

### Contents

**Message from the Prime Minister.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4**

**Message from the Minister of Internal Affairs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6**

**Executive Summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8**

###### Part 1. National Security in a complex world. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

**Chapter 1. Vanuatu’s National Security. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11**

Objectives of the National Security Strategy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

Alignment of the National Security Strategy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

Our Vision and Objectives for National Security.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

**Chapter 2. The Evolution of Vanuatu’s Security Environment and Outlook -**

**Risks and Opportunities.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16**

###### Part 2. Building a Happy and Secure Future.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

**Chapter 3. Pillars of Vanuatu’s National Security.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21**

Pillar 1. National Security Forces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

Pillar 2. Border Security.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

Pillar 3. Justice and Human Rights. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

Pillar 4. Disasters and Climate Change Resilience.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

Pillar 5. Cyber Security.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

Pillar 6. Human Security.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46

Pillar 7. Political Stability and Good Governance.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

Pillar 8. Foreign Relations – External Engagement.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54

Pillar 9. Economy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57

Pillar 10. Government Machinery.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61

**Chapter 4. Conclusion.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66**

###### Annex 1. Global Trends.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67

 A 2 A d Abb i i


-----

-----

### Message from  the Prime Minister

###### Hon. Charlot Salwai Tabimasmas

There can be no higher responsibility of a government than the protection of the nation
– to maintain national sovereignty and border integrity; to ensure a peaceful and just
society; and to nurture strong human security for all and national resilience in the face
of natural disasters and other unforeseen events.

I am proud to present this document to the people of Vanuatu, our first-ever National
Security Strategy. The Strategy outlines Vanuatu’s security environment – the threats
and opportunities – and establishes priorities. It outlines an Action Plan and the
directions the government proposes to take to reinforce the security and resilience of
our nation and people over the short and long term.

The Strategy underlines our national aspiration, set out in the National Sustainable
Development Plan 2016 to 2030, for a stable, sustainable and prosperous Vanuatu. It
reinforces the foundation of our nation, as expressed in our Constitution, our culture,
traditional knowledge and Christian principles.


-----

independence and society. We will commit to promoting a rules-based global system
and maintain our non-aligned foreign policy. We reaffirm our commitment to human
rights, justice and the rule of law.

Vanuatu must use its limited financial and other resources wisely. We are fortunate
to have the strong support of a number of security partners as well as regional and
international organisations, and we will work with them closely to build our security
and prosperity.

We will give high priority to countering non-traditional but growing threats from cybercrime, transnational crimes, money laundering and terrorism. We will guard against
foreign interference and espionage. We will work with our communities to address
domestic crimes.

We will reform the Vanuatu Police Force and build a robust intelligence service to meet
our future security needs. We will maintain a small, affordable, defensive and offensive
capability, and meet our global commitment to peace building.

In tandem with the development of this Strategy, in January 2019 the Government
approved the establishment of a high-level National Security Council, comprising all
the senior Ministers concerned, under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister. This
initiative addresses a long-standing gap in our government machinery by creating
a high-level body to advise the Government on major national security issues on a
strategic, whole-of-government basis.

The Strategy has been developed following a wide range of consultations with
stakeholders in and outside ministries and government, including Chiefs, the Churches,
civil society and the private sector. Consultations were held in Santo and Tanna as well
as Port Vila. Maintaining security is a truly national endeavour, and our fate is in the
hands of us all. In particular the Government looks forward to working closely with all
sectors of society in the implementation of the strategy, and building a secure and happy
future for all.

Hon. Charlot Salwai Tabimasmas

Prime Minister


-----

### Message from  the Minister of Internal Affairs

###### Hon Andrew Solomon Napuat

Vanuatu has many strengths, but also vulnerabilities, including our exposure to natural
disasters and climate change, and our understrength national security forces. In our
complex, challenging and fast-changing global and regional security environment, we
must adapt and act accordingly.

The Government has now given national security its highest priority. This document
provides a full strategy for national security alongside clear decisions about our
country’s priorities, the capabilities we need to achieve them and the resources we will
allocate. It provides for the establishment of strong government machinery, under the
new National Security Council, to deal with national security issues and to boost our
intelligence and assessment capacity.

This strategy embraces the broad concept of security now widely accepted regionally
and globally - covering not just traditional security concerns, but also issues like climate
change and human security – and focuses on the security challenges most relevant to
Vanuatu’s circumstances.


-----

Including for example strong policing and law and order; climate change and natural
disasters; border management and transnational crime; protection of our EEZ; cyber
security; critical infrastructure; our external engagement and regional and global
developments that might impact on Vanuatu; economic issues including debt levels,
foreign investment, and tourism; land and customary issues; the banking system;
background checks on a select range of foreign individuals seeking to obtain Vanuatu
citizenship or otherwise engage with Vanuatu; and human security issues such as
gender-based violence, health security and youth unemployment.

The Strategy also addresses the attributes and capabilities Vanuatu needs as a nation to
safeguard national security, ranging for example from strong and effective institutions;
to a resilient and well-managed economy; to stable government, good governance,
transparency and accountability.

Finally, while some trends in Vanuatu’s future security environment can be anticipated,
inevitably there are many that cannot. It is vital that the Strategy remain under regular
review, to be updated as circumstances and perceived risks change, and that the nation’s
security institutions retain the flexibility and resources needed to respond quickly to
new challenges as they arise.

I look forward to playing my part, along with all others involved, in ensuring the
successful implementation of this Strategy.

Hon Andrew Solomon Napuat

Minister of Internal Affairs


-----

**_Safety and security for all our peoples, through a national security_**
**_system that anticipates threats, protects the nation, builds resilience,_**
**_and shapes our environment in Vanuatu’s interests._**

### National Security Objectives

**_To ensure a safe, stable and prosperous society and protection of_**
**_our values_**

**_To protect and strengthen our sovereignty_**

**_To secure our assets, infrastructure and institutions_**

**_To ensure our foreign policy and external engagement_**
**_maximise Vanuatu’s national interests_**


t i bl d V t


d th l f l d t


-----

of a rules-based global system.

Vanuatu must use its limited resources
wisely. We are fortunate to have the
support of a number of security partners
as well as regional and international
organisations, and will work with them
closely.

The Strategy equips Vanuatu to succeed
in this volatile world. Globally, the
strategic environment is increasingly
uncertain. Change is unpredictable, rapid
and often large-scale, bringing with it
both threats and opportunities.

Vanuatu has a strong interest in a secure
and prosperous Pacific Islands region.
While the region is relatively peaceful and
stable, it faces a number of challenges,
some of which are becoming more acute.


competition for influence grows.

Our country shares many of the
vulnerabilities of its Pacific Islands
neighbours. At the same time, it has a
number of strengths, notably strong
social cohesion underpinned by
traditional values.

The Strategy sets out 10 Pillars, covering
security challenges and capabilities,
which capture what we are doing to
meet our national security objectives,
and what further action we need to take.
Under each pillar are listed “Action Plan”
items, which outline specific government
commitments for action to be taken in the
near term, and “Government Directions”,
which outline the broad approach being
taken to strengthen security in relation to
that issue.


###### The 10 Pillars are:
1. National security forces that are able to protect the nation and provide

security for all citizens

2. Effective monitoring and protection of Vanuatu’s borders and its

Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)

3. Justice and rights for all

4. Resilient national systems for disaster preparedness, response and

recovery; and climate change adaptation

5. Protection of individuals, government and the private sector against cyber

crime and other malicious cyber activity

6. Robust human security for individuals and families

7. Political stability and strong governance of institutions, including the

security sector

8. Effective promotion and defence of Vanuatu’s external interests and

engagement

9. A strong, well-managed and resilient economy

10. Well-coordinated and effective government machinery to manage national

security issues, and a high-quality intelligence and assessment capability.


-----

## Part 1. National Security in


-----

## Chapter 1. Vanuatu’s National Security

###### Objectives of the National Strategy


This National Security Strategy – “Secure
and Resilient” – provides an overarching
framework for our national security
efforts. It describes the strategic context
for Vanuatu and for those in the Ministry
of Internal Affairs and wider Government
agencies who are involved in developing
long-term plans, policies and capabilities.
It sets priorities for the coming years,
articulates Vanuatu’s national security
agenda, and sets in motion reforms
to strengthen the national security
community. The Strategy creates an
integrated, overarching framework for,
but does not duplicate, other security
policies and strategies in key government
areas.

As well as providing a strategic context,
the Strategy identifies long-term
threats and opportunities likely to be of
particular relevance for Vanuatu over
several decades.

An enduring truth, however, is that
Vanuatu will continue to face unexpected
threats and challenges, for which the
government and our security forces and
institutions must be prepared to act.
Uncertainty and complexity will remain


future operating environment. What is
important however is that, whatever the
future may hold, the nation is resourced
with high-quality institutions, personnel
and assessment capability to anticipate
and respond effectively to emerging risks.

Our National Security Strategy is in two
parts. The first part explains the national
security framework and sets out our
vision for national security and our
objectives to make that vision a reality. It
also outlines the strategic environment,
in particular the current trends that are
shaping the global and regional security
context.

The second part of the Strategy maps out
the main Pillars, ten in all, for securing
Vanuatu’s future. It notes current
capabilities, and outlines what is needed
in the future. Under each Pillar, the
Strategy identifies specific initiatives for
the near term (the “Action Plan”), where
appropriate, and in addition outlines
more generally a number of the main
directions the government will take to
safeguard national security under that
Pillar (“Government Directions”).


-----

###### National Security?

The overall security of a nation is
intimately linked to economic stability,
resource efficiency, good governance and
social cohesion.

National security is a broad and evolving
concept. It is concerned with how we
shape our environment, and how we
prevent and prepare for threats to our
sovereignty, people, assets, infrastructure
and institutions. National security is also
concerned with how we respond to such
threats and recover from any event which
may occur. Under the expanded concept
of security now widely accepted, national
security also includes threats such as
climate change and natural disasters,
cyber security and elements of human
security.

Vanuatu can draw on the three elements
of its security forces (Police, Maritime
Wing and Vanuatu Mobile Force) as well
as other government departments and
agencies to fulfil its national security
responsibilities.


played an important role in responding
to natural disasters and has contributed
to regional and United Nations peace
keeping services.

###### Alignment of the National Security Strategy

The Strategy takes full account of
Vanuatu’s governance and developmental
context and is aligned with Vanuatu’s
national, regional and international goals
and commitments.

At the national level, the Strategy flows
from the responsibilities of the State set
out in the Constitution and complements
the aims of the National Sustainable
Development Plan (NSDP) 2016 - 2030

At the regional level, the Policy is aligned
with Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) policies,
most notably the Framework of Pacific
Regionalism, adopted by PIF leaders
in 2014, and the Boe Declaration on
Regional Security, agreed by Pacific
Islands leaders at the Nauru PIF in 2018.


The Vanuatu’s People’s Plan, or the
National Sustainable Development
Plan 2016-2030, is the fundamental
document charting Vanuatu’s future.
The National Security Strategy
supports all the objectives of the
Plan but is aligned most directly with
Society Pillar 5 on “Security, Peace
and Justice”.


-----

an expanded concept of security, which
encompasses “a wider range of security
issues, both traditional and nontraditional, with increasing emphasis
on human security, environmental
and resource security, trans-national
crime, and cyber security.” This is the
approach taken by the Government in
the National Security Strategy. The Boe
Declaration includes a commitment by
member countries to develop a national


first regional countries to adopt such a
strategy.

At the global level, the Strategy is
aligned with the 2015 UN Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). The Strategy
also directly complements the attainment
of objectives under the UN-supported
Small Islands Developing States
Accelerated Modality of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway, adopted in Samoa in 2014.


The SDGs are enunciated in United Nations General Assembly Resolution 70/1 of
2015 “Transforming our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”.
The National Security Strategy is most directly aligned with SDG 16 - “Peace and
Justice, Strong Institutions”


-----

### Our Vision and Objectives for National Security

###### Our vision for Vanuatu’s national security as we journey through the next decades is for safety and security for all our peoples, through a unified national security system that anticipates threats, protects the nation, builds resilience, and shapes our environment in Vanuatu’s interest.

 Our national security objectives to realise that vision are:


-----

-----

## Chapter 2. The Evolution of  Vanuatu’s Security Environment and Outlook. Risks and Opportunities.

###### Vanuatu has direct interests in geo-strategic developments in the Pacific; in the dynamic Asia Pacific where important shifts in power are taking place; and at the global level.

Globally, the strategic outlook is now more uncertain than it has been for some decades.
Key assumptions are being called into question. Change is unpredictable, rapid and often
large-scale, bringing with it both opportunities and threats. Strains in the rules-based
global order are evident, and tensions and rivalry between the major powers are on the
rise. The shape of what is to emerge is not clear.


Vanuatu is at the heart of the vast Pacific Ocean and sits across important lines of
communication. The Second World War underlined the strategic importance of the
Pacific. After some years of relatively little attention, external powers are increasingly
seeking influence in the region.


-----

The United Nations
Security Council meets
to discuss North
Korea. The rules-based
international order has
served the world well
since the end of the
Second World War, but
is now under strain.


There are also uncertainties about the
global economy, fuelled by major trade
tensions. While countries like Vanuatu
have little direct influence on these
developments, they do underline the
importance of maintaining a strong
and resilient economy, to guard against
external shocks. The Global Financial
Crisis had ripple effects for years.

Vanuatu, as with all countries, needs to
be flexible, and to assess and respond
to this fluid environment as best it can.
It is also important, as competition for
influence grows, to guard against those
who seek to exert inappropriate influence
and potentially undermine sovereign
institutions.

The Asia Pacific region has been
undergoing profound economic
transition. Strategic rivalry has also
increased. China has emerged as a global
power, and the United States, while still
the largest power globally, is seeing a
shift in its long-held strategic dominance
in East Asia. Meanwhile tensions around
the Pacific Rim, such those centred on the
South China Sea, and North Korea, have
highlighted the potential for instability in
the region, should they escalate.


At the same time, other trends are
changing our world. Globalisation
and technology are changing the way
we communicate and do business,
although with an ever-growing threat of
malicious cyber activity. Transnational
and organised crime is becoming more
sophisticated, while profit shifting and
other forms of tax evasion across borders
pose increasing challenges for national
governments. Terrorism is a constant
reality in some parts of the world, and as
the brutal attack in Christchurch in 2019
demonstrated, no country is immune, no
matter how safe it normally is. Climate
change and environmental degradation
and the increased demand for food, water
and energy carry with them the risk of
political, economic and social disruption.
Vanuatu will have to navigate more
turbulent times.


-----

endorsed by Pacific Islands
Forum Leaders in 2017 as the
core driver for collective action
for advancing the Leaders’
Vision under the Framework
for Pacific Regionalism. At a
time of increasing attention
from both new and old
development partners, the
concept is seen by some as a
collective determination by
Pacific people to decide their
own development agenda.


A permanent challenge is the vast
expanse of the region and huge EEZs,
sparsely populated by mostly small
island states remote from each other. It is
characterised by small formal economies,
great distance from major markets, high
costs and heavy reliance on development
assistance.Other challenges include rising
inequality, expanding and restive youth
populations, gender-based violence,
resource constraints and depletion of
natural resources, illegal fishing, weak
borders and increasingly sophisticated
trans-national crime. Added to that is the
constant threat of natural disasters, now
compounded by climate change.

External aggression in the Pacific Island
region is unlikely, as is the return of the
type of conflict and instability seen in past
decades in Bougainville, New Caledonia
and Solomon Islands. New pressures
however mean low-level instability, with
the potential to impact on neighbouring
countries, cannot be ruled out.

Vanuatu shares many of the challenges of
its Pacific Islands neighbours, the most


-----

and relatively few natural resources apart
from agricultural products and fish. It is
also facing a number of social pressures
resulting from a rapidly growing youth
population, land issues, and a growth
in the number of foreigners engaged in
businesses, in competition with local
people. Political instability and poor
governance have held the country
back, although these issues are being
addressed.

Vanuatu’s greatest asset is its people resourceful and resilient, still drawing
strength from traditional knowledge
and practices.

Vanuatu has a number of strengths not
shared by many countries. Traditional
values of kastom continue to underpin
society. Chiefs and communities continue
to play an important role in enforcing the
rule of law and standards in rural areas,
and, along with the Churches, maintain
an impressive level of social cohesion in
such a diverse nation of far-lung islands.
Vanuatu is a safe and happy place, where


interests. As a small democratic country
Vanuatu is receptive to adopting new
ideas, to becoming more open, and to
engaging actively internationally.

Law and order is relatively good, despite
shortcomings in the security services,
and despite the growing challenge
of cyber and financial crimes, and
transnational crime more generally.
Levels of violent crime, with the major
exception of domestic violence, are low.
Civil disturbances have been relatively
infrequent, at least in recent years.
Foreign incursions or aggression remain
highly unlikely, although border security
more generally is a major and growing
challenge as organised crime becomes
more widespread and sophisticated.


-----

## Part 2. Building a Happy and Secure Future.


-----

## Chapter 3 . Pillars of Vanuatu’s National Security


Threats to national security can be
external or internal, and short-term or
enduring, and are often inter-connected.
They call for well-resourced, flexible and
coordinated strategic management.

Vanuatu is unlikely to face conventional
military threats. The types of issues
raised during consultations tended to
focus on other external risks - border
security for example and threats linked
to global change, such as climate change
and cyber security - as well as risks more
specific to Vanuatu’s internal condition
such as personal and human security.


National security threats are constantly
evolving, presenting an increasingly
complex set of challenges. Dealing with
these requires a range of capabilities and
a conducive enabling environment.

The 10 Pillars set out in this chapter,
covering security challenges and
capabilities, capture what we are doing
to meet our national security objectives,
and what further action we need to take.
In some areas, we are already performing
well or have useful initiatives in train,
while in others more work needs to be
done.


##### Under each pillar are listed:

1. Action Plan items, which outline specific government commitments for

action to be taken in the near term.

2. Government Directions items, which outline the broad approach

being taken to strengthen security in relation to
that issue.


-----

## Pillar 1. National Security    Forces

###### National security forces that are able to protect the nation,  provide security for all citizens, and protect the EEZ.


Modern and professional security
forces are essential for the protection of
national sovereignty and territory, and
internal security. Their principal tasks
are to prevent crime and maintain law
and order; control civil unrest; provide
surveillance and control of Vanuatu’s
waters and EEZ; protect the nation
against illegal exploitation of resources;
guard against any attempt to coerce
Vanuatu through the organised use of
force; protect critical infrastructure; and
support other government agencies in
controlling points of entry at the border.
The Vanuatu security forces also play
a major role in responding to natural
disasters, and in the provision of services
to remote areas.

Our security institutions need to be wellled, resourced by highly-trained and wellequipped personnel, be well-governed,
provide good geographic coverage of
the nation, and work well with local
communities and other stakeholders.

Vanuatu is a relatively safe and peaceful
country. The threat of external aggression
is extremely low, while internally Vanuatu
does not suffer from the high levels of
gun and other violence and civil unrest


In addition to its own security resources,
Vanuatu is a strong supporter of
international law and norms. It is an
active member of a range of regional and
international organisations which focus
on security cooperation, and has the
support of a number of bilateral security
partners.

Nevertheless there are a number of
current and emerging challenges which
call for a significant step-up in the
capability of the Vanuatu security forces.
The level of crime has been increasing in
recent years, with gender-based violence,
theft and robbery, assault, destruction
of property, and alcohol-fuelled violence
and other anti-social behaviour some
of the more common offences. Border
security and the threat of trans-national
crime is becoming more complex and a
growing challenge in this increasingly
globalised world.

While a number of agencies have security
responsibilities, the Vanuatu Police Force
(VPF) is the principal national security
force, and plays a key role in upholding
and promoting the rule of law.


-----

-----

Raid of marijuana plants by the Police
Drug Unit. The Vanuatu Police Force
(VPF) is mandated by the Police Act Cap
105. Its core functions are to preserve Raid of marijuana plants by the

Police Drug Unit. The Vanuatu

peace and the maintenance of order;

Police Force (VPF) is mandated

protect life and property; enforce the

by the Police Act Cap 105. Its core

laws; prevent and detect offences and

functions are to preserve peace and

bring offenders before the courts; and

the maintenance of order; protect

others duties as prescribed by law. It

life and property; enforce the laws;

currently numbers......personnel.prevent and detect offences and

bring offenders before the courts;
and others duties as prescribed
by law. It currently numbers 400
personnel.

Headed by the Commissioner of Police,
the VPF comprises three arms - the Police
(general duties regular police officers);
the Vanuatu Mobile Force (VMF); and the
Police Maritime Force (PMF).

The difficulty of policing distant, isolated
island populations has been a perennial
challenge for the VPF. In rural areas
there is the need for a balanced strategy
which draws on the strength of the
traditional system while providing the
direct police support that is required.


ongoing priority to ensure the force is
adequately resourced to meet community
expectations and relevant performance
targets.

The VPF Strategic Plan 2016-2020 and
other government documents and forums
have identified a range of problems
which the VPF has faced over a number
of years. These include limited human
resources, lack of community trust, poor
governance, low levels of discipline,
lack of strong leadership from the
executive and middle ranks, fractured
relationships within the Senior Executive,
lack of strategic direction, financial and
management and Human Resources
shortcomings, weak intelligence capacity,
underrepresentation of women in the
force, and political interference. The
poor state of equipment, particularly
vehicles, has been identified as another
shortcoming.

Another challenge for the VPF is to equip
itself to combat non-traditional and
increasingly sophisticated crimes, such as
cybercrime, money laundering and other
financial crimes.

A further issue is the VPF structure, for
which there has never been an adequate
rationale over the years, and is a cause
of continuing concern and debate. One
school of thought favours the separation
of the VMF and PMV from the VPF, to
create a separate national defence force.
Others believe there is no compelling
case for such a force, and that it would
be too costly. There would be value in
conducting a review of the pros and cons
of separation, to inform future decision

-----

initiatives in the VPF in recent times,
such as the successful introduction of the
Police Information Management System,
which has been a major step forward
for the VPF in managing incidents.
Most significantly, a number of major
upgrades of the VPF are now in the
pipeline, including the recruitment of
320 additional personnel, infrastructure
upgrades for the VMF (Cook Barracks
in Port Vila and Tiroas Barracks in
Luganville) and the PMW, and the
establishment of a School of Excellence
at Luganville focusing on leadership and
disaster response capacity, and additional
training opportunities.


Vanuatu police made a valuable
contribution to the Regional
Assistance Mission to Solomon
Islands (RAMSI). The VPF
participated in UN peacekeeping
in East Timor and a number
of African countries between
2000 and 2016. Vanuatu’s first
peacekeeping experience was the
VMF’s contribution to operations
in Bougainville in 1997. Vanuatu
will develop its future peacekeeping
capacity, commensurate with its
resources and the domestic demands
on the VPF.


The primary role of the VMF is to
assist the general duties branch of
the VPF to restore and maintain
law and order as necessary; and
the secondary role is to provide
a limited but first line of defence
against external aggression in
the event of an external threat.
Tasks include internal security
duties including riot control,
counterinsurgency and counter
terrorist operations, if needed;
land-based search-and-rescue
and search and clear operations;
disaster relief operations; close
personal protection of VIPs; peace
operations and peace building;
operating the national fire service;
community development projects
including limited engineer
construction tasks; and regimental
duties including guards of
honour, credentials ceremonies,
and quarter guards. The current
strength of the Vanuatu Mobile
Force is 189.


-----

###### Vanuatu’s security partners provide valuable support in training, infrastructure, equipment and logistics.

 Australia is Vanuatu’s principal security partner. Other important security partners are New Zealand, France, China, and the United States. The FRANZ network (France, Australia, New Zealand) provides disaster relief in the region. The Melanesian countries, notably Papua New Guinea and Fiji, provide training and other support.


-----

### Action Plan

Prioritise and properly fund timely
and sustainable implementation of
recent initiatives to upgrade the VPF,
particularly the recruitment and
training of 320 new officers, the VMF
and PMW infrastructure upgrades,
and the establishment of the School
of Excellence.

Conduct, as soon as practicable, an
Organisational Performance Study of
the VPF.


Carry out, in the second half of 2019,
a Strategic Security Review of the
VPF, leading to a new VPF Strategic
Plan.

Carry out a study of the pros and
cons of separating the VMF/PMW
from the VPF.

Reactivate peacekeeping activities
abroad, and provide appropriate
training, with deployments
commensurate with Vanuatu’s
resources and domestic demands.


-----

## Pillar 2. Border Security

###### Effective monitoring and protection of Vanuatu’s borders and its Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)


Border security is a fundamental
responsibility of the state, to safeguard
national land, air and sea space. Further, a
well-managed border connects a country
to the world, and enables it to manage
risks while benefitting from the flow of
people and goods that are essential to
prosperity and social exchange.

However, significant world-wide
increases in the movement of people
and goods and the rapid increase in the
number and reach of new and more
sophisticated external threats mean that
Vanuatu’s border protection will require
closer attention than it has received in
the past. Current and emerging threats
include transnational crime, illegal
fishing, human trafficking, terrorism, the
introduction of diseases and exotic pests,
and smuggling and other attempts to
evade the payment of taxes and excise.


Managing border security involves
a number of government agencies –
often in cooperation with commercial
aviation and shipping operators (see
BOX). Close cooperation is essential.
Moreover, most border threats are
transnational, and can only be adequately
addressed by members of the region
working closely together and sharing
information, including through regional
and international organisations. This is
particularly the case in the Pacific, a vast
region comprised of small, remote island
countries with limited resources of their
own.

Experience around the world
demonstrates that transnational crime
has the potential to undermine political
processes, weaken security, harm
communities, fuel corruption, inhibit
economic development, and impede


Internal Affairs Minister Andrew
Napuat processes the first
passengers at the November 2018
launch of the new Automated
System for Customs Data (ASCUDA)
passenger processing module
at Bauerfield Airport, which is
improving the efficiency and
security checking of arrivals.


-----

###### Vanuatu was admitted to INTERPOL in November 2018. This will assist the police in sharing and receiving vital policing information instantly from around the world in relation to crimes such as human trafficking, drug smuggling, cybercrime and terrorism. It will also be a major and much-needed step forward in conducting background checks on a range of people seeking Vanuatu citizenship, wishing to do business with Vanuatu, or entering the country for other reasons.


-----

###### the Transnational Crime Unit, the Maritime Wing, and the VMF); Immigration Department; Department of Customs and Inland Revenue; Department of Biosecurity; Quarantine and Inspection Service; Ministry of Health; Ministry of Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and External Trade; Ports Vanuatu; and Airports Vanuatu. Close cooperation between these agencies is essential.


-----

essential to combat this problem. Vanuatu
has a number of measures in place to
combat IUU fishing, but these need
strengthening.

The transition to the new patrol boat in
2021 will provide a good opportunity
for Vanuatu to review and strengthen
the policing of illegal and unauthorised
activity in Vanuatu waters and the EEZ by
fishing vessels, ships and private yachts.

Vanuatu’s history has illustrated the
importance of robust health and
quarantine controls.

Pandemics have been a rising security
threat world-wide, particularly Ebola,
Zika, influenza and H1N1. Meanwhile air
links, and the prospect of direct flights
from new points of origin, particularly
in Asia, underline the need for effective
Point-of-Entry screening and a strong
commitment to comply with International
Health Regulations. Vanuatu has been
strengthening border controls in recent
times, for example by upgrading the
screening of passenger arrivals, and of the
enforcement of the rules for overstayers
and foreign workers. However significant
vulnerabilities remain and, while
difficult to quantify, there is evidence of
illegal or unauthorised entry by vessels,
people and goods into Vanuatu and its
waters. A comprehensive review of this
sector would be timely. Areas of focus
should include any gaps in legislation
and institutional frameworks such as
management plans, MoUs and operating
procedures; personnel and training;
equipment; whole-of-Government
coordination; and engagement with


Close working collaboration and
exchange of information between
border agencies is essential. There are
useful mechanisms already in place,
such as the 2018 MoU between the
VPF and the Immigration Department,
and semi-regular joint meetings of
agencies. However, whole-of-government


-----

meeting at head of agency level, be established under the proposed National Security
Officials Committee, outlined in Pillar 10.


Image: Australian Department of Defence


Tourism is a key plank of
Vanuatu’s economy. Of the
annual 280,000 tourist
arrivals, approximately
200,000 are cruise ship
passengers. Good security is
crucial, both to provide a safe
environment for tourists, and
to ensure proper monitoring of
passengers and goods.


-----

### Action Plan

Conduct a comprehensive review of
border agencies, focusing on human
and other resources.

Establish a Border Management SubCommittee of the proposed National
Security Committee.


Conclude maritime boundary
negotiations with France and Fiji.

Develop a more comprehensive
and effective network of extradition
agreements with other countries.


-----

## Pillar 3. Justice and Human Rights

###### Justice and rights for all


A comprehensive and effective law and
justice system is fundamental to national
security, as is the protection of human
rights. Vanuatu is fortunate in that there
is widespread respect for the rule of
law, court decisions are accepted, and
the judiciary is ethical. Fundamental
freedoms and values are enshrined in
the Constitution, including security of the
person, protection and equal treatment
under the law.

A great strength of Vanuatu is that it is
able to draw on traditional values which
continue to make a vital contribution
to national stability, security, and
harmony. Kastom, the chiefs, culture and
the churches remain fundamental to
Ni-Vanuatu ways of thinking and acting.
A priority is finding the right balance
between traditional values, and the
requirements of the formal justice system
and of economic development and land
use. This will be increasingly challenging
in this globalised and modern world.

The formal justice system is wellestablished and has undergone reform in
recent years. The Justice and Community
Services Sector Strategy 2018-2021
provides a modern, comprehensive
framework, relevant to the Vanuatu
context. It has a strong focus on how
the non-state/kastom and state/formal


systems may be harmonised to create
practical improvements in access to
justice at the community level. Limited
legal literacy is still a limiting factor
however in access to the justice system.
In addition, access to justice by women is
a significant challenge.


Chief Justice Vincent Lunabek at
opening of the 2015 legal year. The
court system, for both criminal
and civil matters, comprises
the Supreme Court, which has
unlimited jurisdiction; the Court of
Appeal, which is the highest court
in the land and hears appeals from
the Supreme Court; 4 Magistrates
Courts, with limited jurisdiction;
and 11 Island Courts, with lesser
jurisdiction.


-----

justice sector relate principally to lack of
resources. There is a limited number of
qualified judges and prosecutors, which
can lead to large backlogs of cases and
undue delays in resolving disputes. The
legal profession also is short of capacity.
The law and justice sector involves
14 agencies, and close and regular
coordination is important. There is scope
to improve this, for example through
the revitalisation of the Combined Law
Agency Group forum.

The state of Vanuatu’s prison system
has caused problems over the years.
The paucity of correctional facilities
in the provinces, the relatively high
number of escapees and the incidence of
reoffending, and the need for a greater
focus on rehabilitation and reabsorption
into the community, have impacted on
law and order and heightened community
security concerns. Reforms and a new
Correctional Act in 2006 addressed a
number of the issues, but further work is
needed. The Department of Correctional
Service (under the Ministry of Justice
and Community Services) is currently
undergoing a major review.

Systems of traditional governance
have been in place across the islands of
Vanuatu for centuries. There is a need
to continually strengthen and formalise
the links between traditional systems of
government and the state. The role of
chiefs, and the Malvatumauri (Council of
Chiefs) are central to this.

Our customary lands are the principal
source of our national wealth, and the
most obvious manifestation of our


the “rules of custom shall form the basis
of ownership and use of land”. Land
use is governed by custom tenure and
traditional land allocation systems, and
formal land use planning. The demand
for land and often competing land uses
is rising.


-----

Following major reforms, including
changes to the Constitution, the passing
into law of the Land Management Act
2013, and the subsequent establishment
of the Custom Land Management Office
and the Office of the Land Ombudsman,
disputes over ownership of land has
reverted to traditional Nakamal forums
in 2014, moving them outside the
Magistrates Courts.

Land issues continue to present
challenges. There are instances where
land is obtained without the knowledge
of traditional owners, or registered by
mistake. Foreigners control substantial
amounts of land, particularly on Efate,
and there is a need to clarify land


Act, which some argue is holding back
development. Very few leases have been
issued and delays in resolving disputes
can be long. Security of land tenure
and leasing is essential for business and
investment confidence.

Community policing, which can
play an important role in our
widely dispersed island nation, is
being strengthened.

The reach of the police force into the
more remote parts of Vanuatu is often
limited or non-existent. Chiefs and
communities play a crucial role in
maintaining stability and security in
those areas. The Government’s current
decentralisation policy envisages the
provision of public services, including
police, closer to the people. 72 Area
Councils have been established across
Vanuatu, and it is envisaged that a
minimum of two police officers will
be assigned to each Council.Vanuatu is
committed to the protection of human
rights, and is strengthening internal


-----

to human rights, traditional values, and
Christian principles.

The media and civil society have
important roles to play in educating
the community and policy makers on
issues of concern, maintaining policy
scrutiny, and promoting responsible
and responsive government. Vanuatu
ranks relatively highly in terms of press
freedom and freedom of expression
more generally, which is enshrined in the
Constitution.


it to meet its obligations under human
rights treaties. Vanuatu is currently
participating in the 3rd cycle Universal
Periodic Review (UPR) under the
auspices of the UN Human Rights Council.

Vanuatu compares relatively well against
many countries in its observance of
human rights, although there are still
some vulnerable areas. These include
gender violence and the rights of women
more generally, and various abuses by
police or other officials, despite efforts by
the government to prosecute and punish
such behaviour. The rights of people with
disabilities also need strengthening.

Establishment of a fully functioning
Human Rights Commission would be
a valuable step forward. In addition,
an eminent persons group has been
proposed to develop a policy delineating


Image: Vanuatu Daily Post


In October 2018 Vanuatu
established the National
International Humanitarian Law
Committee (NIHLC), which will
strengthen Vanuatu’s observance
of various international
undertakings, and promote
awareness of human rights and
humanitarian law in the country.


-----

###### Vanuatu has ratified core human rights treaties including:

 • Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW)

 • Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)

 • Convention on the Rights of a Child (CRC)

 • International Convention of Civil and Political Rights (CCPR)

 • Convention Against Torture (CAT)

 Vanuatu has also ratified a number of International Labour Organisations (ILO) conventions that aim to protect and uphold the rights of its workers. Furthmore, it has ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of a Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of a Child on the sale of


-----

### Action Plan

Strengthen links between the
traditional and formal justice
systems, including through
implementation the Malvatumauri
2011 Roadmap.

Ensure the smooth implementation
of the new community police
arrangements flowing from
decentralisation, working closely
with chiefs and traditional
authorities.

Revitalise the Combined Law Agency
Group.


Accelerate work to develop a
fully-functioning Human Rights
Commission.

Prompt follow-up of any issues
arising from the 2019 Universal
Periodic Review of human rights in
Vanuatu.

Improve the framework for land
ownership and use, to achieve a
harmonious balance between the
rights of traditional owners and the
productive use of land.

Develop support systems for victims
of crime.


-----

## Pillar 4. Disasters and Climate Change Resilience

###### Resilient national systems for disaster preparedness, response and recovery; and for climate change adaptation.


Vanuatu is the world’s most vulnerable
country to climate and disaster risk,
according to a 2016 United Nations
report. This poses our highest and
most enduring security threat, with
major implications for our society,
environment, agriculture and fisheries
and the economy more generally. Vanuatu
lives with cyclones, volcanic eruptions,
earthquakes and tsunamis, and storm
surges, landslides, flooding and droughts.
With its limited resources and island
geography Vanuatu is also potentially
vulnerable to major man-made disasters,
particularly involving vessels and aircraft.

Changing weather patterns, which give
rise to an increase in natural disasters,
are widely attributed to climate change,
which is of grave global and regional
concern and was recognised by Pacific
Islands Forum Leaders in 2018 as “the
single greatest threat to the livelihood,
security and well-being of Pacific
people”. Climate change is also a “threat
multiplier” which can exacerbate a
range of existing stress situations and
lead to social tensions.Learning from
Cyclone Pam, natural disaster response


the National Disaster Management
Office have been upgraded. Effective
coordination between the many
stakeholders in response and recovery
operations continues to improve. The
Government gives high priority to climate


In addition to the human toll, the
economic cost of natural disasters
can be devastating. The impact of
Cyclone Pam in 2015 exceeded
60 per cent of GDP, derailing the
nation’s budget and fiscal position.
Overall, the impact of natural
disasters in Vanuatu is equivalent
to the loss on average of 6.6% per
annum (World Bank).


-----

in recognising that by integrating work in
these two areas, duplication of structures,
funding and policy approaches could be
avoided. This underlies the establishment
of the National Advisory Board on Climate
Change and Disaster Risk Reduction

A VMF member assists with the
evacuation of 10,000 residents
of Ambae Island, following
protracted volcanic activity
in 2017/18. Like most major
natural disasters, this multiagency operation required close
cooperation between national and
local authorities, communities,
NGOs, international development
partners, and the private sector.

in 2012, the development of the
comprehensive Vanuatu Climate Change
and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2016
to 2030, and the development of the
Natural Disaster Recovery Framework
in 2018. Vanuatu and its partners have
strong technical expertise on climate
change and disaster risk.

In building climate change resilience
across the country, there is much to
be done with limited funds so careful


international climate finance is critical.

Vanuatu speaks up strongly in
international fora on climate change,
including the United Nations Framework
Climate Change negotiations, the Small
Islands Developing States forum, and
the Pacific Islands Forum. It is an active
member of the recently-formed Climate
Vulnerable Forum of 20 countries.
Domestic policies also reflect Vanuatu’s
strong commitment to climate change

Ni-Vanuatu possess diverse
traditional resilience practices
that enable disaster risk reduction
and climate change adaptation,
including in relation to food
production and preservation.

mitigation and adaptation. It has set a
target of transitioning to 100% renewable
energy in the electricity sector by 2030,
launched a National Green Energy Fund
in 2018, and included climate change
topics very widely in school curricula.


-----

### Action Plan

Develop a framework for the support
of people displaced by natural
disasters.


Strengthen measures to deal
with major man-made disasters,
particularly involving ocean vessels
and aircraft, as well as oil spills
and other potential environmental
disasters.


-----

## Pillar 5. Cyber Security

###### Protection of individuals, government and the private sector against cyber crime and other malicious cyber activity.


The use of information technology
globally has grown exponentially, and
with it the risks of attacks on computer
systems and critical infrastructure, cyber
crime, and the misuse of social media.
Cyber security has become a high priority
national security issue for all countries,
requiring increasingly sophisticated
and resource-intensive measures at
the national level, as well as close


international collaboration.

Access to broadband internet has
grown rapidly in Vanuatu, which
is now one of the best-connected
countries in the Pacific region. This
speedy communication brings great
opportunities in terms of business and
economic activity, as well as social and
cultural exposure.


Image: Vanuatu Daily Post


Government and private sector workshop participants at launch of Vanuatu’s
Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) in June 2018.
Currently in set-up phase, the aim of the CERT is to

###### • Respond to cyber threats

 • Promote security awareness

 • Collaborate with international counterparts, as well as other cyber security
institutions and firms.


-----

The Boe Declaration endorsed by
Pacific Islands Leaders highlighted
cyber security as an emerging
security challenge for the region,
and recognisedthe need to maximise
protections and opportunities for Pacific
infrastructure and peoples in the digital
age.Vanuatu is making steady progress
in addressing the rapidly growing threat
of malicious cyber activity, building on
the 2013 National ICT Policy and the
2013 National Cyber-security Policy. A
Cyber Computer Emergency Response


-----

### Action Plan

Prioritise passage of new cybercrime
legislation, and accession to the
Budapest Convention.


Accelerate implementation of the
National Cyber-security Policy,
particularly the full functioning of
the Computer Emergency Response
Team (CERT) and the establishment
of the proposed national cyber
security centre.


-----

## Pillar 6. Human Security

###### Provide robust human security for individuals and families.


Human security is a broad concept
embracing a range of issues affecting an
individual’s well-being, including not
just personal security, but issues such
as health security and food security.
The importance of human security for
individuals and families has long been
recognised by Pacific Islands Forum
leaders, and is a key objective of the 2014
Framework for Pacific Regionalism.

Vanuatu is in the medium human
development category - its Human
Development Index (HDI) rating
has steadily improved, although it
continues to lag behind the regional
average, and still confronts a number
of social challenges. Culture and
society is Vanuatu’s strength, and the
traditional family is the only social
safety net for most of the young, old, and
disadvantaged.

There are three human security issues
that stand out as having current or
potential major national and social
impact in Vanuatu. They are health
security, gender-based violence, and
the challenges of a fast-growing youth
population.


###### Health Security

Disease patterns in Vanuatu are changing,
and health issues are increasingly
complex. There have been a number of
significant gains in the health sector in the
past decade, including an increase in life
expectancy. However, Vanuatu continues
to face significant challenges to human
security from communicable infectious
diseases, and, perhaps more significantly,
the rise in non-communicable diseases
(NCDs).

Pacific Island Forum Leaders have
declared the rise in NCDs to be a crisis
in the region. The impacts of NCDs in
terms of premature deaths and increasing
levels of disability (including strokes,
amputations, blindness and mental health
issues), are significant and growing, and
affecting the development prospects of
member countries.

In the case of Vanuatu, 37% of deaths are
caused by NCDs, principally coronary
heart disease, diabetes and strokes.
According to the World Bank’s “Pacific
Possible” report, in addition to the human
toll, this could reduce GDP by around 6%
by 2040 if not dealt with, and reduce the
labour force substantially.


-----

This school canteen is
a role model, selling
only healthy local food,
not imported and local
processed foods and
drinks. A healthy diet
and life-style is critical in
combatting the growing
incidence of NCDs.


The new National Health Sector Strategy
2017 - 2020, and the strong supportive
role played by the WHO and several other
organisations and development partners,
provides the opportunity to tackle both
NCDs and infectious diseases in a more
concerted, prioritised fashion, employing
a comprehensive whole-of-government
approach, with strong emphasis on
information campaigns and preventative
medicine. At the regional level the South
Pacific Commission’s 2014 Roadmap
on NCDs also provides a valuable
framework.

###### Gender-Based Violence

The problem of domestic and genderbased violence is severe in the Pacific
region, including Vanuatu. According to
a 2017 UN Women report, the level of
such violence in the region is amongst the
highest in the world, with two thirds of
women and girls affected.

There is increasing disquiet in Vanuatu at
the high levels of violence against women,
and that the use of violence as a form
of punishment is accepted as “normal”


in many families and communities. In
addition to the human toll, there are
multiple other effects, which can include
financial cost, irregular attendance
at work, low productivity, unwanted
pregnancies, vulnerability to diseases,
and mental illness.

Vanuatu has been relatively active in
tackling this problem. The 2009 Family
Protection Act was the first legislation of
its type in the Pacific region. The National
Gender Equality Policy 2015-2019 was
put in place to drive changes aimed
at empowering women and reducing
domestic and gender-based violence.
Several development partners and
regional organisations provide strong
support.

Nevertheless the problem remains
endemic. Addressing the core problem
will require strengthened capacity in
the law and justice chain, as well as
more Government, NGO and Church
cooperation, and programmes to support
police and traditional authorities in
training for mediation, victim support
and other measures.


-----

March against domestic
violence organised
by the Vanuatu
Women’s Centre, which
works closely with
communities as well as
the VPF in combatting
gender-based violence.


###### Youth Population

Vanuatu’s high birth rate of 2.3% per
annum is fuelling a rapid increase in
the number of young people. Many lack
opportunities in rural communities and
drift to urban areas, where a number
become involved in criminal activities.
Alcohol and drug abuse is a growing
problem.

Increasing urbanisation of youth will
increase the potential for communal
violence, public disorder, and social
unrest. There will be a need for expanded
law enforcement and rehabilitation
resources.


Critically, the “youth bulge” calls for
increased education and training
opportunities, and, most importantly,
more employment outlets. In addition
to the creation of more local jobs,
labour mobility schemes in Australia
and New Zealand are providing useful
opportunities. Other creative solutions
can be explored, for example on-the-job
skills training in the Vanuatu Mobile
Force.


Image: Vanuatu Daily Post


-----

### Action Plan

Develop a National Human Resources Development Plan, incorporating family /
traditional / church values, along with the skills required in a modern society.


-----

## Pillar 7. Political Stability and Good Governance

###### Political stability and strong governance of institutions, including the security sector


Stable government, an independent civil
service, and strong governance underpin
national security as well as sustainable
economic and social development.
Government needs to be driven by sound
policy-making, not personalities and
patronage.

Until recently, frequent changes of
political leadership in Vanuatu have
been a dominant feature of political life,
leading to constant changes of policy
and a lack of sustained concentration
by successive governments on issues
of national importance. This has
undermined confidence in government
amongst the people of Vanuatu as well
the private sector.

The current government, elected in
January 2016, has now been in power for
three years, and has prioritised political
and constitutional reform to bring about
stability in government as well as better
representation. An important initiative
has been the development of a Political
Party Law, designed to curb defections
of MPs from the party they were elected
to, and to tighten requirements for the
registration of political parties.


Another concern has been political
interference in the civil service,
security services, and state -owned
enterprises. This has been disruptive
and detracted from the professionalism
of these organisations. Merit-based
recruitment and promotion is vital, as
is the independence of the oversight
institutions, such as the Public Service
Commission and Police Services
Commission. The Government is
addressing these issues within the
context of a comprehensive National
Human Resource Development Plan, due
for completion early in 2019.


Then-Prime Minister Natapei
supported a number of initiatives
promoting good governance and
political stability.


-----

professionalism of the security services
and institutions, and to instil public
confidence. Security organisations need
to be accountable, transparent, and clear
on their roles and responsibilities.

Key elements of security sector
governance include civilian oversight of
policy and implementation, legislative
oversight of institutions, judicial
oversight, and compliance with domestic
and international law and human
right standards. Community leaders,
civil society and the media also play a
useful role, enabling the perspectives of
ordinary people and interest groups to
be incorporated into policy making and
oversight processes.

Historically, there have been concerns
in Vanuatu over the involvement on
several occasions of the security forces in
politics, most notably the abduction of the
President in 1996. However the security
services have not played a political role
in recent years, and have also played a
constructive role during constitutional
crises. There have, however, been
continuing reports of misconduct and
impunity in the security services.

Accountability institutions play a key
role in strengthening governance. In
relation to the security sector, potentially
important accountability institutions
include Parliament, the State Law
Office, the Judiciary, the Office of the
Ombudsman, the National Audit Office,
and the Leadership Code Commission.
A number of these require additional
resources and other institutional capacity
strengthening to fulfil their obligations to


Professional Standards Unit (PSU)
investigates allegations of ethics
violations and misuse of force, handling
for example 108 complaints against 80
officers in 2016. It is important that this
body also be well-resourced.

Currently Parliament plays only
a limited role in relation to the
security sector. The government
proposes to address this gap by
establishing a Parliamentary
Oversight Committee for the
sector.

Corruption is a major global problem. It
has the potential to undermine the rule
of law and trust in the political system,
allow organised crime to flourish, and
hold back development. It has been a
concern in Vanuatu over a long period.
The jailing of 14 Members of Parliament
in 2015 for corruption and bribery
however was a watershed, serving to
highlight the importance placed on the
rule of law and the independence of the
judiciary. It also put in the spotlight the
longstanding conflict between customary
practices and gift exchanges and the


-----

sector performance.

In 2016 the Government set up an
anti-corruption committee to oversee
implementation of the United Nations
Convention Against Corruption, which
Vanuatu ratified in 2014, and to oversee
the development of a national AntiCorruption Strategic Framework.


workings of government, and of
related issues such as the funding of
political parties - a current concern are fundamental to good governance
and public trust. The Government
is strengthening transparency in a
number of areas, and in 2016 brought
in the Right to Information Act, which
requires government agencies to publish
information about their activities and to
respond to public requests for access to
information.


-----

### Action Plan

Continue to promote political
stability, including through initiatives
such as the proposed Political Party
Law.

Tighten rules on donations to
political parties, ensuring full
disclosure.


Establish the proposed
Parliamentary Oversight Committee
on the security sector.

Strengthen good governance across
government institutions, particularly
in the use of funds.


-----

## Pillar 8. Foreign Relations – External Engagement


###### Vanuatu’s external network includes
 • High Commissions or Embassies in New York (UN),

 • Canberra, Wellington, Suva, Beijing, Brussels, and Geneva; and Consulate-Generals in Noumea,


-----

###### • Australia, China, France and New Zealand have long-standing diplomatic missions in Vanuatu.

 • Japan has recently opened a mission, and the UK is planning to do so.

 • In addition various United Nations agencies and a number of other international and regional organisations are represented in Vanuatu.


-----

### Action Plan

Prioritise completion and
implementation of the proposed
foreign policy White Paper.

Expand the role of Vanuatu’s
missions abroad in support of
national security objectives,
including through the possible


posting abroad of suitably qualified
specialist officials.

Expand Vanuatu’s membership
and ratification of international
conventions of direct relevance
to the country’s economic,
environmental and security
interests.


-----

## Pillar 9. Economy

###### A strong, well-managed and resilient economy.

A healthy and sustainable economy
is fundamental to Vanuatu’s national
security - to underpin equitable
development and social cohesion, build
resilience to unpredictable shocks
like natural disasters, and support
the provision of adequate resources
for agencies with major security
responsibilities. Conversely, security is
essential to a well-functioning economy

- to provide a stable and predictable
environment based on the rule of law, and
to underpin productive interaction with The capital, Port Vila, is the most

important business and financial

the outside world, such as foreign tourism

centre and a major tourist

and investment.


Image: Vanuatu Tourism Office


While Vanuatu’s economy faces a number
of long-term challenges, notably its
narrow base and vulnerability to shocks
such as natural disasters, it is generally
well-managed. In its 2018 Article 4 report
on Vanuatu, the IMF commented that
successive governments have succeeded
in maintaining macroeconomic stability
in recent years. The economy has made
an impressive recovery from Cyclone Pam
in 2015. The Government is conscious
of the need to avoid unsustainable debt
levels, which would create unnecessary
hardship for the nation in the future.

Vanuatu’s close relationship with its
development partners is important,
with development cooperation


accounting for a significant proportion
of Vanuatu’s GDP. Underlining the
importance of sound management
of development cooperation, in early
2019 the Government launched the
National Aid Management Policy
Implementation Strategy. Development
cooperation opportunities in the region


-----

countries are showing in engagement
with the region. The Government works
to ensure development cooperation is
well coordinated, transparent, supports
sustainable development, and responds
to Vanuatu’s priorities. It is also important
that any loans are within manageable
levels and do not create debt stress.

Development cooperation
helped fund this project to train
prawn farmers. Vanuatu’s main
development partners are
Australia, China, New Zealand,
Japan, France, and the EU.
Multilateral development partners
include the World Bank, the ADB,
UNDP, WHO and a range of other
UN organisations.

In its 2018 report, the IMF noted that
public debt had increased sharply since
2014, mainly due to disbursements
for Cyclone Pam reconstruction and
infrastructure projects, though the
new external borrowing was highly
concessional. It recommended that


the Government consider measures to
address the rising debt and to rebuild
fiscal buffers, which it is currently doing.
In the future, consideration of further
measures to diversify sources of revenue,
such as the introduction of income tax,
will assume increasing importance.

Vanuatu has an open economy and
is keen to attract further foreign
investment. There have been instances
however of investments which have
been inconsistent with Vanuatu’s
developmental priorities and national
interests, for example by over exploiting
resources, failing to provide suitable
employment opportunities for niVanuatu, or creating problems in
relation to land use. The Government
is strengthening the implementation of
national interest guidelines for foreign
investment.

The narrow base of Vanuatu’s
economy has been a driver of efforts by
governments, dating back to the preindependence period, to raise revenue
by other means, including the Offshore
Financial Centre, the International
Shipping Register, and, more recently,
Citizenship schemes. While to varying
degrees these have generated revenue,
they have also not been without their
problems, principally due to the lack of
probity of some of those who have taken
advantage of the schemes.

In relation to the Offshore Financial
Centre, in 2016 Vanuatu was placed on
the “Grey List” by the OECD Financial
Action Task Force (FATF), signifying a
judgement that Vanuatu had not made


-----

notable success, Vanuatu was removed
from the Grey List in 2018, following a
major program of legislative reforms (see
box). However, in early 2019 Vanuatu was
placed on an EU list of non-cooperative

Image: Vanuatu Daily Post

Vanuatu was officially removed
from the FATF Grey List in June
2018. This notable success,
which followed passage of more
than 30 pieces of legislation, was
the result of a strong collective
effort by a multi-agency National
Coordination Committee,
supported by development
partners.

tax jurisdictions.

While questions have been raised about
the EU process, it is important that
Vanuatu takes steps to have that listing
lifted - it is vital that Vanuatu remain off
such international warning lists, both to
provide confidence and predictability
to the local and foreign business
communities, and to avoid damage to
Vanuatu’s reputation internationally.


provided a windfall to government
coffers (approximately US$70 million
in 2018), although the government
recognises these returns are unlikely to
be sustainable in the long term. There
is increasing evidence however that
background checks on those purchasing
Vanuatu citizenship have failed to weed
out a number of undesirable individuals,
thus potentially compromising the good
name of the Vanuatu passport, leading
other countries to consider tightening
requirements for entry of Vanuatu
citizens.

There have been instances in the past
where decisions taken by certain
statutory authorities have caused
public disquiet, with actual or potential
security implications. It is important
that the Government be in a position to
keep abreast of such problems and take
appropriate action.

Vanuatu is scheduled to graduate
from Least Developed Country (LDC)
status in 2020. While this is welcome
acknowledgement of the progress
Vanuatu has made over recent decades,
it does imply that Vanuatu will no longer
benefit from certain development
cooperation instruments available to
LDCs. Although development partners
do not base their cooperation exclusively
on LDC status, careful planning will
be required to minimise any negative
impacts from graduation. The
Government has put in place a highlevel coordination mechanism for this
purpose.


Image: Vanuatu Daily Post


-----

### Action Plan

Develop a policy framework
for Citizenship schemes,
with particular emphasis on
strengthening the integrity of
such schemes through rigorous
background checks of applicants.


Complete follow-up work following
Vanuatu’s removal from the FATF
Grey List, and take prompt action
to have Vanuatu removed from
the EU list of non-cooperative tax
jurisdictions.

Prompt and effective
implementation of the National Aid
Management Policy Implementation
Strategy


-----

## Pillar 10. Government Machinery

###### Well-coordinated and effective government machinery to manage national security issues, and a high-quality intelligence and assessment capability.


###### National Security System

Until now, Vanuatu has not had a national
security system, and only few personnel
specifically assigned to cover national
security issues. The government is
addressing this gap, which was identified
as far back as 2009, through the
establishment of the National Security
Council and supporting government
machinery, and more generally to build
expertise on national security issues
within the government service.

This is in line with the responsibility
of any government, in safeguarding
its nation and people, to have in place
a national security system that is
strategically-focused, well-coordinated,
flexible and able to balance competing
interests. Such systems should be able
to deal with short-term emergency
situations as well as evolving and longerterm threats, and to provide strong
management at both the strategic and
operational level.

**_The Government therefore is_**
**_establishing a national security system_**
**_that will operate at three levels:_**


2. The National Security

###### Council (NSC)
The National Security Council, chaired
by the Prime Minister and comprising
a number of Ministers and security
officials (see BOX), will be established
as soon as the requisite legislation is
passed. The NSC will be responsible for
advising the government on security,
peace and law and order issues in
Vanuatu, reporting regularly to the
Cabinet. It will meet once a month, and
when required during an emergency


1.


###### Cabinet (Council of Ministers)
The prime body for decisions on
national security shall continue to
be the full Cabinet, chaired by the
Prime Minister. It has oversight of the
national security sector, including
relevant policy and legislative
proposals. Exceptionally, Cabinet can
be convened urgently to manage and
direct responses to major crises or
other events affecting national security
that require immediate attention. In the
event of an extreme national security
emergency, Cabinet has the option of
recommending to the Head of State the
declaration of a State of Emergency.


-----

###### National Security Council Membership Permanent members: Prime Minister (Chair), Attorney General, Minister of Internal Affairs, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Minister of Finance, Minister of Climate Change, Commissioner of Police, Commander VMF. Other ad hoc members invited to attend on a needs basis.


-----

###### National Security Machinery


role will be assisting with NSC meetings

- scheduling, preparing and presenting
security briefs, identifying issues, recordkeeping, and follow-up. It will also play
a role in building working relationships
on security issues with relevant regional
organisations and bilateral security
partners.

###### Whole-of-Government

More generally, Government is committed
to fostering greater collaboration and
information sharing between agencies
throughout government on national
security issues. The tendency of agencies
to work “in silos”, a common problem
in the Pacific region, is hampering the
cooperation needed to deal with security
issues. Strategies include upgrading
formal mechanisms, such as MoUs,
between agencies; the creation of more
opportunities between agencies for joint
training, exercises and secondments; and
inducing cultural change to discourage
agencies from being too protective of
i f ti


###### Intelligence and Assessments

There is a pressing need to improve
Vanuatu’s intelligence capability. There
is no policy in place for the VPF’s
National Intelligence Unit (NIU), and it
is under-resourced and unable to meet
government requirements.

In addition to the intelligence gap on
developments within the country, a
second gap is in the capacity to provide
government with intelligence and
assessments of developments within the
region and beyond that have implications
for Vanuatu.

A unique Vanuatu assessment product
on national security issues is needed
in this volatile world to understand the
forces driving change, in order to be
able to influence events and to advance
national interests. The Government
requires good quality and timely data
and other information, from open source


-----

partners, to be used as a basis for tailored
briefs to assist senior policy makers in
decision-making. Examples of issues of
interest are transnational crime; cyber
security; customs, immigration and
biosecurity issues; financial crimes;
human trafficking; foreign interference;
and terrorism.


Classified and other sensitive
information: Currently Vanuatu does not
have an adequate system to store and
protect classified information. Such a
system is important in itself, and is also
a necessary pre-condition if Vanuatu is
to exchange sensitive information with
other governments.


### Pacific Fusion Centre

_45. Leaders welcomed Australia’s decision to work with regional_
_security agencies to establish a Pacific Fusion Centre that will_
_build on current regional frameworks to strengthen information_
_sharing and maritime domain awareness to better inform_
_security responses to some of the main threats outlined in the Boe_
_Declaration, such as illegal fishing, drugs trafficking and other_
_transnational crimes. Leaders urged the importance of working_
_together to develop a fit-forpurpose Pacific regional fusion facility_
_and to conduct a feasibility study in the last quarter of 2018._

Image: Vanuatu Tourism Office


-----

### Action Plan

Establish National Security Council
(NSC) following passage of the
necessary legislation.

Establish government machinery to
support the NSC, namely a National
Security Officials Committee and
a Secretariat headed by a National
Security Adviser.

Update current legislation and policy
on intelligence, and upgrade the
National Intelligence Unit.

Following a scoping study, create a
multi-agency intelligence body to
report to government on national
security issues.


Establish an assessment capability
in the future NSC Secretariat,
focusing on domestic, regional and
international security developments
of relevance to Vanuatu.

Develop and implement a system for
the safe storage and protection of
sensitive information.

Develop a mechanism to monitor
and respond to possible threats of
terrorism.

Develop a framework for the
protection of government assets,
ports, airports, energy and
communications facilities and other
critical infrastructure.


### Government Directions


Improve the collection, analysis
and sharing of data by government
agencies, to assist policy-making and
action on national security issues.


Develop closer links with trusted
security partners, and regional and
international agencies, to boost
exchanges of intelligence and
assessments on matters of common
concern.

Provide a career pathway for
selected officials to develop expertise
on national security issues.


-----

## Conclusion


The Government gives priority to
safeguarding the nation and building
public awareness of security issues,
and looks forward to working with
all members of the community in this


-----

## Annex 1. Global Trends


###### Global Trends

The global trends summarised below will
impact on Vanuatu’s security, interests
and prosperity in the coming years and
decades. They present both challenges
and opportunities. Predicting the future
with any precision is not possible, but
mapping out the major trends and
their interrelationship helps inform our
National Security Strategy and guide our
future actions.

###### Globalisation, Interconnectivity, and Shifts in Power

The global environment is increasingly
dynamic and interconnected, a product
of rapid technological and scientific
advances. This has empowered
individuals, expanded our opportunities,
brought economic change and helped lift
many millions of people in the developing
world out of poverty.

Increasingly however this dynamic
environment is accompanied by
instability, uncertainty, and heightened
risk. Events unfold quickly and often
are more complex than before, calling
for ever faster and more agile security
responses to emerging challenges. Our
interconnected world also means that
malign individuals and groups now have
greater access to disruptive technologies,
i l di hi ti t d


enabling them to perpetrate large-scale
violence.

The post-1945 international order has
been characterised by an increasingly
integrated world economy and the
development of international rules and
institutions. However more recent winds
of change have seen increasing concerns
about the effects of globalisation, and
in many countries a rise in political
alienation and economic nationalism.
Rules are being contested, and in some
cases major powers are ignoring or
undermining international law. The postCold War lull in major rivalry has ended.

Meanwhile the centre of gravity of global
economic power has continued to shift
towards Asia. Even given the current
decline in China’s economic momentum,
in a relatively short time China will
overtake the US in economic size, with
India also rising rapidly. The diffusion of
power among countries will bring about
huge change, with predictions that by
2030 Asia will overtake North America
and Europe combined in global power,
based upon GDP, population size, military
spending and technological advancement.
But, although the dominance of the US
is being challenged in the international
arena, it will remain the most powerful
country.

We are now seeing a rise in trade
t i Th di th


-----

and investment since the 2008-9 global
financial crisis. Should these tensions
lead to a significant rise in protectionism
globally, there will be a heightened risk of
strategic friction, an economic slowdown,
and an undermining of the rules of
international commerce.

###### Demographics

The world’s population, 7.7 billion in
2019, is likely to reach 9.2 billion by
around 2040, as a result of increased
life expectancy and continuing high
birth rates in a number of developing
countries. In most developed countries
and China, population rates will be slower
and in some cases will decline, slowing
their productive capacity. Populations
in Africa and South Asia however will
continue to rise rapidly. In some countries
this will give rise to a heightened risk of
political and social tension, driven by a
growing reservoir of dissatisfied young
men. On the other hand, some developing
countries like India have the potential,
depending on their policy choices, to reap
a demographic dividend which will spur
economic growth.

Demand for both skilled and unskilled
labour will drive global migration. At
the same time the increased flows
of irregular migration and displaced
persons fleeing conflicts or natural
disasters - now numbering some 65
million, the largest number since the
Second World War - will continue to be a
source of strain both internally in many
nations, and between countries.


###### g,
 Environment, and Resources

The world’s growing population, and
particularly the rapid growth in the
middle class - expected to number some
3.5 billion by 2030 in Asia alone - will
strain the environment and the world’s
resources. By some estimates, demand
for food, water and energy will grow by
35, 40 and 50 percent respectively over
the next two decades. There will continue
to be intense pressure on forests, driven
by changes in land-use, illegal logging,
climate change, and the soaring demand
for timber. Oceans will also be under
greater pressure, with further strain
on global fisheries, much of which are
already fished at unsustainable levels.
Increasing demand for critical minerals,
and the need to transport them across
states, will call for efficient extraction
techniques and more secure routes, as
well as equitable investment regimes, if
tension and conflict are to be avoided.

Climate change, sea level rise and a
greater incidence of extreme weather
events will exacerbate the existing
challenges. Natural disasters - causing
loss of life, physical destruction and
disease, and in extreme cases fuelling
migration, social unrest and instability

- will call for more disaster relief and
humanitarian assistance. Vulnerable
developing countries particularly will
feel more pressure, due to the high cost
of climate change and natural disaster
adaptation and mitigation.


-----

Developments in technology will continue
to bring significant improvements
in medicine and health. Advances in
diagnostic techniques, the development
of artificial organs and mind-controlled
prosthetic limbs, and the development
of potential cures for some cancers and
other devastating illnesses, all give hope.
We are likely to live longer and have
more productive lives.

But new challenges to good health are
already taking root. In particular rising
physical inactivity and unhealthy diets
are contributing to an obesity epidemic
and a spike in non-communicable
diseases. Antimicrobial-resistant
pathogens could be widespread by
2040, potentially causing millions more
deaths. Drug-resistant tuberculosis and
malaria are posing increasing challenges.
The frequency and diversity of disease
outbreaks is increasing rapidly, partly
fuelled by the unprecedented mobility
brought about by globalisation. The need
to guard against pandemics - which could
cause millions of deaths in a worst-case
scenario - is ever present, with the annual
cost of pandemics already an estimated
$500 billion.

###### Gender

Gender inequality has long undermined
global prosperity, stability and security,
contributing to and often exacerbating
a range of challenges including poverty,
weak governance, conflict and violent
extremism. The gap in opportunity
between the genders in economic, social
and political spheres is likely to narrow in
the coming decades but only gradually


continue to have more opportunities and
freedom, in comparison to developing
countries where deep-rooted disparities
are ingrained. In some parts of the world,
advocates of women’s rights and feminist
movements will continue to be treated
harshly.

###### Conflict

The world will face a diverse range
of security threats, some of them
increasingly sophisticated.

Conflict between the great powers
does not seem likely, given the strong
disincentives - too much would be at
stake. To the extent there is such a threat,
it is likely to be caused not by design
on the part of any power, but the risk of
strategic miscalculation or operational
misadventure on land or sea or in the
skies.

The risks of interstate conflict more
generally are however increasing,
with the weakening of the post-Cold
War equilibrium. The confluence of a
number of factors - for example changed
calculations by key countries, disputes
over resources, and more accessible and
sophisticated weapons - could conspire
to bring about interstate conflict.
Growing concerns about nuclear security
also underline the possibility that future
wars in a number of regions, such as the
Middle East or South Asia, could include a
nuclear deterrent.

In the coming years the world will face
new proliferation challenges because of
emerging Weapons of Mass Destruction
(WMD) and conventional weapons


-----

the employment of chemical, biological,
radiological or nuclear weapons - not
necessarily by readily-identifiable actors will demand ever closer attention.

###### Terrorism

The threat of terrorism will remain high,
as terrorists continue to exploit fragile
and violence-prone states. Despite the
defeat of ISIS, the conflicts in Iraq and
Syria energised Islamist extremists
to an an unprecedented degree, and
their ideology will fall on fertile ground
elsewhere, aided by advances in
information technology which allow
extremists to inspire or direct attacks
remotely. Home-grown terror cells,
lone wolves and returning foreign
terrorist fighters challenge not just their
home countries but those beyond their
shores. Meanwhile the vicious attack in
Christchurch in March 2019 underlines
both that right-wing extremists are
a major and growing threat, and that
normally safe countries are not immune
from terrorist attack.

###### Transnational Crime

Transnational crime is becoming
increasingly complex and global, and
threatens stability. Tax fraud and evasion,
money laundering, narcotics smuggling,
arms trafficking, human trafficking,
and sexual servitude all blight lives and
harm communities, and can undermine
political processes, fuel corruption, and
inhibit economic development.

The globalisation of transnational,
serious and organised crime will threaten
national security and public safety in the


in terms of the volume of illicit narcotics
and other illicit goods crossing borders,
the incidence of the trafficking and
smuggling of people, the level of violent
criminality that we are likely to see, the
threat to national revenue bases, and,
increasingly, the attempts to infiltrate
public institutions and to corrupt
officials in order to create a permissive
environment for crime.

###### Cyber security

The cyber economy is transforming
how we do business and connect with
the world. Increasing dependence on
information technology however means
the potential costs of disruption are large
and growing. Malicious cyber activity can
disrupt infrastructure and services, cause
billions of dollars damage to companies,
threaten the integrity of government and
private networks, and even potentially
compromise national security, for
example through cyberattacks targeting
the nation’s financial, energy, water or
transportation systems. Despite the
significant efforts and investments that
have been undertaken by governments
and the private sector in recent years, the
risks of such attacks continue to grow.


-----

## Annex 2. Acronyms and Abbreviations

|Acronym / Abbreviation|Description|
|---|---|
|CERT|Computer Emergency Response Team|
|CSO|Civil Society Organisation|
|EEZ|Exclusive Economic Zone|
|LDC|Least-Developed Country|
|FRANZ|France Australia New Zealand|
|FATF|Financial Action Task Force|
|FFA|Forum Fisheries Agency|
|GBV|Gender-based Violence|
|GDP|Gross Domestic Product|
|IUU|Illegal, Unregulated and Unreported (fishing)|
|NCD|Non-Communicable Disease|
|NSC|National Security Council|
|NSOC|National Security Officials Committee|
|NSDP|National Sustainable Development Plan 2016 – 2030|
|NSS|National Security Strategy|
|OECD|Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development|
|PIF|Pacific Islands Forum|
|PMSP|Pacific Maritime Security Program|
|PMW|Police Maritime Wing|
|SDGs|Sustainable Development Goals|
|UPR|Universal Periodic Review|
|VMF|Vanuatu Mobile Force|


-----

-----

