###### VIETNAM NATIONAL DEFENCE

 1


-----

###### 2


-----

###### SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM

 MINISTRY OF NATIONAL DEFENCE

# VIETNAM

 NATIONAL DEFENCE

###### HANOI 12 - 2009


###### 3


-----

###### 4


-----

###### PRESIDENT HO CHI MINH
 THE FOUNDER, LEADER AND ORGANIZER OF
 THE VIETNAM PEOPLE’S ARMY
 (Photo taken at
 Dong Khe Battlefield in
 the “Autumn-Winter Border” Campaign, 1950)


###### 5


-----

###### 6


-----

##### FOREWORD

###### The year of 2009 marks the 65[th] anniversary of the
 foundation of the Vietnam People’s Army (VPA), an army from the people and for the people. During 65 years of building, fighting and maturing, the VPA together with the people of Vietnam has gained a series of glorious victories winning major wars against foreign aggressors, contributing mightily to the people’s democratic revolution, regaining independence, and freedom, and reunifying the whole nation. This has set the country on a firm march toward building socialism, and realising the goal of “a wealthy people, a powerful country, and an equitable, democratic and civilized society.”

 Under the leadership of the Communist Party of
 Vietnam (CPV), the country’s comprehensive renovation has gained significant historical achievements. Despite all difficulties caused by the global financial crisis, natural disasters and internal economic weaknesses, the country’s socio-political situation remains stable; national defence- security has been strengthened; social order and safety have been maintained; and the international prestige and position of Vietnam have been increasingly improved. As a result, the new posture and strength for building and safeguarding the Homeland have been created.

 In the process of active and proactive international
 integration, under the complicated and unpredictable

 7


-----

###### conditions in the region as well as in the world, Vietnam has had great opportunities for cooperation and development while facing severe challenges and difficulties that may have negative impacts on the building and safeguarding of the Homeland. This situation requires the VPA to further exert itself to successfully fulfilling all tasks, in particular contributing to the planning of strategic policy; building unceasingly strong provincial and municipal defence zones that are the true foundation for the all-people national defence posture; further promoting propaganda work; and making the VPA revolutionary, regular, seasoned, and gradually modernized, and politically, ideologically and organizationally strong in order to meet the demands of safeguarding the Homeland under new conditions.
 Adjusting the VPA’s structure to conform to peacetime conditions and raising its readiness to meet the requirements of modern warfare is imperative and of strategic importance to the socio-economic development, construction of the nation, and defence of the Homeland.

 On the basis of a thorough grasp of the Party and
 State’s guidelines of independence, self-reliance, peace, cooperation and development in external affairs, and the foreign policy of openness, multilateralization and
 diversification in international relations, the VPA should enhance its defence diplomatic activities; expand and consolidate ties and cooperation with all count ries (first and foremost with neighbouring and regional ones, and other major partners etc), and conduct deepened, effective, stable,

 8


-----

###### sustainable, mutually-confident international relations that contribute to the successful implementation of the Party and State’s foreign policy, and meet the needs of building the VPA under new conditions.

 To this end, the Ministry of National Defence of the
 Socialist Republic of Vietnam has published the Third White Paper on Vietnam National Defence. This document defines basic viewpoints on Vietnam’s national defence policy, the mechanism of leadership and management of national defence, the structure of the Ministry of National Defence, and the organization and guideline for building a comprehensively strong VPA as well as the Militia and Self-Defence Force. This White Paper also touches upon defence cooperation policy, and expresses the desire of the Vietnamese people and the VPA for advancing mutual understanding and trust with other peoples and armed forces so as to further foster cooperation for the sake of peace, national independence and social progress.

 General PHUNG QUANG THANH
 Minister of National Defence
 The Socialist Republic of Vietnam

 9


-----

###### 10


-----

##### Part One

#### SECURITY SITUATION
 AND
 NATIONAL DEFENCE POLICY


###### 11


-----

###### 12


-----

###### 1. SECURITY SITUATION

 1.1. The World and Regional Situation

 The security situation of the world and the region in the
 early 21[st] century has seen complicated changes. However, peace and cooperation for mutual development has been the mainstream. Although a world war or a war in which weapons of mass destruction (WMD) might be used is unlikely, local wars and armed conflicts among countries or within a nation originating from national, ethnic and religious contradictions, terrorism, interference, subversion, separatism, disputes over territory, natural resources, and national interests have been on the rise, deeply affecting peace and security of all nations.

 The world situation has changed rapidly and
 unpredictably. The re-allocation of military and economic power worldwide has profoundly changed the world’s political environment with the emerging trend of multi- polarity. Several new powers and power centres have emerged, playing a more important role in the world and regional affairs. The competition for influence among powers and power centres has risen fiercely.

 Economic globalization has deepened, making countries
 increasingly interdependent, and compelling them to expand their cooperation to solve issues of common interests. However, due to differences in interests, competition in certain issues turns out to be fierce. The world’s economic recession arising from financial crisis has seriously impacted

 13


-----

###### all countries. Energy security and food security have become increasingly important issues to the whole world. Apart from these, other global non-traditional security issues have been of major concern to all countries. Addressing the above- mentioned issues is the responsibility of the international community because no single country or region can solve them by itself.

 The influence of defence-security issues on
 international relations has been on the rise. The new revolution in military affairs has been greatly changing the defence and military strategies of all countries. The military power competition around the world has led to the risk of arms races, especially at sea and in space. Many major powers have adjusted their military strategies, increased their defence budgets, speeded up the armed forces
 modernization, and developed advanced weapons and
 equipment, and military technologies. These developments have affected not only the relations among major powers but also the national defence of all countries. The gap of military strength between major powers and the rest of the world has widened. In some regions, the enhancement of military strength has made the situation more complicated. The mechanism of arms control and non -proliferation of WMD has faced huge challenges.

 The Asia-Pacific region, with its dynamic developing
 economies, has taken on an increasingly important position in the world, attracting the interest and competition for influence among the major powers. The regional

 14


-----

###### cooperation mechanisms in various fields have developed. However, this region also poses potential threats to defence-security. In many hotspots, tensions which may lead to armed conflicts and wars have remained unsettled. Disputes over territory and natural resources in land and at sea have been on the rise. The Asia-Pacific region has confronted the increasingly serious impact of many non - traditional security challenges.

 In spite of the basically stable security situation in
 Southeast Asia, potential risks of conflicts still remain. The global economic recession has heavily affec ted the regional economy, worsening the domestic unstable situation in some countries. Territorial disputes over land and sea have been more complicated, in particular those relating to sovereignty and national interests in the East Sea have been on the rise. Southeast Asia suffers heavily from frequent natural disasters such as storms, floods, and tsunamis. To some extent, terrorism and piracy have been restrained; they still pose potential menaces to the regional security situation and are a common concern of Southeast Asian countries and many others. Climate change, natural disasters, epidemic s, and trans-national crimes have a great impact on the security of regional countries.

 ASEAN member-states have strengthened cooperation
 and integration in order to turn Southeast Asia into a region of peace, stability, and development. The ASEAN Charter has come into effect, opening a new era of regional cooperation. This is an important legal f ramework

 15


-----

###### promoting the successful building of the ASEAN
 Community with three pillars, namely, Security-Political Community, Economic Community and Socio -Cultural Community by the year 2015. The cooperative relations between ASEAN and outside partners along the line of peace, stability and development have been strengthened. On the basic principles of “volunteering, consensus and non-interference in each other’s internal affairs”, ASEAN continues to take a leading role in the motivation and development of the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), and other regional security mechanisms. Regarding sovereignty disputes in the East Sea, ASEAN countries have further committed to complying with and implementing “The Declaration of Conducts of All Parties in the East Sea” (DOC) and striving to build the “Code of Conducts of All Parties in the East Sea” (COC) in order to reach a long -term solution to this complex issue on the basis of the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.

 1.2. Vietnam

 Over twenty years of realizing the policy of
 renovation, openness and int ernational economic
 integration, Vietnam has recorded many achievements of historic significance in politics, economy, society, national defence, security, and diplomacy. The overall national strength has been enhanced; the socio-political situation stabilized; national independence, sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and defence -security
 maintained. The country has achieved significant results

 16


-----

###### in improving the national security environment. Vietnam has actively participated in the process of negotia ting and signing international conventions and agreements
 regarding national sovereignty on land and at sea. For the first time in history, the land border of Vietnam has been basically demarcated, creating favourable conditions for Vietnam and neighbouring countries to build the borders of peace, friendship and cooperation for mutual development. This is the result of ceaseless efforts by the Vietnamese Government and concerned parties in settling this important and sensitive issue. Vietnam has also been active in finding solutions to the maritime border issue. The maritime boundary between Vietnam and China in the Gulf of Tonkin has been demarcated. Some issues arising in the overlapping areas at sea between Vietnam and other countries have been settled or addressed. Vietnam has established diplomatic relations with most countries in the world. The friendship and cooperation between Vietnam and all countries have been increasingly strengthened and developed.

 However, like many other countries, Vietnam fac es
 with diversified and complicated security challenges. Vietnam’s economy has been in danger of further lagging behind due to insufficient resilience while coping with the serious impact of the global financial crisis and economic recession. Though the national defence-security has been maintained, many factors, both internal and external, that cause socio-political instability, have not yet been

 17


-----

###### thoroughly eliminated. Democratic freedom, religious freedom, and human rights have been abused by hostile forces in order to undermine the great national solidarity, and to incite violence and separatism in some areas of the country. Concerning the disputes over sovereignty, sovereign rights and jurisdiction over the territories in the East Sea, the complicated developments so far have seriously affected many activities and the maritime economic development of Vietnam. Non-traditional
 security issues such as illegal trafficking of weapons and drugs; piracy, organized trans-national crimes, terrorism, illegal migration and immigration; environmental
 degradation, climate change, and epidemics continue to concern Vietnam.

 2. NATIONAL DEFENCE POLICY

 2.1. Fundamental Issues of the National Defence
 Policy

 Vietnam always regards the maintenance of peaceful and
 stable environment for socio-economic development,
 industrialization and modernization, building the socialism- oriented market economy as the top national interest, and the consistent goal of its national defence policy. Vietnam has followed a national defence policy of peace, and self-defence expressed in the guideline of not using force or threatening of using force in international relations; solved differences and disputes with other countries by peaceful means. Vietnam advocates the gradual modernization of the VPA and

 18


-----

###### enhancement of the defence potential only to maintain its military power sufficient for self-defence capability. Vietnam opposes arms race. As a nation having experienced wars for national independence and freedom, Vietnam thoroughly respects other countries’ independence, sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and national interests on the basis of fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter and international laws. At the same time, Vietnam demands that its independence, sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and national interests must be respected by other countries. Vietnam advocates against the military use of force first in international relations, but is ready to resolutely fight against all aggressive acts.

 Vietnam’s consistent policy is to solve both historical
 and newly emerging disputes over territorial sovereignty in land and at sea through peaceful means on the basis of international laws. As for disputed sovereignty rights at sea, though there is sufficient historical evidence and legal foundation to prove Vietnam’s undeniable sovereignty over water areas and islands in the East Sea, including the Paracels and the Spratlys, it is always ready to negotiate with all parties concerned to find peaceful solutions to those disputes in conformity with regulations of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. While continuously seeking for a long-term solution to the issue, Vietnam advocates that all parties must restrain themselves, strictly abide by DOC, and strive for building COC in order to reach a long-term and fair solution to this complicated

 19


-----

###### issue, turning the East Sea into a sea of peace, frie ndship, and development.

 Vietnam builds its national defence power on the
 basis of the overall strength of the whole nation, of the great solidarity of the masses, of the whole political system led by the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV), combining the strength of the nation with the strength of the time, the strength of military forces and the all -people defence posture with the strength of people’s security forces and posture. Vietnam has established a policy to concurrently develop both its socio-economic and defence capabilities and closely coordinate defence-security and diplomatic activities to support the cause of
 industrialization and modernization, and rapid and sustainable economic development. To protect Vietnam’s independence, sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and other national interests as the region and world situation faces many changes, Vietnam builds its all-people national defence upon the whole nation’s tradition of patriotism and fighting against foreign aggression;
 strengthening armed forces, inheriting and upholding the values of the Vietnamese military sciences over the time, and developing the Vietnamese military arts to meet the demands of modern wars.

 Proactively preventing and repulsing the dangers of
 wars are among essential tasks of Vietnam’s national defence in peacetime in order to realize the optimal national defence strategy of protecting its sovereignty, unity,

 20


-----

###### territorial integrity and other national interests without
 resorting to war fighting. Vietnam advocates implementing the national defence strategy through a spectrum of political, economic, diplomatic, socio-cultural and military activities aimed at eradicating the causes of armed conflicts and wars. Thoroughly grasping the principle of active, comprehensive defence and safeguarding the Homeland from apart,
 Vietnam’s national defence takes combined measures to maintain internal stability while preventing the risks of outside intervention.

 Vietnam’s national defence is always closely linked to
 the CPV and the State’s guideline of independence, self - reliance, peace, cooperation and development in external affairs, and the foreign policy of openness,
 multilateralization and diversification in international relations. Through its diplomatic activities, Vietnam has consolidated mutual understanding and trust with peoples and governments of other countries, laying the firm
 foundation for expanding cooperation, resolving differences in order to prevent and repulse the dangers of armed
 conflicts, contributing to the maintenance of a peaceful and stable environment in the region and the world. On
 implementing the independent, and self-reliant national defence policy, Vietnam builds national defence power mainly upon its own resources and people. Thus, Vietnam consistently advocates neither joining any military alliances nor giving any other countries permission to have military bases or use its soil to carry out military activities against

 21


-----

###### other countries. At the same time, Vietnam attaches great importance to developing defence ties with all other countries on the basis of respect for each other’s independence, sovereignty and mutual benefit. Vietnam highly values defence cooperation with neighbouring countries, and traditional friends while developing defence links with other countries sharing the goal of peace, independence and development. With the spirit of “ shelving the past, looking forward to the future,” Vietnam is ready to cooperate with other countries to solve humanitarian issues left by history; and at the same time, Vietnam acclaims initiatives and activities for peace and cooperation of all countries regardless of political regimes or their history of relations with Vietnam.

 Vietnam resolutely condemns and opposes to
 terrorism in any forms and simultaneously protests against any acts in the name of counter-terrorism to intervene into the internal affairs of other countries. Apart from taking necessary measures to prevent and respond to terrorism, Vietnam supports the international community ’s
 endeavours and expansion of cooperation to prevent
 terrorist actions and support of terrorism in any forms. Vietnam insists that the counter-terrorist measures and international cooperation in the fight against terrorism must be carried out within the framework of the United Nat ions, and in compliance with the fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter and international laws. Vietnam has signed 8 out of 12 conventions on counter -terrorism of

 22


-----

###### the United Nations and is considering participating in the remaining conventions.

 Vietnam approves the settlement of other flashpoints
 which might break out into armed conflicts in the region through dialogue, peaceful negotiation, and without
 resorting to force or the threat to use force.

 2.2. Foreign Relations and Defence Cooperati on

 As a country actively integrating into the international
 community, Vietnam consistently realizes the foreign guideline of independence, self-reliance, cooperation and development with a foreign policy of openness,
 multilateralization and diversification along the principle that Vietnam wishes to be a friend and credible partner of all nations in the international community.

 Defence diplomacy is part of the State’s diplomacy.
 The goal of defence diplomacy is to establish and develop defence relations with all countries based on equality, and mutual respect that contribute to the cause of building the country, building the armed forces, consolidating national defence and security, safeguarding the Homeland, and making contributions to the maintenance of regional and world peace and security.

 In an increasingly interdependent world, Vietnam’s
 security is inseparable from the world’s security in general and regional security in particular. Defence cooperation is one of the most important factors for maintaining peace and

 23


-----

###### stability in the region and the world as well, and it is also an important factor for achieving Vietnam’s defence goals. Therefore, Vietnam advocates expanding defence diplomac y and actively participating in defence and security cooperation in the regional and international community.

 The VPA advocates effectively broadening and
 heightening bilateral defence relations while actively participating in multilateral defence cooperat ion. Vietnam intensifies all forms of defence diplomacy such as exchange of military delegations at all levels, defence consultancy and dialogue, participation in regional and international fora to reinforce the friendship, mutual understanding, confidence building, and conflict prevention.

 Vietnam wishes to widen bilateral defence relations with
 all countries. The priorities in Vietnam’s defence relations with other countries are exchange of military delegations, information and experience sharing, cooperation in training and education, and solving humanitarian issues. Vietnam has so far established official defence relations with 65 countries, including major powers in the world; and set up its defence attaché offices in 31 countries. Forty-two countries have opened their defence attaché offices in Vietnam.

 Vietnam promotes its defence cooperation with other
 ASEAN member countries within the framework of building the ASEAN Political-Security Community and in accordance with its bilateral relations with each country along the line of enhancing information and experience sharing, reinforcing

 24


-----

###### cooperation in training and education, and co-ordinating to solve security issues of common concern.

 Vietnam attaches importance to expanding defence
 dialogues with relevant countries, enabling all parties to grasp each other’s viewpoints, creating the opportunity for solving issues relating to the interests of all parties. Vietnam has conducted frequent defence dialogues at various levels with other ASEAN member countries, and the other countries such as China, Russia, the United States, Japan, France, India and so on. Together with increasing exchange of high-level military delegations, Vietnam also attaches importance to exchange of young military officers, cooperation between research and educational institutions of Vietnam’s Ministry of National Defence with other countries. Vietnam has welcomed 46 ship visits, including 81 port calls, over 18,000 turns of naval officers and crew from other countries to Hai Phong, Da Nan g and Ho Chi Minh City. In 2008, for the first time, Vietnam sent nav al vessels abroad for friendly visits.

 Due to historical, geographical conditions and deeper
 economic integration into the region and the world, many of Vietnam’s defence-security issues have become increasingly intertwined with those of neighbouring countries. Hence, along with exchange of military delegations, cooperation in training and education and so on with all countries, Vietnam prioritized cooperation with neighbouring countries to solve bilateral defence-security issues. Vietnam has completed the land-border demarcation work and landmark planting with

 25


-----

###### China; conducted the border demarcation and landmark planting in some important border areas and reached agreement on completing border demarcation and landmark planting with Cambodia by 2012; completed the
 demarcation work and has increased the density of border landmarks with Laos. Vietnam intensified the co-ordination in patrolling and controlling border areas between Vietnam’s border guard forces and the border guard and security forces of other countries to strictly implement international agreements on border, border guard
 cooperation agreements on combating crimes such as trans - border smuggling, illegal migration, women, childre n and drugs trafficking, and so on for the sake of building a border of peace and friendship. Vietnam has strived to solve the maritime boundary issues, and to expand cooperation with other countries to ensure maritime security. Vietnam’s Navy has set up hotlines and conducted joint patrols with the naval forces of Cambodia, Malaysia, Thailand and China in order to improve the effectiveness of coordination in maintaining security in overlapping zones and bordering areas at sea.

 Establishing and maintaining the relations between
 Vietnam’s General Department of Defence Intelligence and other countries' military intelligence agencies is an
 important channel for sharing information on defence - security issues.

 Vietnam highly values and actively participates in
 multilateral cooperation on security issues through

 26


-----

###### international and regional organizations and fora such as the UN, ASEAN, ARF, and Asia-Pacific Economic
 Cooperation (APEC).

 As a UN official member since 1977, Vietnam has
 strictly accomplished its duties and at the same time, actively and responsibly participated in solving international security issues. During its term as a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council (2008 -2009), Vietnam has consulted opinions from non-aligned countries, closely coordinated with other member states of the Security Council in the process of making decisions on international security issues in conformity with the principles of the United Nations Charter.

 Vietnam greatly appreciates the role of the UN and
 regards the peace-keeping operations (PKO) as an important function of the UN. To better fulfil this function, UN PKO must abide by the principle of respecting independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, and non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries; ensure impartiality; and only be carried out with the acceptance of parties concerned. Vietnam is accomplishing its preparations for effectively participating in UN PKO, in conformity with its capability and conditions. Vietnam’s relevant age ncies are actively studying experience of other countries, and preparing its personnel with sufficient professional skills, foreign
 language proficiency and knowledge of international laws to participate effectively in UN PKO.

 27


-----

###### Prompted by the policy of proactively supporting and
 contributing to the common efforts of the international community for peace, security and disarmament, Vietnam actively participates in international efforts to prevent and repulse dangers of wars as well as to overcome the consequences caused by armed conflicts and wars. Vietnam and other Southeast Asian countries have signed the Treaty on the South East Asia Nuclear Weapons Free Zone (SEANWFZ). Vietnam calls upon nuclear powers to participate in the Protocol of the Treaty in order to turn Southeast Asia into a permanent nuclear weapons free zone. In accordance with the consistent policy of supporting and actively contributing to the common efforts of the
 international community for disarmament, Vietnam
 welcomes the initiatives on preventing the development, manufacturing, storage and use of WMD. At the same time, Vietnam holds that all countries have the right to research, develop, and transfer nuclear, chemical, and biological technologies for the sake of peace as regulated by international laws. Vietnam has taken part in and strictly observed many conventions, agreements, and protocols on non-proliferation of WMD and other international
 conventions on disarmament. Vietnam is seriously
 considering international conventions and treati es on defence-security issues, and actively preparing necessary conditions for fully implementing the duties required.

 Vietnam is willing to cooperate with the countries in
 the region and the world in an effort to solve non-traditional

 28


-----

###### security issues. To improve the effectiveness of cooperation in this field, Vietnam advocates expanding and enhancing cooperation both bilaterally and multilaterally, such as sharing information and experience; setting up a
 coordination mechanism with the relevant organizations of other countries to prevent, cope with and settle the related non-traditional security issues. Vietnam’s functional
 agencies are preparing capabilities of personnel and
 technical equipment in order to participate in multilateral search and rescue exercises in the East Sea, first and foremost with neighbouring and regional countries.

 Vietnam considers as important the strengthening of
 defence cooperation with ASEAN countries on the basis of defence-security cooperation mechanisms in the process of building the ASEAN Community. These mechanisms are established on the basis of the principles of “consensus”, “non-interference in each other’s internal affairs”, “not changing the ASEAN Community into a military alliance or mutual defence bloc,” and other fundamental principles of the ASEAN Charter. Vietnam greatly appreciates and
 actively participates in ASEAN Defence Minister Meetings (ADMM) and other senior defence officials meetings, and supports initiatives that enhance cooperation among
 ASEAN militaries to settle common security issues. In this spirit, Vietnam’s Ministry of National Defence has
 proactively taken part in multilateral defence cooperation mechanisms with ASEAN countries by participating in ASEAN defence meetings at all levels, exchanging

 29


-----

###### experience in defence building, fighting against trans - national crimes and terrorism, participating in such
 humanitarian operations as natural disaster relief and
 prevention, and sending observers to military exercises of regional countries. In 2010, as an ASEAN Chairman, Vietnam will closely coordinate with the other member states to successfully organize meetings and activities in order to enhance the defence cooperation relations among ASEAN countries. Vietnam’s Ministry of National Defence also supports and plays an active role in efforts of
 expanding defence-security cooperation relations with non- ASEAN partners with a view to maintaining peace and stability in the region and the world.

 30


-----

###### Part Two

 BUILDING THE NATIONAL DEFENCE


###### 31


-----

###### 32


-----

###### Vietnam’s national defence is the all -people national
 defence which comprises the full spectrum of the State and people’s political, economic, diplomatic, military, cultural and scientific activities that contribute to the build-up of a synchronized, balanced and comprehensive power of the nation of which the military power is of the essence and the armed forces being the key element in order to maintain the country’s peace and stability, prev ent acts of sabotage and war provocation, repulse threats of war, and at the same time, be ready to defeat any aggressive acts in all forms and scales.

 The all-people national defence is the concretization of
 Vietnam’s national defence policy manifested in
 organizational and operational structures of all branches, levels, and of the whole people under a unified strategic guidance, to create the real power for safeguarding the Homeland. The all-people national defence is aimed at firmly protecting independence, sovereignty, unity,
 territorial integrity and national security in all aspects; protecting the regime, revolutionary fruits and the cause of renovation; and at the same time, preventing and repulsing plots to cause violence, armed conflicts and aggress ive wars, and firmly preserving a peaceful and stable
 environment for the cause of industrialization and
 modernization. The goal of building the all-people national defence in a new era is to ceaselessly enhance the national defence power, prevent and readily defeat all types of aggressive wars under any circumstances. The all -people

 33


-----

###### national defence is built in the direction of all-people participation, comprehensiveness, self-mastery, self reliance and gradual modernization.

 Building the powerful all-people national defence
 includes the building of national defence potential, defence forces, defence posture, and the mechanism of defence leadership and management.

 1. BUILDING THE NATIONAL DEFENCE
 POTENTIAL

 The national defence potential comprises politico spiritual, economic, scientific and technological, and
 military potential.

 1.1. Building Politico-Spiritual Potential

 Politico-spiritual potential is the fundamental
 component of the national defence potential, inherent in human qualities, in national historical-cultural traditions, and in the political system. This is the potentiality of politics and spirit that could be transformed into physical power for implementing national defence tasks. This potential manifests itself in the people and armed forces’ awareness, will, belief, psychology and emotion toward the national defence duties.

 The current politico-spiritual potential of Vietnam’s
 national defence is the result of a long building process under the leadership of the CPV and President Ho Chi Minh, and is the continuance of the thousands-year-long
 34


-----

###### history tradition of the Vietnamese people in founding and defending the nation.

 First and foremost, building the politico-spiritual
 potential means building the confidence of all strata of people in the virtue of the regime and in the success of national construction and defence. Hence, building a pure and sound Party, a law-governed State of the people, by the people and for the people, and continuously enhancing the people’s material and spiritual life are decisive factors in the building of the politico-spiritual potential. Building the politico-spiritual potential requires morale education to raise the national defence awareness of all people, especially the young generation and students, and to foster knowledge on defence-security matters for key cadres of all branches and at all levels. Vietnam has built a system of defence educational materials for people from all walks of life. The politico-spiritual potential is built during the process of consolidating the people’s great solidarity and strictly implementing the State of Vietnam’s policy of religious freedom, and racial equality. The State of Vietnam consistently pursues a policy of respecting and ensuring the rights of religious freedom, to follow or not to follow any religion, and to legal religious practices. The State strictly prohibits making uses of race, faith and religious issues to violate the laws and regulations of the State, to incite and sow division among the people, particularly among ethnic groups in order to cause social disorder to the detriment of national security. As a country with 54 fraternal ethnic

 35


-----

###### groups, the State of Vietnam implements a policy of ethnic equality. The ethnic groups of Vietnam enjoy equal rights to improve their material and spiritual life, which enhances their education, preserves, enriches and brings into full play their cultural identity and fine traditions. State policy prioritizes socio-economic development in remote and mountainous areas, border, coastal and island regions as well as hunger elimination and poverty alleviation that gradually narrows and clears the development gap among regions. The politico-spiritual potential is also built through practicing broad democracy with the principle that “people know, people discuss, people implement and people check,” radically fighting against corruption and building an
 equitable, democratic, and civilized society.

 1.2. Building Economic Potential

 Economic potential is the potentiality in the economic
 field (including the defence-economic sector), that could be mobilized for socio-economic development, strengthening national defence or conducting a defensive war. The economic potential is also a material foundation for other potential manifested in the quantity, productivity, quality and efficiency of the social production, the growth pace of the economy, the resource reserve and the quality and qualification of the workforce. In the national defence aspect, economic potential is manifested in such major fields as the human, material, and financial resources of the economy that could possibly be mobilized to deal with situations both in peacetime and wartime. The economic

 36


-----

###### potential is also expressed in the mobility and viability of the economy and also the capacity to ensure economic security in the process of international economic integration and the severe challenges of wars.

 Building the economic potential of the all -people
 national defence is carried out through the close combination between socio-economic development and defence-security enhancement, between socio-economic development and building the provincial and municipal defence zones under the defined long-term programming and plans, and through the building of economic -defence and defence-economic zones in major strategic areas.

 Over the past years, Vietnam’s economy has
 continuously achieved a high growth rate. The Gross Domestic Product has increased considerably, the
 economic structure has continuously shifted towards
 industrialization and modernization, and the infrastructure has developed. Vietnam has proactively and grad ually integrated in the regional and world economies and has become an official member of the World Trade Organization (WTO). The material and spiritual life of people from all strata of society and the armed forces has been improved; while the intellectual standards of the people, the quality of human resources, and the dynamism of all socio-economic sectors have been raised
 significantly. Vietnam strives for the goal of becoming a modernized industrial country by 2020.

 37


-----

###### Thanks to the economic development of the past years,
 the building of economic potential for the all-people national defence has gained important results. Vietnam has a logistic reserve sufficient to deal with all contingences. The increasingly perfect and modern infrastructure system has created more favourable conditions for defence activities. Though the economy still faces difficulties in the process of development and impacts of the global economic recession, the State of Vietnam has allocated a necessary portion of the State budget for defence requirements in general and for the acquisition of equipment and weapons for the armed forces in particular.

 The Defence Budget of Vietnam

 (Billion VND)

 2005 2006 2007 2008

GDP 839,211 973,791 1,143,442 1,490,000

Defence budget 16,278 20,577 28,922 27,024

Share in GDP 1.872% 2.194% 2.529% 1.813%

###### The major portion of the above-mentioned budgets was
 spent on ensuring decent living conditions for military officers, non-commissioned officers, soldiers and defence employees, supporting the operations of defence industry, and maintaining the VPA readiness.

 38

|Col1|2005|2006|2007|2008|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|GDP|839,211|973,791|1,143,442|1,490,000|
|Defence budget|16,278|20,577|28,922|27,024|
|Share in GDP|1.872%|2.194%|2.529%|1.813%|


-----

###### Building the economic potential for national defence
 also requires proper investment in defence industry . The defence industry must be an integral part of the national industry and under the management of the Ministry of National Defence. The renovation efforts to improve
 defence industry capabilities are made in the direction of dual-use, ensuring the maintenance, manufacture,
 improvement and upgrading of weapons and equipment required by new assignments for the development of the people’s armed forces in st rategic regions and focusing on local defence capabilities.

 1.3. Building Scientific and Technological Potential

 The scientific and technological potential is the
 potentiality in science and technology (including natural sciences, social sciences and humanities, technical sciences and technologies) that could be mobilized to accomplish the society’s immediate and long -term duties as well as to deal with national defence situations. The scientific and technological potential is a factor that plays an ever more important role in the national defence potential. It is
 manifested in the ability and the level of technological and scientific development, in the quantity and quality of the contingent of scientific and technological workers, in the material facilities for research and development,
 dissemination and application of scientific and technological achievements in national defence. The scientific and
 technological potential has a direct impact on the

 39


-----

###### development of science and technology in the military and defence, the organizational structure of the armed forces, and the command and management of the armed forces.

 Building the scientific and technological potential of
 the all-people’s national defence is closely linked with the development of science and technology of the country. The State of Vietnam regards the investment in developing science and technology as the foundation and driving force for socio-economic development. This is an important base to speed up industrialization and modernization, a sound foundation for the scientific and technological potential of the all-people national defence. The State of Vietnam pay s special attention to investment in material and technical facilities that meet the requirements of scientific - technological research and development, and at the same time follows a policy of preference and priority to scientific and technological workers. The State also defines measures that tie science and technology to production, business, protection of property rights, gradual
 establishment of technological market, and expansion of international cooperation to absorb advanced technologies suitable for Vietnam’s conditions. Despite difficulties, the scientific and technological potential of the country is being intensified step by step, thus contributing more effectively to economic development and consolidati on of national defence-security.

 Over the past years, special attention has been paid to
 develop Vietnam’s military science, technique and arts, to

 40


-----

###### focus on finding technical and tactical solutions for
 effectively dealing with high-tech wars. Vietnam attaches importance to continuing and bringing into full play the arts of people’s war at strategic, operational and tactical levels, meeting the requirements of modern wars to make the most of weaponry and manpower against aggressive wars. Vietnam develops the military science and technology to meet the immediate requirements of equipment and weapons for the people’s armed forces while gradually conducting research and development of technological solutions, new weapons and equipment that may be needed in future wars. The State of Vietnam is improving th e mechanism to absorb and utilize talents, and mobilizes all internal and external scientific potentialities for building the all-people’s national defence.

 1.4. Building Military Potential

 Military potential is the material and spiritual
 potentiality that could be mobilized to create real capabilities which connect to the military and defence duties in both peacetime and wartime. Military potential is the core element of the national defence potential which is built on the basis of politico-spiritual, economic and scientific and technological potentialities. The military potential is shown not only in the capacity to maintain, improve and unceasingly develop the combat power and readiness of t he armed forces but also in manpower and material reserves to serve military tasks.

 41


-----

###### The State of Vietnam builds the military potential
 along an integrated strategic plan, in accordance with the requirements of defending the country. The combat competence and readiness of the armed forces seen in its organizations, personnel, equipment, logistic facilities, military arts and science and technique, are usually taken into account, maintained, improved and continuously developed to meet the requirements of the people’s war to defend the country.

 The military potential consists of two basic elements,
 manpower and weaponry of which manpower is the determinant. Vietnam owns the strong military potential partly due to its young and abundant human resources. The State of Vietnam takes interest in building the contingent of the military officers required for fulfilling the tasks in new conditions. The Law on the VPA Officers adopted in the Third Session of the 12 [th] National Assembly defines the common criteria for VPA officers, that is, absolute loyalty to the Fatherland, the people and the State of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam; dignity; industriousness, thrift, integrity, uprightness, public-spiritedness, selflessness; democratic heightening, strict obedience of military disciplines and orders; respect for and solidarity with the people and comrades in arms; qualifications of politics and military science required by the assigned duties. The Law is also amended to extend the service age of officers in order to save the expenses for training manpower, utilizing and bringing into full play the expertise and experience of the

 42


-----

###### officers, especially the professional ones and highly qualified scientists, meanwhile, preserving the specific feature of the military workforce. The Law also adjusts the policy toward officers, identifying the People’s Army as “a special labour sector” assigned to duties of defending the country. The amended Law on Military Service adopted in the 7[th] Session of the 11 [th] National Assembly reduces the service duration from 24 months to 18 months. This regulation results in the possible increase in the number of the youth to join the army. Those ex-servicemen will constitute a powerful reserve force, always ready to supplement the regular force when needed.

 Military potential is also shown in the capacity to
 mobilize various branches, science and technology, transportation and other public service sectors to meet the national defence requirements. Building the military potential is closely tied to the industri alization and modernization of the country. Achievements in
 economics, science, technology, culture and ideology are the foundation to build the armed forces, develop the military science and arts, and military social sciences and humanities. The State of Vietnam advocates that the building of the military potential be linked to the building of the politico-spiritual, economic, scientific and
 technological ones, regarding this as an essential demand in building the potential of the all-people national defence to ensure mobilization capability and create the power to firmly defend the country.

 43


-----

###### 2. BUILDING DEFENCE FORCES

 The National Defence of Vietnam is based on the
 comprehensive power of resources; therefore, t he defence forces comprise the all-people forces of which the people’s armed forces are the core.

 Building the defence forces is first and foremost the
 building and consolidation of the political system including the Party, the State, the Vietnamese Fatherland Front and public mass organizations, with priority given to the task of building and increasing the leading role of the Party, and efficiency in management and implementation of
 government apparatus at all levels. The political system is the nucleus of the defence forces, playing the decisive role in the mobilization and enhancement of the nation’s defence might. In the political system, the building, consolidation and enhancement of operational effectiveness of mass organizations are of great significance in bringing together and mobilizing the popular mass to carry out national defence tasks, to directly protect their own localities and offices, thus making contribution to the maintenance of political stability, public order and safety.

 The building of defence forces must be
 institutionalized by a system of laws and statutory
 documents on national defence in order to mobilize all sectors of the economy to participate in the construction and consolidation of the all-people national defence, and to safeguard the Homeland.

 44


-----

###### The task of building comprehensively powerful
 people’s armed forces is crucial to the building of the defence forces. The VPA and the People’s Public Security are made revolutionary, regular, seasoned, and gradually modern to truly play the key role in the defence forces. The Militia and Self-Defence Force is organized in conformity with the sectors of economy, broadly and focally at the same time, to meet the requirements of their tasks both in peacetime and in wartime.

 3. BUILDING NATIONAL DEFENCE POSTURE

 The posture of the all-people national defence is the
 organization and disposition of the national defence forces and potentialities throughout the territory in conformity with an integrated strategic intent to ensure victory over any hostile plots and acts that violate the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and national interests of Vietnam, and to be ready to pivot toward the posture of people’s war once war occurs.

 The posture of the all-people national defence is built
 in connection with the national and local master plans along the guideline of close combination between economy and national defence and vice versa, and the establishment of strategic zones that are firm in politics, rich in economics, and strong in national defence and security. Along with the socio-economic construction and development, building infrastructure and allocating economic and technical facilities are closely linked to the all-people national

 45


-----

###### defence posture. Thus, building the all-people national defence posture must be taken into account in designing and planning the socio-economic development. The all-people national defence posture is built to ensure a firm an d interconnected layout, combining the on-spot posture with the mobile one, the overall posture with the concentrated one, with special attention given to key directions, regions and targets, and strategic localities. The State makes policy for the re-distribution of labour force, establishing
 economic-defence and defence-economic zones in remote, mountainous areas, border, maritime and island z ones to ensure the close coordination of the socio-economic
 development with the enhancement of the defence forces, potentialities and posture in vital areas.

 On the basis of the adjustment of the strategic
 disposition of the economy nationwide, the State increases its investment in building provinces and cities into sound defence zones, ensuring their ability to deal with local contingencies in peacetime by themselves. In wartime, they are capable of taking initiative in fighting enemies from the very beginning, wearing them out, driving them to become passive and bogged down, thus creating opportunities for, and closely coordinating with the
 regular corps to annihilate the enemy. Special attention is paid to laying grassroots foundations at hamlets,
 mountainous villages, communes, wards, border and island zones, and vital local areas to ensure stability and strength in all aspects.

 46


-----

###### In conjunction with building defence zones, the layout
 of the armed forces is adjusted in each strategic direction and all over the country, forming a steadfast and highly agile posture, ready to respond to any circumstances. The regular and local forces are rationally positioned and closely combined with the building of a defence system to create an interconnected, solid military posture in key regions and to ensure the armed forces’ combat capability in land, air, sea and island environments.

 Strategic rear areas, strategic rear bases, and logistic
 bases of each zone and direction are established to guarantee the people’s activities and the armed forces’ operations in case of high-tech wars with appropriate attention given to self-support and self-reliance. The national defence posture is executed through the implementation of strategic plans, such as those for shifting the country from peacetime to wartime, securing the national defence and political security, for protecting air space and national border.

 The all-people national defence posture is closely
 linked to the building of the people’s security posture to form a firm interconnected layout, bringing into full play the strength of various forces, combining different types of military and non-military activities, creating agility and flexibility, and the capacity for independent and combined combat operations. This is an important part of building the national defence posture, shown in how the defence zones are structured. Based on the features of each defence zone, the disposition and deployment of forces are contemplated

 47


-----

###### to ensure the highest efficiency in performing defence and security tasks in localities, creating a close combination between defence and security in each strategic zone and all over the country.

 4. THE LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT OF
 NATIONAL DEFENCE

 4.1. The Leadership Role of the CPV over the VPA
 and the National Defence

 The CPV puts forth the guideline and makes decisions
 on the issues relating to the Homeland defence strategy. Through Party organizations, it maintains the leadership of the entire political system in defence activities.

 The CPV exercises the absolute, direct and all-round
 leadership over the VPA in order to make the VPA strong politically, ideologically and organizationally. The Party’s leadership over the VPA is achieved through the system of Party organizations, the chain of command, the system of political organizations, political cadres at all levels, and public mass organizations at grassroots level.

 The system of Party organizations in the VPA
 comprises the Central Military Party Committee (CMPC in short) and Military Party Organizations at all levels. The General Secretary of the CPV Central Committee is the Chairman of the CMPC. The CMPC also includes Vice Chairman and members appointed by the Politburo, including some members of the CPV Central Committee

 48


-----

###### within the army and some others outside the army. Party executive committees from those at the level directly reporting to CMPC to the grassroots level are elected by their corresponding party congresses.

 CMPC proposes to the CPV Central Committee the
 issues of military and national defence guidelines and missions, the national defence plan, directions and measures of building the all-people national defence, Party’s leadership mechanisms over the VPA. It is CMPC’s responsibility to coordinate and instruct its immediate subordinate executive committees in the implementation of the Party’s resolutions and directives concerning the military and national defence. CMPC exercises direct leadership in the building of the comprehensively powerful VPA, and the building of pure and sound Party organizations in the army. By improving the quality and efficiency of Party and political work, the CMPC ensures firm and increased Party’s leadership over the army. The CMPC performs the collective decision-making on major issues such as policies, programmes, plans of action for the implementation of the Party’s directives and resolutions, measures for building the VPA, and decisions on the VPA personnel issues. The CMPC directs the General Political Department and through the General Political Department, it directs Party organizations and the system of commissars and political organizations at all levels in conducting the Party and political work in order to make the VPA strong politically, ideologically and organizationally to accomplish all of its missions.

 49


-----

###### The system of political organizations in the VPA
 comprises the General Political Department and political organizations in the units of all levels. The General Political Department directs the Party and political work within the VPA, operating under the leadership of the Politburo and the CPV Central Secretariat, particularly under the direct and constant leadership of the CMPC. Based on the resolutions, and the directives of the Party Congresses, Party Central Committee, Politburo, Party Secretariat and the resolutions of the CMPC; and the orders of the Minister of National Defence, the General Political Department proposes to the CMPC the guidelines, measures and action plans for the Party and political work in the army; directs, instructs and inspects the performance of that work at all levels. The VPA political organizations carry out the cultivation of and
 education on the CPV guidelines, advocacies and policies, the State laws; direct and instruct the building of pure and sound Party organizations and cells; instruct military units to carry out anti-psychological warfare measures; coordinate with local Party executive committees, authorities and public mass organizations in disseminating and mobilizing people to fulfil their duties of defending the Homeland.

 The commissars and junior commissars preside over
 political work at all levels. Units at the levels from company to battalion have junior commissars. From the level of regiment to military region and the equivalent there are commissars. The commissars and junior commissars are responsible to their superiors and the Party executive

 50


-----

###### committees for the entire Party and political work within their units, for directly guiding, instructing, inspecting, organizing and executing the Party and political work as regulated; while concurrently taking part in designing and organizing the performance of the unit’s plans.

 4.2. State Management of National Defence

 The State of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam carries
 out the national defence management as defined by its Constitution and laws. The basic contents of the State’s national defence management consist of promulgating a system of statutory documents on national defence, signing international conventions and agreements on defence cooperation, building master and specific plans for national defence mobilization, and organizing and guiding the implementation of national defence tasks and necessary measures to defend the Homeland.

 The National Assembly is the supreme organ of State
 authority of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, the sole body with the right to promulgate laws concerning fundamental domestic and foreign policies, the country’s socio -economic, national defence and security tasks, decisions on the building and organization of the armed forces and matters of war and peace, and to define the state of emergency and other special measures so as to ensure the national defence-security. The National Assembly exercises supreme supervision over the State’s national defence activities. Since 2005 the National Assembly has passed a number of laws concerning the

 51


-----

###### national defence, such as the Law on Amendments and Supplements to several articles of the Law on the VPA Officers, the Law on National Defence, the Law on Amendments and Supplements to several articles of the Law on Military Service, the Law on National Security, the Law on the People’s Public Security, and the Law on National Border. The Standing Committee of the National Assembly has enacted a series of national defence decrees, for example, the Decree on the Maritime Police, the Decree on the Militia and Self-Defence Force, the Decree on the Intelligence, the Decree on the Border Guard, the Decree on National Defence Mobilization and the Decree on Defence Industry.

 The State President is the Chairman of the Council of
 National Defence and Security, the Commander -in-Chief of the people’s armed forces. The President dec lares the state of war, orders limited or general mobilizations, declares the state of emergency locally or nationally, proclaims and issues other laws and decrees on national defence, and promotes officers of the people’s armed forces to the ranks of Senior Lieutenant General and General.

 The Government is the supreme executive organ of the
 State of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. The Government promulgates decrees and resolutions to specify the
 implementation of national defence laws and ordinances. It also makes policies on the consolidation of national defence and building of the VPA, maps out the master and specific plans for defence mobilization, organizes and directs the implementation of national defence tasks and necessary

 52


-----

###### measures to safeguard the Homeland. As delegated,
 ministries and branches undertake the national defence education and international cooperation in certain aspects related to national defence, ensure the material life for the armed forces, implement welfare policies for the rear, and inspect the fulfilment of national defence tasks, etc. Since 2004, the Government and the Prime Minister have issued a number of documents regarding national defence. The Government has institutionalized the responsibilities of branches, levels and strata of people in build ing provinces and cities into defence zones firm in politics, wealthy in economics, strong in national defence and security, which are the sound foundations for the all-people national defence. The Prime Minister decides the promotion of
 officers of the armed forces to the ranks of Major General and Lieutenant General.

 The Ministry of National Defence is the advisory organ
 for the Party and State to consult on matters of national defence and military guidelines and duties in safeguarding the Homeland, exercises the State management function on national defence nationwide, organizes the work of building, managing and commanding of the VPA, the Militia and Self-Defence Force, and administers public services as stipulated by law. The Minister of National Defence, who directs the execution of the State management functions on national defence and military affairs as defined by law and concurrently takes on responsibilities for the organization, building and management of the armed forces, and is the

 53


-----

###### highest commander of the VPA and the Militia and Self- Defence Force. The Ministry of National Defence is composed of the General Staff, the General Political
 Department, other general departments and their
 subordinates. The Ministry of National Defence decides the commission and promotion of officers to the ranks of field and company officers of the VPA.

 The General Staff commands and operates the VPA
 and the Militia and Self-Defence Force, and exercises the State management function on national defen ce. The General Staff organizes and directs the development of the army and the Militia and Self-Defence Force while also commanding military operations. The General Staff comprises the General Chief of Staff, the vice chiefs, the functional departments of operations, milit ary training, manpower, militia and self-defence, and educational institutions. The General Chief of Staff, concurrently the Deputy Minister of National Defence, takes the role of the Minister of National Defence in the latter’s absence. The General Chief of Staff directs offices and units directly under the General Staff to formulate the defence strategy, the master and specific plans for defending the country; presides over coordinating, instructing, inspecting and motivating other ministries, ministerial-level agencies, and the people’s committees at all levels to implement legal regulations on national defence; and inspects and urges VPA units to abide by the State laws and the orders of the Minister of National Defence.

 54


-----

###### The General Political Department is the organ that
 directs and carries out the Party and political work in the army. It has the General Director and Vice General Directors, functional departments responsible for the personnel work, political propaganda and ideological education, Party
 organizations, public relations and army security. It is in charge of administrative management over the system of military tribunals and military procurations at all levels.

 The functional organizations at the general department
 level of the Ministry of National Defence include the General Department of Technology, the General Department of Logistics, the General Department of Defence Industry and the General Department of Defence Intelligence. Each general department has the general director and vice general directors (the General Department of Defence Intelligence has the commander and vice commanders), the commissar and deputy commissar, the staff office, the political department, and other departments and subordinate units with specific responsibilities and duties.

 The General Department of Logistics is the leading
 organ for logistics in the VPA, and functioned as an advisory agency on relevant matters concerned. At the same time it directs and organizes such logistical activities as material supplies, daily necessity support, medical care, and transportation for the army. Its current organization includes the Office of the General Department of Logistics, the Staff Office, Political Department, Department of Logistics, specialized departments in charge of military ordnance,

 55


-----

###### military medicine, stationing facilities, fuel, transportation and other subordinate agencies, bases, and units.

 The General Department of Technology is the leading
 organ for technology in the VPA, functioning as a staff agency on the matters concerned and ensures the technological and technical support for the VPA. It has functional departments in charge of technological and technical support for military regions, army corps, services and arms. It also has agencies, units, specialized edu cational institutions, maintenance depots and enterprises, and other subordinate units.

 The General Department of Defence Industry is in charge
 of manufacturing military weapons and equipment for the army and the Militia and Self-Defence Force. It has functional departments, weapon and military equipment manufacturing factories, vocational schools, and subordinate units.

 The General Department of Defence Intelligence is a
 specialized strategic intelligence body for the Party and State of Vietnam, the specialized military intelligence organ for CMPC and the Ministry of National Defence. The General Department of Defence Intelligence directly carries out intelligence activities at the strategic level. At the same time, it is the advisory organ for the Minister of National Defence and the General Chief of Staff to consult on the force organization and intelligence operations. It is the lead department directly responsible for instructing and guiding the army’s military intelligence and reconnaissance network in terms of professional intelligence.

 56


-----

###### The Maritime Police Department under the Ministry of
 National Defence is the State’s specialized force with the responsibility of controlling security, order, safety, and law enforcement as stipulated by the State of Vietnam and the relevant international conventions and agreements signed or participated in by the Socialist Republic of Vietnam in its waters and continental shelf. Vietnam has four Maritime Police zones. The Maritime Police force is equipped with vessels capable of enforcing the laws related to sovereignty, sovereign rights, and jurisdiction in Vietnam’s waters. All activities of the Vietnam Maritime Police are directly
 organized, managed and operated by the Ministry of National Defence.

 The Department of Rescue and Relief, under the
 Ministry of National Defence, functions as the standing body of the National Committee for Search and Rescue, and is responsible for coordinating both military and non-military forces in search and rescue operations, and disaster relief.

 The Foreign Relations Department, under the Ministry
 of National Defence, is the State management organ on the VPA’s defence external relations, functioning as the
 advisory organ for the CMPC and the Minister of National Defence to consult on the guidelines, directions and measures to military external relations, instructing and managing defence external relations activities, and planning and organizing those activities in assigned domains. The Department of External Affairs represents the Ministry of National Defence in relations with foreign defence attachés,

 57


-----

###### diplomatic representatives, international and regional organizations in Vietnam.

 The Office of the Ministry of National Defence
 concurrently the CMPC Office and other organizations play the role of a consultative organ and provide assistance to the Ministry of National Defence.

 4.3. Directions to Enhance the Leadership and
 Management in National Defence

 Enhancing the Party’s leadership in national defence is
 aimed at meeting the requirements of defending the Homeland under new conditions. The Party’s organizational structure in national defence leadership is built in a unified and synchronous way from the centre to locality, notably at military region and grassroots levels. The contents of the Party leadership work in national defence are continuously supplemented. The operational mechanism and the coordination responsibilities of each level, branch, locality in activities relevant to national defence, especially in dealing with complicated situations are becoming more clearly defined and perfected.

 Administrative reform, aimed at making the work of
 the state apparatus in national defence increasingly effective is of exceptional significance. The goal of the administrative reform is to make the system of administration and state administrative management smooth, sufficiently
 authoritative, competent and efficient, with three main points: the institutional reform of administrative affairs, the

 58


-----

###### rectification of the apparatus, and the formation of cadres and employee contingents.

 The organizational structure of the State management
 in national defence from the centre to localities continues to be adjusted on the basis of clearly identifying the operational mechanism, functions and tasks of agencies and cadres charged with national defence work in ministries and branches. The national defence duties of agencies, departments and branches at all levels are institutionalized by law so as to make the best of the State management power in national defence. The delegation of the State management authority in national defence between the governmental agencies and authorities of centrally-governed provinces and cities is being further studied in order to set in details.

 One of the major policies and solutions to the
 administrative reform in national defence is to ensure the democratization of the society’s political life, the realization of the people’s mastery in safeguarding the Homeland and in fulfilling their duties and rights in national defence. Administrative procedures concerning the State
 management in national defence are being continually
 reformed along with building the contingent of pure and competent cadres responsible for national defence work.

 The cadres of functional agencies should continually
 be guided and fostered to bring into full play their roles as consultant in organizing the building and management of

 59


-----

###### national defence work. The statute of rel ations,
 coordination, and combination among agencies and branches at all levels in carrying out defence-related activities should be streamlined in order to enhance the overall strength of all forces. The system of statutory documents and the system of policies in building the all- people national defence should be studied, supplemented, and amended to match the requirements of new situations so that every citizen would be able to fulfil their obligation and rights to the national defence tasks.

 60


-----

###### Part Three

 BUILDING THE PEOPLE ’S ARMY

 AND

 THE MILITIA AND SELF-DEFENCE FORCE


###### 61


-----

###### 62


-----

###### 1. ORGANIZATION OF THE VPA AND THE
 MILITIA AND SELF-DEFENCE FORCE

 The People’s Army and the Militia and Self-Defence
 Force are the main components of Vietnam people’s armed forces, playing the key role in all-people national defence, charged with the task of combat readiness and combat to defend the Homeland, and at the same time, making contribution to the cause of industrialization and
 modernization of the country.

 1.1. Vietnam People’s Army

 The VPA, the core of the Vi etnam people’s armed
 forces, is an army from the people and for the people, and ready to sacrifice their own lives for “the independence and freedom of the Homeland, for socialism and for the happiness of the people.”

 The forerunner of the VPA is the Vietnam Propaganda
 Unit of the Liberation Army, the first main force established on December 22, 1944 under the directive of late President Ho Chi Minh.

 At the time of its founding, the Propaganda Unit of the
 Liberation Army, with only 34 cadres and soldiers, s oon displayed the tradition of the nation’s struggle against foreign invaders and the military art of “using the few to counter the many and the small to defeat the big .” In its early days, the first regular troops of Vietnam attained resounding feats of arms, liberating large areas to establish

 63


-----

###### the bases for the struggle for independence, beginning the VPA's tradition of “determined to fight and determined to win.” On May 15, 1945, the Vietnam Propaganda Unit of Liberation Army merged with the National Sal vation Army and was renamed the Liberation Army, becoming the main military force of the Front of Vietnam Independence League during the General Uprising to seize state power in the August Revolution in 1945.

 The Vietnam Propaganda Unit of Liberation Army,
 forerunner of the VPA, established on December 22 [nd] 1944

 From 1945 to 1954, the VPA developed by leaps and
 bounds in both manpower and combat strength. Shortly since the Independence Day to November 1945, the Liberation Army developed from a small group into a 50,000 strong National Army of Vietnam organized into 40 detachments. In 1950, the latter was renamed the Vietnam People’s Army. At that time, the important regular multi 
 64


-----

###### regiment units (equivalent to divisions), namely, 308, 304, 312, 320, 316, 325 and 351, were established one after another, and have so far remained the main force units of the VPA. From a small troupe with only several hundreds soldiers during the General Uprising, the VPA grew into an army of powerful regular divisions, achieving outstanding feats of arms, of which the greatest was the Historic Victory of Dien Bien Phu, where the French scheme to re-establish its colonial regime was resolutely defeated.

 The flag of “determined to fight and determined to win ”
 in the Dien Bien Phu Battle, May 1954

 After the 1954 Geneva Accords were signed, Vietnam
 was temporarily divided into two parts. The Vietnamese people assumed the two strategic tasks of the socialist construction in the North and the struggle for national reunification. The VPA’s missions then were to develop into a more regularized army that could both safeguard the socialism in the North and join the struggle for the liberation of the South to achieve national reunification. On February

 65


-----

###### 15, 1961, the South Vietnam Liberation Army, the military force of the South Vietnam Liberation National Front, was founded on the basis of merging the local armed forces with reinforcements from the North. Upon the direct intervention of US troops, the VPA, shouldering with the people and other armed forces, launched the all-people, all-round, long- lasting and arduous war, accomplished miracles with the 1968 Spring General Offensive and Uprising as a typical instance, and the fought back against the sabotage wars conducted by the US Air Force and Navy on the North, with “Dien Bien Phu Battle in the Air” in December 1972 as the pinnacle; with the successful ending by the historic Ho Chi Minh Campaign on April 30, 1975 resulting in th e reunification of the country, and opened a new era of development for Vietnam.

 South Vietnam Liberation Army’s tank entered the
 Independence Palace on April 30[th] 1975

 66


-----

###### After the 1975 historic victory, the VPA with the whole
 people again won the wars for border protection, preserved the Homeland’s independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.

 Right after the end of the national salvation war against
 American aggressors, the genocide regime headed by Pol Pot in Cambodia incited nationalist resentment and launched the border encroachment war in the south-west border of
 Vietnam. Pol Pot’s clique committed numerous barbarous massacres against the Vietnamese people living along the border, and at the same time, conducted the policy of genocide against the people of Cambodia. To protect the Homeland, on December 23, 1978, the VPA launched the strategic counter-offensive and smashed the Pol Pot army’s attacks. Then, in response to an urgent appeal from the Cambodian people and the Kampuchean National United Front for National Salvation, Vietnam’s military volunteers, along with the Cambodian armed forces, annihilated 21 Pol Pot divisions and put an end to this brutal genocide regime.

 When the country embarked upon the period of peace
 and construction, the VPA adjusted its organizational structure and equipment, and downsized its strength by nearly two thirds. Generations of VPA officers and soldiers continue to display the fine tradition and nature of “Uncle Ho’s Soldiers” and always faithfully fulfil their functions as an army ready for fight, for work and for produce, worthy of late President Ho Chi Minh’s praise of “Our army, loyal to the Party, pious to the people and ready to fight and sacrifice

 67


-----

###### their lives for independence and freedom of the Homeland, and socialism, will fulfil any tasks, overcome any difficulties and defeat any enemies.”

 Functioning as an army ready for work, the VPA has
 always maintained its close ties with the people. Being one of the core forces participating in mass mobilization, the VPA units have actively conducted that work. Many of them have taken the lead in socio-economic development in remote and secluded areas, taking part in search and rescue operations, natural disaster relief, and flood and storm prevention. The VPA has also joined in the work of hunger elimination and poverty alleviation, contributing to the improvement of the people’s material and spiritual life, st riving to achieve by 2010 the goal of hunger elimination and poverty alleviation for 100,000 needy households.

 As an army ready for produce, VPA units have made
 the most of such potential as labour, land, techniques, etc., to promote production activities and generate on-spot
 supplemental products that contribute to stabilizing and considerably improving the servicemen’s quality of life. VPA factories and enterprises have manufactured various types of weapons and equipment necessary for modern operations that meet the army’s requirements of combat readiness and combat. Many VPA units engaging in production and business have effectively conducted their operations to become the country’s major economic
 organizations, pioneering the combination of economy with defence, thus making worthy contributions to the nation’s

 68


-----

###### socio-economic development and defence-security
 consolidation. VPA businesses have joined a number of the nation’s major projects and ventures such as the Ho Chi Minh highway, North-South 500KV electric grid, services for petrol and gas exploitation, and hydroelectric station constructions at the Da River and Dray H’ling. There are 98 VPA businesses at present operating in various fields of the economy, such as flight services, seaport services,
 telecommunication, and ship-building industry. Their export commodity and service turnover is ever increasing.

 Fulfilling its basic function of combat readiness and
 combat to protect national independence, sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity, and interests, the VPA is organized in the direction of making it highly-skilled and compact, supplied with necessary modern weapons and equipment, regularly trained, and ready to complete any assigned tasks.

 At the moment, the VPA has 450,000-strong active
 forces including main force and local force, and a 5 -million- strong reserve.

 The main force, the core of the VPA, comprises the
 mobile force of the corps, services, arms, the main force of the military regions and technicians and professional personnel. Besides readiness-training units and combat units, there is a complete system of logistic support units, technical support units, academies, research institutes, officer-training institutions and professional and vocational schools at various levels.

 69


-----

###### 1.1.1. Ground Forces

 The Ground Forces is not organized into a separate
 command, but put under the direct guidance and command of the Ministry of National Defence, the General Staff, the General Political Department, and under t he specific direction of general departments and other functional agencies. In the early days, the VPA was composed of the Ground Forces only, mainly infantry. After 65 years of building, the Ground Forces have gradually developed in organization and strength to meet the requirements, circumstances and fighting modes of the Vietnam’s
 people’s war.

 The Ground Forces consist of seven Military Regions
 (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 9) and Hanoi Capital Command, six arms (Artillery, Tank and Armour, Engineering, Signal, Chemical, and Commando) and four corps (1, 2, 3, and 4). Each military region, Army corps and arm has Commander and Vice Commanders, Commissar and Deputy Commissar, functional agencies responsible for staff, political, logistic s, and technical affairs and other subordinate units. The military regions are organized in strategic directions and areas. Each military region consists of affiliated regular divisions and regiments. A military region commands provincial and district military units and the Militia and Self-Defence Force within the region. Army corps, the largest-size mobile units in the Ground Force s, are positioned to protect the country’s vital strategic local areas. An Army corps is composed of divisions and other affiliated

 70


-----

###### units. The arms participate in joint and combined operations as assigned and also exercise the function of technical support and officer and technical personnel training in professional branches for the whole VPA. Each arm has its own combat units, officer-training colleges and professional technical schools.

 The Ground Forces of Vietnam are equipped in the
 “modern, light and compact” direction so as to achieve the capabilities of high mobility, strong shock and fire power, and fighting in various terrains and any weather and cl imate conditions in conformity with the art of modern people’s war. Having undergone a lot of trials during the wars for national liberation and defence, the Ground Forces have gradually matured, excellently fulfilled their duties, and built the glorious tradition. All of its corps, most of the arms and numerous units have been awarded the title of Hero of the People’s Armed Forces.

 1.1.2. Air Defence – Air Force

 The Air Defence – Air Force is a service assuming
 the responsibilities of both national air defence and air forces. It is the core force responsible for the control and defence of the airspace, protection of the nation’s key facilities and the people, and participates in safeguarding the Homeland’s seas and islands. The Air Defence – Air Force is able to independently perform its missions, or to take part in joint and combined operations. The service plays the role of a consultative organ for the Ministry of

 71


-----

###### National Defence on matters concerning the building of the air defence of the Ground Forces and the air force of other services, arms and branches. The military air transportation, besides the task of supporting combat and combat readiness, also takes part in natural disaster relief operations and economic development activities.

 The Air Defence – Air Force is organized into the
 Service Command, combat units, support units, educational institutions and production units. The Service Command has the Commander and Vice Commanders, the
 Commissar and the Deputy Commissar. It also consists of agencies responsible for military affairs, Party and political work, technical and logistic issues, and affiliated units. The main combat units of the service are air divisions, air defence divisions, and affiliated air units. The Air Defence – Air Force is gradually equipped with various types of modern combat aircraft, missiles, anti -aircraft artillery and other technical means, including multi -purpose fighters, long-range air defence missiles and new generation radars. The service has well performed the training task, maintained the combat readiness and control of the country’s airspace, and taken part in search -and-rescue and disaster relief operations.

 During the liberation war, the Air Defence – Air Force,
 by performing its duties with excellence, defeated the two wars of sabotage of the U.S. Air Force and Navy in the North, protected the transportation of supplies from the North to the South, making worthy contribution to

 72


-----

###### defending the North and liberating the South, thus achieving national reunification. By virtue of their achievements in combat operations and other tasks, both the Air Defence and Air Force have been awarded the title of Hero of the People’s Armed Forces

 1.1.3. Navy

 The Vietnam People’s Navy is the core service in
 protecting Vietnam’s maritime sovereignty. The Navy’s responsibility is to strictly manage and control the waters and islands in the East Sea under Vietnam’s sovereignty, to maintain security, to counter any acts of violating sovereignty, sovereign rights, jurisdiction and national interests of Vietnam at sea, to secure normal activities of Vietnam in its waters and islands in conformity with Vietnamese and international laws, to ensure maritime safety and participate in search-and-rescue operations in accordance with Vietnam’s laws and the international conventions adopted by Vietnam, to be ready for joint and combined operations to defeat any aggression from and at sea.

 The Navy Headquarters takes command of the entire
 Navy. The Headquarters has the Commander and Vice Commanders, the Commissar and the Deputy Commissar. It also consists of agencies responsible for military affairs, Party and political work, technical and logistic issues. The Navy is organized into five Naval Regions (1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) and affiliated units. The main forces of the Navy are the

 73


-----

###### units of surface ships, coastal artillery and land-to-sea missiles, marine, naval commando and island defence forces. The Navy has been reinforced with personnel and equipment to effectively conduct search -and-rescue
 operations. In the future, the Navy will be further equipped with modern weapons and enhanced combat power to be sufficiently capable of successfully accomplishing the task of protecting Vietnam’s sovereignty, sovereign rights, jurisdiction and national interests at sea.

 The Navy enjoys a very glorious tradition, having
 achieved great feats of arms in fighting against the sabotage war launched by the U.S. Air Force and Navy in the North of Vietnam, particularly in breaking through the U.S. sea lane blockade, and in accomplishing its assigned tasks in the historic Ho Chi Minh Campaign. The Service has been awarded the title of Hero of the People’s Armed Forces.

 1.1.4. Border Guard

 The Border Guard, equivalent to a service, is a
 component of the VPA. It exercises the functions of controlling, protecting national sovereignty, territorial integrity, public order and security of national borders on land, at sea, and border gates as regulated by laws. It is also a force in defence zones of the border provinces and districts. The Border Guard bears the main responsibility for coordinating with concerned branches and forces in local areas and authorities in controlling and protecting the national border lines and border landmarks, ensuring the

 74


-----

###### implementation of agreements, regulations and laws on border issues, detecting and fighting against all illegal activities and sabotages, and crimes of all kinds to preserve sovereignty, security and public order in the boundary areas; carrying out the border guard external relations, maintaining contacts with agencies concerned of neighbouring countries to settle the border related issues with a view to build ing the border of peace and friendship, hence making contribution to the creation of an environment of stability and development that actively supports the policy of expanding international cooperation.

 The Border Guard is consistently organized and
 commanded from its Headquarters to grassroots units, including the Border Guard Command, border guard provincial (municipal) commands, border guard maritime brigades, and border guard posts, border guard maritime detachments. The Border Guard Command has the Commander and Vice Commanders, the Commissar and the Deputy Commissar. It also consists of agencies responsible for military affairs, Party and political work, technical and logistic issues, the Department of Drugs Prevention and Control, and affiliated units. The B order Guard has become increasingly stronger, professionally competent, and adept at mass mobilization and expert in Vietnam laws, as well as international laws and practices. It is equipped with border guard professional means and devices and increasingly modern weapons to accomplish its tasks.

 75


-----

###### Since its establishment on March 3, 1959, after 50
 years of growing, and maturing, and increasingly striving, the Border Guard’s officers and soldiers have achieved numerous feats of arms and glorious victories. The Border Guard has been awarded a Gold Star Order and twice the title of Hero of the People’s Armed Forces.

 1.1.5. Local Force

 The Local Force is a mobile force engaging in
 operations mainly within its locality, an d together with the militia and self-defence units, playing the core role in the people’s war at localities under the direct command of the provincial military commands (or centrally-governed
 cities) and the district-level military commands (or
 provincially-governed towns and cities). The Local Force is closely linked to a defence zone, carrying out combat operations in the general defence posture of the military region as well as the whole country in accordance with the requirements and characteristics of each area in the
 people’s war at the locality in combination with the people’s war of the entire country.

 The organization, equipment, and disposition of the
 Local Force depends on the size and the importance of provinces (or centrally-governed cities) and districts (or provincially-governed towns and cities). Up to the
 organizational size, terrain conditions, and the socio- economic situation of each locality, the Local Force units are equipped with the amounts and types of weapons

 76


-----

###### suitable for combat needs. The Local Force also has professional and technical units, as well as air -defence, artillery, reconnaissance, commando, engineering and other support units.

 Nowadays, education and training for Local Force
 units are conducted regularly in order to raise the sense of vigilance and readiness necessary for the coordination and combination with militia and self-defence units in fighting for the protection of the local people and authorities. The Local Force also closely coordinates with the Militia and Self-Defence Force to maintain order and security within their own localities, render assistance to the Militia and Self-Defence Force in training, and contribute to the fulfilment of training task for the Reserve.

 1.1.6. Reserve

 The Reserve, a component of the VPA, is strictly
 organized, disciplined and capable of fulfil ling its task, ready to participate in the active force as re quired. The Reserve includes reserve military personnel and technica l means of the national economy which have been selected and planned to readily supplement the active force of the VPA. The Reserve is organized on the basis of the same table of organization and equipment of the VPA with its components corresponding to those of the services and arms of the regular and Local Force.

 Every year, the Government assigns quotas of training,
 exercises and examinations of mobilization readiness for

 77


-----

###### ministries, branches and localities. The Ministry of National Defence instructs, directs, inspects and urges the localities and units in their building and mobilization of the Reserve in conformity with the laws, and directly administers the training arrangement of the reserve units. The ministries, branches, and provincial people’s committees co ordinate with active units of the VPA to allocate military reservists and technical equipment to reserve units based on the mobilization quotas assigned by the Government.

 The reservists are selected from military personnel
 finishing their military service and civilians trained as regulated by the law. Annually, the reserve units are summoned for checking their mobilization readiness, with training and military exercises based on a common training programme. Reservists are selectively appointed to command posts of the reserve units and get allowances as regulated.

 So far, the Reserve has become an important force
 contributing to the building of the all-people defence and the consolidation of the strength of the people’s war posture to meet the requirements of construction and protection of the Homeland under new circumstances.

 1.1.7. Major Academies, Colleges and Research Institutes

 The VPA has a complete system of academies and
 schools to meet the demand for training officers and non- commissioned officers as well as technicians at all levels for the VPA, masters and doctorate candidates for the

 78


-----

###### military, engineers and technicians for civilian areas. Those institutions also do scientific and technological research in general, and military scientific and technological research in particular. At present, Vietnam has 21 military academies, colleges, and 1 junior college training officers for all branches, agencies and units under the Min istry of National Defence. Organizationally, there are 6 major academies and 3 officer-training colleges directly attached to the Ministry of National Defence. The remaining academies, colleges and schools are under the management of general departments, services and arms. Military educational institutions are classified on the basis of responsibilities and tasks of training officers. The National Defence Academy is the only institution training strategic - level officers. The remaining academies train operat ional and tactical-level officers. The officer-training colleges train company-level command officers.

 The National Defence Academy is a major State
 educational institution, assigned by the Government to the Ministry of National Defence for direct manageme nt. This Academy is the training and supplementary centre for Party’s and State’s high -level cadres. Its tasks include the training of operational and strategic -level officers for the VPA, the improvement of national defence knowledge for key cadres of the ministries, agencies, branches and public mass organizations at central and local levels, the training of military masters and doctorate candidates, and international cooperation with

 79


-----

###### some countries in the field of training military and civilian cadres in terms of national defence.

 The Ministry of National Defence also directly
 administers two academies training medium and high - ranking political and military officers, namely, the Academy of Politics and the Academy of Army. The Academy of Politics’ mission is to train political officers at the intermediate and advanced levels of politics. It is also entrusted with the task of managing the Institute for Military Social Sciences and Humanities by the Ministry of National Defence. The Academy of Army, which is directly under the Ministry of National Defence, is a military educational institution, responsible for training command and staff officers at regimental and divisional levels for the Ground Forces.

 Directly attached to the Ministry of National Defence
 are other research institutes on military science, arts and technology such as the Institute for Military Strategy, the Institute for Military Science and Technology, the Institute for Military History, and the Institute for Defence International Relations.

 The Institute for Military Strategy plays the role of a
 consultative organ for the Ministry of National Defence on issues related to national defence guidelines and policies, and the building of the armed forces, studying, analysing and forecasting potential threats to Vietnam’s national defence and security, issues of military ideology, guidelines

 80


-----

###### and doctrines, the arts of war, modes of warfare, the economic-national defence issues, and proposing the
 directions for the organization and construction of the armed forces, the leadership and command system, and measures for safeguarding the Homeland.

 The Institute for Military Science and Technology is a
 research institution on military science-technologies that conducts research on and develops equipment and weapons for the army to meet the requirements of modern warfare, while simultaneously doing research on sciences, tec hniques and technologies for civilian use.

 The Institute for Military History is the leading
 historical research institution of the VPA in charge of doing research on the military history of Vietnam and the world in order to draw lessons and experiences that serve the tasks of the Homeland’s construction and protection at present and in the future.

 The Institute for Defence International Relations is
 responsible for research on the world defence relations. At the same time, it plays the role of a consultative organ and organizes activities of multilateral defence foreign relations for the Ministry of National Defence.

 1.1.8. Major Production Units

 The production units of the VPA are the leading force
 in combining the economy with national defence. VPA’s companies, enterprises, including many co rporations and production corps, have made considerable contributions to

 81


-----

###### the cause of industrialization and modernization of the country, maintaining their presence in the most difficult regions for socio-economic development, thus creating strong national defence posture in the vital areas of the Homeland.

 The VPA has more than 20 production corps
 responsible for the socio-economic development of the remote and mountainous areas, contributing to the improvement of the material and spiritual life of the people, and ensuring national defence and security in the border regions and islands. The production corps take part in the re- distribution of the inhabitants in accordance with the
 production planning and national long-term defence-security goals, forming groups of villages and communes in the border regions in the all-people national defence posture for the protection of the Homeland. The tasks of such production corps are to build critical infrastructures, for example, roads, electric and irrigation systems, clean water supply, schools, medical stations and markets; to carry out measures to encourage the production of agriculture, forestry and aquaculture, creating basic elements for the development of the commodity economy; to assistant in hunger elimination and poverty alleviation in the areas of responsibility. In places with favourable conditions for large-scale production where local people are not able to invest in goods production by themselves (such as the Central Highlands, South-western Vietnam and North-western Vietnam), the VPA directly organizes production so as to attract the ethnic minorities as

 82


-----

###### well as people from other places to come for settlement and participation in the State’s economic organizations.

 In parallel with improving the material life of the
 people, production corps also make considerable
 contribution to the improvement of the cultural and spiritual life in the distant areas of the Homeland. The production corps have mobilized the people to carry out the Party’s and State’s guidelines and policies; developed television and radio broadcasting, cultural and medical systems in
 mountainous villages; built schools for the children of the ethnic minorities; taken part in primary education universalization and illiteracy eradication; improved
 conditions of medical care for the people; and preserved and developed the traditional culture of the ethnic minorities. The production corps have also helped improve and train the cadre contingent for the localities, facilitating sustainable socio-economic development in local areas.

 Since their establishment, production corps have taken
 part in resettlement programs, built hundreds of groups of new mountainous villages, sponsored and organized the permanent agriculture and settlement for tens of thousands of households, and generated jobs for ethnic minority groups. The production corps have assisted the people to reclaim virgin lands, improve paddy fields for wet rice cultivation, contributing to the modification of backward lifestyles and cultivating customs, and built and consolidated the national defence-security posture in key local areas.

 83


-----

###### 1.2. Militia and Self-Defence Force

 Militia and Self-Defence Force is the armed force of
 the masses that is not separated from production activities and work. As a component of the People’s Armed Forces of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, it is placed under the leadership of the CPV, the management of the Government and people’s committees at various levels, the unified guidance and command of the Minister of National Defence, and the direct guidance and command of local military headquarters, taking responsibility for the protection of administrative authorities, lives and property of the people, State property at the levels of communes, offices and organizations.

 In peacetime, the Militia and Self-Defence Force is the
 core force tasked with performing both work and
 production, and playing the vanguard role in protecting production activities, preventing and overcoming the aftermaths of natural calamities and enemy-inflicted
 destruction as well as other serious incidents. At the same time, it co-ordinates with grassroots-level security forces to maintain political security, and public order and safety in localities, and participates in building g rassroots-level establishments into comprehensively strong ones, making contributions to the building of increasingly firm local defence zones. In border, sea areas and islands, the Militia and Self-Defence Force co-ordinates with the Border Guard Force to firmly protect sovereignty, territorial integrity and border security of the Homeland. In wartime, the Militia and

 84


-----

###### Self-Defence Force becomes the strategic force in carrying out people’s war, acting as the core force in the movement of fighting the enemy by the whole people, taking part in combat and combat service, coordinating with other forces to protect the locality and unit pursuant to the operational plan of the defence zone. The Militia and Self-Defence Force carries out civil defence work both in peacetime and wartime as regulated by law.

 Militia units are organized in communes, precincts or
 district towns (commonly called communes). The self - defence units are organized in political, socio-political bodies, State offices, civil services and economic
 organizations (commonly called offices and organizations). The Militia and Self-Defence Force is composed of the core force and the broad force. The core one is composed of the Militia and Self-Defence Force in infantry, air-defence, artillery, engineering, reconnaissance, signal, chemical protection, medical care, and the coastline and maritime Militia and Self-Defence Force. The mobile, on-the-spot and permanent forces of the Militia and Self-Defence Force are organized into platoons, companies or battalions, and equipped with appropriate weapons. The Militia and Self- Defence Force is provided with political education and military training in the programmes regulated by the Ministry of National Defence. The Minister of National Defence and commanders of military headquarters at various levels command the Militia and Self-Defence Force as stipulated by the Law on National Defence. Activities of the Militia and

 85


-----

###### Self-Defence Force are carried out according to the plans of commune-level military commanders, and of military command boards of offices and organizations, under the direct leadership as well as guidance of the Party’s executive committees and the grassroots-level administrative
 authorities.

 The First National Congress of the CPV issued “the
 Resolution on Self-Defence Teams” on March 28, 1935 which is regarded as the foundation date of Vietnam’s Militia and Self-Defence Force. For the past 74 years, the development history of the Militia and Self-Defence Force has been closely linked to the cause of national
 independence, and the Homeland’s construction and protection. From 1935 to 1945, self-defence teams in both rural and urban areas came into being, becoming core elements for the masses to conduct armed uprisings and guerrilla warfare, and to build and expand their guerrilla bases. In August 1945, the Militia and Self-Defence Force together with the whole people successfully carried out the General Uprising for independence. After September 2, 1945, the Militia and Self-Defence Force became an element of the independent State of Vietnam ’s armed forces, one of the three categories of the people’s armed forces, and was organized in all communes and villages, municipal quarters, actually becoming a tool to protect the young revolutionary regime and the revolutionary achievements.

 In the resistance war against the French colonialis ts,
 the Militia and Self-Defence Force was developed

 86


-----

###### extensively all over the country, gradually unified
 organizationally, guided and commanded by the communal militia board, and district and provincial military headquarters under the direct leadership of the Party’s executive committees at various levels. Although equipped only with rudimentary improvised weapons while facing the expeditionary force armed with modern weapons, the Militia and Self-Defence Force together with the people formed combat villages, steadfastly held the ground and stuck fast to the people, wearing the enemies out, destroying the puppet authority system, eliminating traitors to the Vietnamese nation, and actively co-ordinating with regular troops to fight against enemy’s moppi ng-up and besieging operations. The Militia and Self-Defence Force made many enemies’ military posts surrender and withdraw, expanded the guerrilla bases, and contained and stretched e nemy’s forces, compelling them to disperse for response, created favourable conditions and joined the regular troops in conducting successfully many major operations,
 culminating in the historic Dien Bien Phu Battle.

 In the national salvation war against American
 aggressors, the North Vietnam’s Militia and Self-Defence Force, comprised of over 700 detachments and equipped with relatively modern weapons, formed an anti-aircraft network against enemy’s low flying airplanes and shot down many enemy aircraft. The number of US aircraft shot down by the Militia and Self-Defence Force alone
 accounted for ten percent of the total US airplanes shot

 87


-----

###### down over the North. The Militia and Self-Defence Force also captured alive a great number of US pilots, wiped out tens of enemy commando groups, and sank and damaged many enemy combat ships. The Militia and Self-Defence Force also performed well the task of the people’s air- defence at grass-roots localities, built a variety of air-raid shelters, overcame the aftermath of the damage caused by enemy’s air-raids, cleared unexploded bombs, mines and water mines, and broke through sea lanes and harbours blockade, etc. There were 183 million turns of people participation in transportation, combat service, and help evacuating people, preventing and overcoming the aftermath of the damage caused by the enemy, and reinforcing effectively manpower and materials for the Southern front.

 The Militia and Guerrilla Forces in South Vietnam
 bravely fought against the enemy with all kinds of w eapons, used various and creative ways of fighting throughout three strategic regions, closely combining political struggle with armed struggle, holding out resiliently, creating the position of an interlocked pattern between our forces and the enemy’s. This unique and creative way of fighting,
 Vietnamese guerrilla warfare, compelled the enemy to stretch its force in response. In the 1975 Spring General Offensive, the Militia and Self-Defence Force together with the regular troops and the entire people in South Vietnam launched simultaneous offensives and uprisings, liberating the whole of Southern Vietnam and achieved the
 reunification of the country.

 88


-----

###### After the great victory in the spring of 1975, the Militia
 and Self-Defence Force acted as a core component of the people at grassroots levels to overcome the aftermath of war by actively clearing unexploded bombs and mines to restore millions of hectares of cultivated land for production. The Militia and Self-Defence Force was mobilized to take part in the construction of the border defence line, directly engaged in combat and combat service, making important
 contributions to the success of the border wars.

 Nowadays, the Militia and Self-Defence Force has
 developed in quality, quantity, organizational structure, and equipment. The organizational structure is more compact but the overall quality of the Militia and Self- Defence Force has been upgraded, meeting the
 requirements of new assignments.

 Over 74 years of construction, combat and
 development, generations of cadres and members of the Militia and Self-Defence Force have shown absolute loyalty to the Homeland, the people, and the revolutionary cause of the Party, combating resiliently, ingeniously and bravely, labouring, studying and working effectively and
 creatively, and gained great achievements. Its 366 units and 275 individuals have been awarded the title of Hero of the People’s Armed Forces. Vietnam’s Militia and Self-Defence Force deserves President Ho Chi Minh’s praise: “The Militia and Self-Defence Force and
 guerrillas are the force of the whole nation, an invincible force, a solid wall of the Homeland. No matter how

 89


-----

###### atrocious enemies are, if they collide with that force, that wall, they are sure to be destroyed.”

 2. GUIDELINES FOR BUILDING OF THE VPA
 AND THE MILITIA AND SELF-DEFENCE FORCE

 2.1. Building the Vietnam People’s Army

 Vietnam advocates maintaining the VPA powerful
 enough, with a reasonable strength, highly trained, ready to meet all the demands for the protection of the Homeland.

 2.1.1. Building Politico-Spiritual strength

 Building the VPA politically and spiritually strong is a
 principle in the building of the VPA, a basis to raise the overall quality as well as combat power of the VPA, manifesting the viewpoint of regarding the human factor as the determinant in the battlefield. Political and spiritual building is to strengthen the Party’s leadership and the effectiveness of the State’s management, to maintain the nature of the working class, the national and people’s characteristics of the VPA. The combat power in terms of politics and ideology of Vietnam’s armed forces also
 manifests in the striving for mastery of advanced military science and technology, and the spirit of “dare to fight and fight to win.”

 Vietnam advocates enhancing the work of political
 education to make sure that the VPA brings into full play the tradition of patriotism and solidarity to fight the enemy and defend the country bequeathed from our forefathers for

 90


-----

###### national protection, the tradition of “determined to fight, determined to win” of the VPA. VPA cadres and soldiers must be educated and trained to ensure their firm political foundation and determination to fulfil any tasks, in any conditions and under any circumstances, especially in the face of ideology-sabotaging activities by hostile forces and negative effects of the society, their absolute loyalty to the Homeland and the regime, impregnation of revolutionary morals, close connection to the people, and their willingness to sacrifice their lives for national independence, freedom and interests, making contribution to the maintenance of peace in the region and world. The Party, command organizations, the system of political offices and the public mass organizations in the VPA should be made
 comprehensively powerful.

 Vietnam is determined to counter all attempts of
 “depoliticizing” the VPA and People’s Armed Forces by hostile elements to separate the People’s Armed Forces from the leadership of the CPV.

 2.1.2. The Organizational Structure and Equipment,
 and the Build-up of Human Resources

 In peacetime, Vietnam advocates continuing to
 downsize the strength of the active force and to build the reserve force sufficient to meet the requirements in case of contingency or war. The active force of the VPA is maintained at the level of reasonable strength, highly- skilled, yet compact, ensuring the combat power. The

 91


-----

###### reduction in the number of subordinate units, the gradual transfer of certain support activities to civil sectors, the restructuring of the armed forces in the direction of giving priority to combat units, the units conducting important tasks, and technical services and arms are fundamental guidelines for the organizational structure and equipment of the armed forces in general, and the VPA in particular.

 President Ho Chi Minh greatly appreciated the role
 of the contingent of officers and cadres when he said: “Cadres are considered as cornerstones for all kinds of work”. Thus, the building of the contingent of officers and professional technical personnel, and training high -quality human resources for the people’s armed forces are pivotal work and are of strategic significance. The objective of the training and education of the contingent of officers and professional technical personnel of the VPA is to satisfy the demand of building the revolutionary, regular, seasoned and gradually modern Army. Officers and
 professional technical personnel of the VPA must have firm political foundation and determination, strong
 combat will, and be capable of commanding the troops and operating under conditions of hi -tech wars. They must be educated and trained in all aspects of politics, ideology, morals, manners, competence and qualifications. The system of VPA educational institutions responsible for training officers and technicians in military science - technology majors must be organized in the direction of intensive training, widening the linkages among

 92


-----

###### themselves and with the training establishments of o ther ministries and branches so as to raise the effectiveness of training, to build an abundant source of talents trained for satisfying the requirement of the armed forces .
 Furthermore, VPA educational institutions must provide necessary knowledge in such fields as politics, economics, culture, sociology, law, technique, technology and management for the contingent of officers and
 professional technical personnel so that when they are no longer in service, they would easily adjust to civilian life. The State implements proper training policies to
 encourage and attract numerous brilliant young students to attend officer and professional technical personnel training colleges and schools in order to create a supplementary source of talents for the armed forces.

 2.1.3. Training

 In peacetime, in parallel with political and spiritual
 building, military training is indispensable for strengthening the combat power and combat readiness of the armed forces. The VPA pays special attention to the training of individual combat skills, joint and combined operations, and making the best use of the performance as well as effectiveness of existing weapons and equipment through the application of the Vietnamese military art. It also attaches great importance to raising the knowledge on modern military technology and to renovating the content, programmes and methods of training in conformity with the organizational

 93


-----

###### size, equipment as well as realistic conditions of each category of the armed forces so as to meet the combat requirements for defending the country in new situations.

 The training is renovated comprehensively along the
 motto of “basics, practical ities, thorough grasp.” Great importance is attached to the synchronized and in-depth training, close to combat realities, the requirements, assignments and operational areas of each force and each unit, consonant with the organizational structure and equipment, and the Vietnamese military art. In training, special attention is paid to the training and exercises of area defence at various levels, to the exercises of search and rescue, of natural disaster prevention as well as overcoming natural disaster consequences, and of counterterrorism, so that the units can deal well with various situations, fulfilling excellently the assignments.

 To raise overall quality, enhance combat power as well
 as combat readiness of the VPA, the educational and training contents, programmes and methods continue to be renewed in order to be suitable for modern operational conditions. Special attention is paid to domestic and international linkage and integrated education. Great importance is attached to the training and fostering leaders and commanders with comprehensively excellent skills, military talents and skilled technical personnel. The training is close to combat requirements, combining the new way of fighting with the traditional one, selectively acquiring

 94


-----

###### experiences of other countries and combining guerrilla fighting mode with the regular force one.

 2.1.4. Weapons, Technical and Logistic Equipment

 Weapons and technical equipment play a very important
 role in modern wars. Although being a developing country with low-level of science and technology development the State of Vietnam pays attention to provide the VPA with weapons and technical equipment necessary for safeguarding the country. In order to provide the armed forces with weapons and technical equipment, in addition to conserving and maintaining well, and improving selectively the existing inventories, Vietnam has made appropriate investment in self-producing some weapons and equipment conformable with its technological capability, and at the same time, procuring some advanced weapons and technical equipment to meet the demands of strengthening the combat power of the people’s armed forces.

 Vietnam’s national defence industry is a component of
 the national industry, developed mainly in the direction of self-reliance. At the same time, cooperation with defence industries of friendly countries is being conducted so as to absorb advanced technologies with a view to raising the level of science and technology development. For the research, development and application of military
 technology and production of Vietnamese national defence industry establishments to further satisfy the requirements for repairing, improving, producing weapons and technical

 95


-----

###### equipment of the armed forces, the national defence industry develops on the basis of close linkage with other industries, mobilizing potentialities of all economic sectors in an integrated strategy.

 Logistic equipment plays an essential role in combat
 operations. The development of logistic equipment is carried out in the direction of research and improvement for raising quality of products necessary for the troops to fight under the condition of hi-tech wars. Proper investment is made in the acquisition of and research on manufacturing logistic equipment in order to meet regular demands of the VPA as well as of war situations. The scientific - technological research for the production of logistic equipment is accelerated together with strengthening the maintenance, management, reasonable use and bringing into full play the existing logistic equipment.

 2.1.5. Building and Developing the Military Science

 Experience and lessons drawn from the long history of
 armed uprisings, wars of liberation and wars of national defence have been developed into the unique military doctrine of Vietnam. Such experience and lessons have been summed up into the system of knowledge in order to find out the strength for safeguarding the country. One of the bases for creating this source of strength is the sense of national cohesion of Vietnam. That sense is shown fully in the patriotism, in the spirit of independence, self-mastery, self- reliance and self-resilience as stated by President Ho Chi

 96


-----

###### Minh “Liberate ourselves with our own power.” The military science of Vietnam always places emphasis on that great and profound lesson. Owing to this, the capabilities of the entire people and entire nation have been exploited and made full use to the maximum extent through the thousands -of-year long history to build and defend the Homeland.

 Nowadays, under the new conditions and
 circumstances, the military science of Vietnam is being enriched with theories of building the people’s armed forces and the all-people national defence in peacetime. The military science of Vietnam has been built on the basis of the military theory and practices of its own and at the same time, acquired the quintessence of the world military science and applied in conformity with the specific conditions of Vietnam, especially those related to new factors emerging from the influences of the techno-scientific revolution in military affairs.

 Coupling with the development of the military science,
 the military technology branch is also bringing into full play the tradition of “initiative, crea tiveness, self-reliance and self-resilience” in the research, development and application of new technologies, especially the information technology, in the training and education of technicians with a view to meeting the demands of conducting the people’s war against hi-tech war to safeguard the Homeland.

 The command system has satisfied the requirement of
 commanding the VPA and excellently fulfilled its tasks in

 97


-----

###### the recent wars. Nowadays, the techno -scientific
 achievements, particularly those in informati on technology, have made great strides in communication means to the service of command, control, intelli gence and “information warfare.” The big challenges of this kind of warfare require the command system of the VPA to be modernized so as to be able to meet the needs of any future war of national defence. Improving and raising the quality of the communication system play an important role in building the strength of the all-people national defence in general and the combat power of the VPA in particular.

 2.1.6. Broadening Defence International Cooperation

 Broadening external relations and heightening the
 effectiveness of international cooperation in the defence and security fields are an important orientation in the building of the VPA in the time to come.

 The cooperation in training, education, and experience
 and academic exchanges are priorities in the defence external relations of Vietnam. Vietnam advocates
 broadening international cooperation in the training of officers and high-level professional technical personnel, especially in foreign language training, military medicine as well as other militarily scientific and technological fields. In addition to sending military personnel abroad for studying and training, some schools and colleges of the VPA are expanding their training and education for students of other countries’ armed forces. Since 2007, the Vietnam’s National

 98


-----

###### Defence Academy has opened training courses for foreign high-ranking officers. Broadening relations between
 Vietnam’s academies, colleges and research institutes of national defence with foreign partners, and sending officers to attend international conferences as well as seminars are important channels for open exchanges on regional and international security issues of mutual interests, at the same time create opportunities for cooperation to raise the quality of research on new issues in the military science and art.

 Vietnam pays attention to international coopera tion in
 national defence industry in order to meet the demands for weaponry of the armed forces, to enhance capabilities of the national defence industry on the basis of the strict implementation of international commitments to arms
 control mechanism. Vietnam’s national defence industry prioritises international cooperation in the fields of technological research and transfer, weapon and equipment production and repair, and personnel training.

 To provide the VPA with modern weapons that the
 domestic defence industry is not yet capable of producing to meet the requirement of safeguarding the Homeland, Vietnam continues to acquire military weapons and equipment from traditional trading partners. At the same time, Vietnam pays attention to expanding defence trade relations with other countries in order to further satisfy the needs for technical support as well as equipment and weapons of the armed forces.

 99


-----

###### 2.2. Building the Militia and Self-Defence Force

 The Militia and Self-Defence Force is built in the
 direction of “solidity and extensiveness”, with high overall quality, first and foremost the political one, and organized into active mobile force and widespread force with appropriate quantity and proportion, and rational
 organizational structure. The quality of training milit ia commanders of communes (precincts, district towns) is further improved. The role of leadership and guidance of local Party’s executive committees and administrative authorities to the Militia and Self-Defence Force is
 strengthened, ensuring that this force is capable of fulfilling successfully its tasks and playing a pivotal and important role in the protection of the Party’s executive committees, administrative authorities and people in localities.

 Thoroughly grasping the Party’s viewpoints and
 guidelines in building the armed forces of the masses in new situations, the Militia and Self-Defence Force is re examined, consolidated to raise quality, foremost the political one. Proceeding from new requirements and assignments in modern wars, the building of an appropriate Militia and Self-Defence Force organization is carefully studied. The organization model of the Militia and Self- Defence Force is renovated in conformity with the diversity of economic sectors. The Militia and Self-Defence Force is organized in an extensive manner but with focal points, combining rudimentary with relatively modern and modern

 100


-----

###### equipment to meet the demands of foreseeable and long - term tasks.

 The training of the Militia and Self-Defence Force is
 being renovated both in contents and methods,
 concentrating on cadres drilling and fostering.
 Examinations, demonstrations and exercises are frequently held to enhance working, command, and combat
 competences of the cadres and soldiers of the Militia and Self-Defence Force. Great importance is attached to the training of combat co-ordination between the Militia and Self-Defence Force and local troops and regular troops. The Militia and Self-Defence Force is trained for better fulfilling the tasks of natural disaster relief and prevention, and protection of social security order in localities.

 The State applies an appropriately good treatment
 policy towards cadres and members of the Militia and Self- Defence Force, creating favourable conditions both
 materially and spiritually for them to operate more and more practically and effectively, so as to make worthy contribution to the cause of Homeland construction and protection

 101


-----

###### 102


-----

###### CONCLUSION


###### 103


-----

###### 104


-----

###### The White Paper on Vietnam National Defence
 provides readers with an overview on the basic issues of the Vietnam’s national defence polic y of which the building of all-people national defence, the building of the VPA and the Militia and Self-Defence Force are key matters. The issues addressed in the White Paper on Vietnam National Defence are aimed at contributing to the promotion of mutual
 understanding and confidence-building between Vietnam and other countries. This Paper is also an important document to raise the awareness of national defence for citizens of Vietnam, and help all citizens, offices, units and social organizations better understand their rights and duties to national defence consolidation for building and safeguarding the Homeland.

 In the context of complicated and unpredictable
 changes in the world and regional security, with the mixture of opportunities and challenges, Vietnam advocates the maintenance and development of a sufficiently powerful national defence, adheres to the national defence policy of peaceful and self-defence nature focusing on building the all-people national defence. Vietnam builds its armed forces “of the people, by the people and for the people.” which are closely organized and strictly disciplined, with a reasonable active force, a large and mighty reserve force. The armed forces are trained and equipped with increasingly advanced weapons to be strong enough to protect independence, sovereignty, unification, territorial integrity and the interests of the nation and the socialist regime. Vietnam accelerates

 105


-----

###### international cooperation in the national defence and
 security fields, seeks long-term solutions to territorial disputes as well as other issues by peaceful means, and contributes to building Southeast Asia into a peaceful, stable and prosperous region.

 The publication of 2009 White Paper on Vietnam
 National Defence expresses Vietnam’s desire and
 determination for the development of friendship,
 cooperation, and equal relations with all countries on the basic of mutual respect for the sake of peace, national independence, democracy and social progress./.

 106


-----

### APPENDICES


###### 107


-----

###### 108


-----

###### Appendix 1:
 Organization and Structure of the Ministry of National Defence of Vietnam


###### 109


-----

**APPENDIX 2: LIST OF VIETNAM’S NATIONAL**

**DEFENCE ATTACHÉ OFFICES**

|No.|Location|Address|Phone|
|---|---|---|---|
||||Fax|
|1|Laos|No. 65, Saomsayha Rd., Vientiane, Laos|00.856.21412403|
||||00.856.21416352|
|2|Cambodia|No.75, 214 Rd., 7/1 Dist., Phnom Penh, Cambodia|00.855.12595443|
||||00.855.23801430|
|3|Indonesia|Ambassador Mall, JS Sura Sarid, Indonesia|00.62816876373|
||||00.62215265093|
|4|Malaysia|No.7, Lorongsan Ah wing, Off Jalan samarak, 54100, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia|00.603.26913522|
||||00.603.26913566|
|5|Myanmar|No.45, Inyamaing Rd.,Bahan Township, Yangon, Union of Myanmar|00.95.1537823|
|||||
|6|The Philippines|No.670, Pabio, Ocampo, Malate, Manila, the Philippines|00.63.25280474|
||||00.63.25280476|
|7|Singapore|No.62, Farrer Rd. # 03 - 01, Spanish Village, Singapore 268847|00.65.64757491|
||||00.65.64632817|
|8|Thailand|No.1479, Pichaya Lasalle, Soi Sukhumvit 105 (Soi Lasalle), Bangna, Bangkok 10260 Thailand|00.66.23839284|
||||00.66.23839285|


###### 110


-----

|No.|Location|Address|Phone|
|---|---|---|---|
||||Fax|
|9|China|No.32, Guang Hua Rd., Chao yang Dist., Beijing, China|00.86.1065323593|
||||00.86.1065323593|
|10|Korea, Republic|No.726-62, Hannam 2 - dong, Yongsan – gu, Seoul, ROK|00.82.27498362|
||||00.82.27493275|
|11|Korea, DPRK|No.7, Moonsoo dong- Dong Pyong Yang- Pyongang, DPRK|00.86.1065442327|
|||||
|12|Japan|Yoyogi 3-57-6, Room 305, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 151-0053, Japan|00.81.35320617|
||||00.81.35320617|
|13|India|B1/70, Safdarjung Enclave, New Delhi - 110029, India|00.911146019697|
||||00.91.26161571|
|14|United States (concurrently in charge of Canada)|1233, 20th St., NW, Suite 201, Washington D.C., 20036, USA|00.01.202.2931822|
||||00.01.202.2931842|
|15|Brazil|SHIS QI-13, Conjunto 12-Casa 16, Lago Sul, Brasilia, Brazil|00.55.6132547957|
||||00.55.6132480669|
|16|Cuba|No 15201, Avenida 1ra A, Esq.154 Reparto Nautico, Municipio Playa, Ciudad La Habana|00.53.7.2044087|
||||00.53.7.2086418|
|17|Russia|No.30, Tverxkaia St., Iamskaya 1. Moscow, Russia|00.74.952518950|
||||00.74.952502138|
|18|Ukraine|No.51-A, Tavarna St., Kiev 01103, Ukraine|00.380.442845740|
||||00.380.442845542|


###### 111


-----

|No.|Location|Address|Phone|
|---|---|---|---|
||||Fax|
|19|Bulgaria|No.7, 507 St. Semeonovo, Sofia, Bulgaria|00.359.29613257|
||||00.359.29613429|
|20|France|No.45 bis, Av. Division Leclerc, 92320 Chatillon|00.33.157630353|
||||00.33.157637036|
|21|South Africa|Rem. Ext of Erf 551,No.302, NicholsonSt., Brooklyn Pretoria, Republic of South Africa|00.27.124608863|
||||00.27.124608872|
|22|Australia|No.4, Broinowski PL., ISAACS, ACT 2670, Australia|00.61.262901590|
||||00.61.262868630|
|23|Algeria|No.38, Rue Des Tourelles, Hydra, Alger, Algeria|00.21.321.603854|
||||00.21.321.603854|
|24|Germany|Platanenallee 12a, 14050, Berlin-Westend, Germany|00.49.3042023593|
||||00.49.3042023794|
|25|Venezuela|Mamabiba Building, Tropical Rd., La Floresta, Chacao dist., Caracas, Venezuela|n/a|
|||||
|26|Czech Republic|n/a||
|27|Belarus|n/a||
|28|Spain|n/a||
|29|Brunei|n/a||


###### 112


-----

**APPENDIX 3:**

**LIST OF MAJOR ACADEMIES, COLLEGES OF THE**

**VIETNAM PEOPLE’S ARM** **Y**

**A. Ministerial Level**

**Name** **Traditional** **Contact Address**

**Day**

###### National Jan. 03, 1977 No.93, Hoang Quoc Defence Viet Rd., Hanoi Academy

 Political Oct. 25, 1951 Ngo Quyen Rd., Ha Academy Dong, Hanoi
 Army Jul. 07, 1946 9[th] Ward, Dalat, Lam Academy Dong

 Military Oct. 28, 1966 100, Hoang Quoc Viet Technology Rd., Hanoi Academy

 Logistics Jun. 15, 1951 Ngoc Thuy Ward, Academy Long Bien Dist., Hanoi

 Medical Mar.10, 1949 Phung Hung Rd., Ha Academy Dong, Hanoi

 1st Army Apr. 15, 1945 Co Dong Commune,
 College Son Tay, Hanoi

 2nd Army Aug. 27, 1961 Tam Phuoc Commune,
 College Long Thanh, Dong Nai

 College of Jan. 14, 1976 Bac Ninh Town, Bac
 Political Ninh Officers

 113

|No.|Name|Traditional Day|Contact Address|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|National Defence Academy|Jan. 03, 1977|No.93, Hoang Quoc Viet Rd., Hanoi|
|2|Political Academy|Oct. 25, 1951|Ngo Quyen Rd., Ha Dong, Hanoi|
|3|Army Academy|Jul. 07, 1946|9th Ward, Dalat, Lam Dong|
|4|Military Technology Academy|Oct. 28, 1966|100, Hoang Quoc Viet Rd., Hanoi|
|5|Logistics Academy|Jun. 15, 1951|Ngoc Thuy Ward, Long Bien Dist., Hanoi|
|6|Medical Academy|Mar.10, 1949|Phung Hung Rd., Ha Dong, Hanoi|
|7|1st Army College|Apr. 15, 1945|Co Dong Commune, Son Tay, Hanoi|
|8|2nd Army College|Aug. 27, 1961|Tam Phuoc Commune, Long Thanh, Dong Nai|
|9|College of Political Officers|Jan. 14, 1976|Bac Ninh Town, Bac Ninh|


-----

**B. Service, Arm, General Department Levels**

|No.|Name|Traditional Day|Contact Address|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|Academy of Military Sciences|Jun. 10, 1957|No.322, Le Trong Tan St., Hoang Mai, Hanoi|
|2|Naval Academy|Apr.26,1955|No.30, Tran Phu Rd., Nha Trang, Khanh Hoa|
|3|Academy of Air Defence – Air Force|Jul.16, 1964|Kim Son Commune & Trung Son Tram Commune, Son Tay, Hanoi|
|4|Academy of Border Guard|May 20, 1963|Son Loc Quarter, Son Tay, Hanoi|
|5|College of Army Culture and Arts|Sept. 23, 1955|No. 100, Nguyen Chi Thanh Rd., Dong Da, Hanoi|
|6|College of Air Force Officers|Aug. 20, 1959|Nha Trang, Khanh Hoa|
|7|College of Tank & Amour Officers|Apr. 10,1973|Vinh Yen Rd., Tam Dao Dist., Vinh Phuc|
|8|College of Signals Officers|Jul. 20, 1967|Nha Trang, Khanh Hoa|
|9|College of Engineering Officers|Dec. 26, 1955|Thu Dau Mot Town, Binh Duong|
|10|College of Chemical Defence Officers|Sept. 21, 1976|Son Dong Commune, Son Tay Dist., Hanoi|
|11|College of Artillery Officers|Feb. 18, 1957|Trung Son Tram Commune, Son Tay, Hanoi|


###### 114


-----

|No.|Name|Traditional Day|Contact Address|
|---|---|---|---|
|12|College of Special Operation Officers|Jul. 20, 1967|Xuan Mai Town, Chuong My Dist., Hanoi|
|13|Vinhem Pic Technical Junior College|May. 27, 1978|No.189, Nguyen Oanh, Go Vap, Ho Chi Minh City|


###### 115


-----

**APPENDIX 4**

**LIST OF MAJOR RESEARCH INSTITUTES OF THE**

**VIETNAM PEOPLE’S ARM** **Y**

|No|Name|Traditional Day|Contact Address|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|Institute for Military Strategy|Jan. 11, 1990|No.3B, Hoang Dieu St., Hanoi|
|2|Institute for Military Science and Technology|Oct. 12, 1060|No.17, Hoang Sam St., Hanoi|
|3|Institute for Defence International Relations|Dec. 21, 2002|Nhan My, My Dinh, Tu Liem, Hanoi|
|4|Institute for Military History|May 28, 1981|No.3B, Hoang Dieu St., Hanoi|
|5|Institute for Military Art|Jan. 03, 1977|No.93, Hoang Quoc Viet Rd., Hanoi|
|6|Institute for Military Social Sciences and Humanities|Dec. 21, 2002|Ngo Quyen, Ha Dong, Hanoi|


###### 116


-----

**APPENDIX 5: TRADITIONAL DAYS OF MAJOR UNITS**

**Unit** **Traditional Day**

Vietnam People’s Army Dec. 12, 1944

General Staff Headquarters Set. 07, 1945

General Political Department Dec. 22, 1944

General Department of Logistics Jul. 11, 1950

General Department of Technology Sep. 10, 1974

General Department of Military Industry Sep. 15, 1945

General Department of Defence Oct. 25, 1945
Intelligence

Military Region 1 Oct. 16, 1945

Military Region 2 Oct. 19, 1946

Military Region 3 Oct. 31, 1945

Military Region 4 Oct. 15, 1945

Military Region 5 Oct. 16, 1945

Military Region 7 Dec. 10, 1945

Military Region 9 Dec. 10, 1945

Air Defence – Air Force Oct. 22, 1963

Navy May, 07, 1955

Border Guard Mar.03, 1959

Corps 1 Oct. 24, 1973

Corps 2 May 17, 1974

Corps 3 Mar.26, 1975

Corps 4 Jul. 20, 1974

Engineering Arm Mar. 25, 1946

Special Operation Arm Mar. 19, 1947

Chemical Arm Apr. 19, 1958

Artillery Arm Jun. 29, 1946

Tank-Amour Arm Oct. 05, 1959

Signals Arm Sep. 09, 1945

Foreign Relations Department May 28, 1964

Maritime Police Department Aug. 28, 1998

###### 117

|No|Unit|Traditional Day|
|---|---|---|
|1|Vietnam People’s Army|Dec. 12, 1944|
|2|General Staff Headquarters|Set. 07, 1945|
|3|General Political Department|Dec. 22, 1944|
|4|General Department of Logistics|Jul. 11, 1950|
|5|General Department of Technology|Sep. 10, 1974|
|6|General Department of Military Industry|Sep. 15, 1945|
|7|General Department of Defence Intelligence|Oct. 25, 1945|
|8|Military Region 1|Oct. 16, 1945|
|9|Military Region 2|Oct. 19, 1946|
|10|Military Region 3|Oct. 31, 1945|
|11|Military Region 4|Oct. 15, 1945|
|12|Military Region 5|Oct. 16, 1945|
|13|Military Region 7|Dec. 10, 1945|
|14|Military Region 9|Dec. 10, 1945|
|16|Air Defence – Air Force|Oct. 22, 1963|
|17|Navy|May, 07, 1955|
|18|Border Guard|Mar.03, 1959|
|19|Corps 1|Oct. 24, 1973|
|20|Corps 2|May 17, 1974|
|21|Corps 3|Mar.26, 1975|
|22|Corps 4|Jul. 20, 1974|
|23|Engineering Arm|Mar. 25, 1946|
|24|Special Operation Arm|Mar. 19, 1947|
|25|Chemical Arm|Apr. 19, 1958|
|26|Artillery Arm|Jun. 29, 1946|
|27|Tank-Amour Arm|Oct. 05, 1959|
|28|Signals Arm|Sep. 09, 1945|
|29|Foreign Relations Department|May 28, 1964|
|30|Maritime Police Department|Aug. 28, 1998|


-----

**APPENDIX 6: LIST OF ECONOMIC-DEFENCE ZONES**

**No** **Name** **Location**

1 Mau Son Economic - Defence Zone Lang Son

2 Bao Lac-Bao Lam Economic - Defence Zone Cao Bang

3 Muong Cha Economic - Defence Zone Dien Bien

4 Vi Xuyen Economic - Defence Zone Ha Gang

5 Xin Man Economic - Defence Zone Ha Gang

6 Bat Sat Economic - Defence Zone Lao Cai
Province

7 Song Ma Economic - Defence Zone Son La

8 Phong Tho Economic - Defence Zone Lai Chau

9 Bac Hai Son Economic - Defence Zone Quang Ninh

10 Binh Lieu-Quang Ha-Mong Cai Quang Ninh
Economic - Defence Zone

11 Khe Sanh Economic - Defence Zone Quang Tri

12 Aso-Aluoi Economic - Defence Zone Thua ThienHue

13 Ky Son Economic - Defence Zone Nghe An

14 Muong Lat Economic - Defence Zone Thanh Hoa

15 Cumga Economic - Defence Zone Dak Lak

16 Tay Giang Economic - Defence Zone Quang Nam

17 Bu Gia Phuc-Bu Gia Map Economic - Binh Phuoc

Defence Zone

18 Bac Lam Dong Economic - Defence Zone Lam Dong

19 Tan Hong Economic - Defence Zone Dong Thap

20 Quang Son Economic - Defence Zone Dak Lak

21 Economic - Defence Zone of the 15[th] corps Gia Lai,
Kontum,
Dak Lak

22 Economic - Defence Zone of the 16 [th] corps Dak Lak,
Binh Phuoc

###### 118

|No|Name|Location|
|---|---|---|
|1|Mau Son Economic - Defence Zone|Lang Son|
|2|Bao Lac-Bao Lam Economic - Defence Zone|Cao Bang|
|3|Muong Cha Economic - Defence Zone|Dien Bien|
|4|Vi Xuyen Economic - Defence Zone|Ha Gang|
|5|Xin Man Economic - Defence Zone|Ha Gang|
|6|Bat Sat Economic - Defence Zone|Lao Cai Province|
|7|Song Ma Economic - Defence Zone|Son La|
|8|Phong Tho Economic - Defence Zone|Lai Chau|
|9|Bac Hai Son Economic - Defence Zone|Quang Ninh|
|10|Binh Lieu-Quang Ha-Mong Cai Economic - Defence Zone|Quang Ninh|
|11|Khe Sanh Economic - Defence Zone|Quang Tri|
|12|Aso-Aluoi Economic - Defence Zone|Thua Thien- Hue|
|13|Ky Son Economic - Defence Zone|Nghe An|
|14|Muong Lat Economic - Defence Zone|Thanh Hoa|
|15|Cumga Economic - Defence Zone|Dak Lak|
|16|Tay Giang Economic - Defence Zone|Quang Nam|
|17|Bu Gia Phuc-Bu Gia Map Economic - Defence Zone|Binh Phuoc|
|18|Bac Lam Dong Economic - Defence Zone|Lam Dong|
|19|Tan Hong Economic - Defence Zone|Dong Thap|
|20|Quang Son Economic - Defence Zone|Dak Lak|
|21|Economic - Defence Zone of the 15th corps|Gia Lai, Kontum, Dak Lak|
|22|Economic - Defence Zone of the 16th corps|Dak Lak, Binh Phuoc|


-----

**APPENDIX 7: LIST OF MAJOR DEFENCE GENERAL**

**CORPORATIONS**

**Names** **Traditional** **Main Headquarters**

**Day**

Truong Son May 19, No. 475, Nguyen Trai,
Construction General 1959 Thanh Xuan, Hanoi
Corporation

Northeast Dec. 24, Hong Hai Ward, Ha
General Corporation 1994 Long, Quang Ninh

Flight Services Jun. 01, No. 172, Truong Chinh
General Corporation 1989 Rd., Dong Da, Hanoi

Military Jun.01, No. 1, Giang Van Minh,
Telecommunication 1989 Ba Dinh, Hanoi
General Corporation
(Viettel)

General Corporation Feb. 20, Yen The Ward, Pleiku,
No.15 1985 Gia Lai

Military Petrol General Sep. 30, No 125, Nguyen Phong
Corporation 1965 Sac, Dich Vong, Cau

Giay, Hanoi

General Corporation No May 09, No.3, Nguyen Oanh,
28 1975 10[th] Ward, Go Vap

Dist.,
Ho Chi Minh City

Thanh An Jun. 11, No. 141, Ho Dac Di,
General Corporation 1982 Nam Dong, Dong Da,

Hanoi

Tan Cang Mar. 15, Dien Bien Phu Rd, 22th
General Corporation 1989 Ward, Binh Thanh Dist,

Ho Chi Minh City

Military Bank Nov. 04, No. 3, Lieu Giai Rd.,
1994 Ba Dinh District, Hanoi

###### 119

|No|Names|Traditional Day|Main Headquarters|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|Truong Son Construction General Corporation|May 19, 1959|No. 475, Nguyen Trai, Thanh Xuan, Hanoi|
|2|Northeast General Corporation|Dec. 24, 1994|Hong Hai Ward, Ha Long, Quang Ninh|
|3|Flight Services General Corporation|Jun. 01, 1989|No. 172, Truong Chinh Rd., Dong Da, Hanoi|
|4|Military Telecommunication General Corporation (Viettel)|Jun.01, 1989|No. 1, Giang Van Minh, Ba Dinh, Hanoi|
|5|General Corporation No.15|Feb. 20, 1985|Yen The Ward, Pleiku, Gia Lai|
|6|Military Petrol General Corporation|Sep. 30, 1965|No 125, Nguyen Phong Sac, Dich Vong, Cau Giay, Hanoi|
|7|General Corporation No 28|May 09, 1975|No.3, Nguyen Oanh, 10thWard, Go Vap Dist., Ho Chi Minh City|
|8|Thanh An General Corporation|Jun. 11, 1982|No. 141, Ho Dac Di, Nam Dong, Dong Da, Hanoi|
|9|Tan Cang General Corporation|Mar. 15, 1989|Dien Bien Phu Rd, 22th Ward, Binh Thanh Dist, Ho Chi Minh City|
|10|Military Bank|Nov. 04, 1994|No. 3, Lieu Giai Rd., Ba Dinh District, Hanoi|


-----

**APPENDIX 8: AGREEMENTS ON BORDER ISSUES**

|1|Vietnam-China Agreement on Maritime Boundary Demarcation of the Gulf of Tonkin|
|---|---|
|2|Vietnam-China Agreement on Fishery Cooperation in the Gulf of Tonkin|
|3|Vietnam-China Agreement on Land Border Demarcation|
|4|Vietnam-Lao Agreement on Land Border Demarcation|
|5|Vietnam-Cambodia Agreement on Land Border Demarcation|
|6|Vietnam-Cambodia Agreement on Delimitation of the Historical Waters|
|7|Vietnam-Thailand Agreement on Delimitation of the Historical Sea Zone|
|8|Vietnam-Indonesia Agreement on Delimitation of the Continental Shelf|
|9|Vietnam-Malaysia Arrangement on Mutual Survey and Exploitation of the Overlapping Zone|


###### 120


-----

**APPENDIX 9: MILITARY FLAG, MILITARY BADGE,**

**INSIGNIA, UNIFORMS**

**III. RANK BADGE**


NAVY BORDER

GUARD

Vice Admiral Lieutenant

General


MARITIME

POLICE

Major

General


1. Officer

a. General

Grade

b. Field
Officer Grade

c. Company
Officer Grade


ARMY AIR

DEFENCE
AIR FORCE

General Sr. Lt.

General


Sr. Col. Colonel Commander Lt. Major Major


Sr.

Capt.


Captain Lieutenant First

Lieutenant


Second

Lieutenant

###### 121


-----

NAVY BORDER

GUARD


MARITIM
E POLICE


2.
Professional
warrant
officer

3. Noncommissioned
officer and
soldier

4. Cadet

5. Noncommissioned
student

**1. Badge Plate**

a. General Grade


ARMY AIR DEFENCE
AIR FORCE

Colonel Lieutenant

Major


Lt.

Commander


Captain Warrant

Officer


Major

sergeant


Sergeant Corporal Lance
Corporal

**IV. INSIGNIA**


Private


Army AD - AF Navy Border Guard

b. Officer, non-Commissioned Officer and Enlisted Soldier


Army Air Defence
Air Force


Navy Border Guard Maritime

Police


###### 122


-----

**2. Branch Insignia and Symbols**


Joint Forces,

Army

Chemical

Defence


Mechanized

Infantry

Air

Defence –

Air force


Artillery Engineering Tank-Amour Special

Operations


Radar Missile Air Defence

Artillery


Signals


Parachute Navy


Marine Force Maritime

Police

Driver Military

Band


Border

Guard


Gymnastic and Sports

Troupe


Logistics
Finance


Technical

Branch


Medical

Service


Martial

Law

###### 123


Song and Dance Troupe


-----

###### 124


-----

###### 125


-----

###### 126


-----

###### 127


-----

###### 128


-----

###### 129


-----

###### 130


-----

###### 131


-----

###### 132


-----

###### 133


-----

###### 134


-----

###### 135


-----

**APPENDIX 10**

**EXCHANGE OF HIGH-LEVEL MILITARY DELEGATIONS**

**From 2005 to first six months of 2009**

**INCOMING VISIT**

**Time** **Delegation**

**_2005_**

Jan. 28-29 Minister of Defence, Laos

Feb. 23-25 Chief of General Staff, Algeria

Mar. 07-10 Commander in Chief, Cambodia Royal Army

Apr. 06-8 Minister of Defence, Australia

Apr. 20-25 Chief of General Staff, Laos

Apr. 18-21 Commander of Defence Forces, Singapore

Apr.27-May 02 Minister of Revolutionary Armed Forces, Cuba

May 17-21 Chief of Staff of Armed Forces, the Philippines

Aug.31-Sept 02 Minister of Defence, Laos

Aug. 29-30 Minister of Defence, Cambodia

Sept. 19-20 Supreme Commander of Royal Armed Forces,
Thailand

Oct. 18-20 Minister of Defence, South Africa

Oct. 22-29 Chief of General Staff, Belgium

Dec. 20-23 Co-Minister of Defence, Cambodia

Feb. 23-27 Air Commander, Australia

Mar. 21-25 Deputy Director of Security Agency, Russia

Apr. 04-10 Chief of General Department of Logistics, Laos

Apr. 25-29 Chief of General Department of Defence
Intelligence, South Africa

Jun. 01-03 Navy Commander, Thailand

Jun. 01-04 Director of Federal Bureau, Russia

Jun. 07-09 Assistant Minister of Defence, USA

Jun. 20-Jul.01 Air Commander, Cuba

Jul. 02-08 Deputy Chief of General Staff, Laos

Jul. 12-13 Army Commander, Thailand

Jul. 17-19 Air Commander, Malaysia

###### 136

|INCOMING VISIT|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Time|Delegation||
|2005|||
|Jan. 28-29||Minister of Defence, Laos|
|Feb. 23-25||Chief of General Staff, Algeria|
|Mar. 07-10||Commander in Chief, Cambodia Royal Army|
|Apr. 06-8||Minister of Defence, Australia|
|Apr. 20-25||Chief of General Staff, Laos|
|Apr. 18-21||Commander of Defence Forces, Singapore|
|Apr.27-May 02||Minister of Revolutionary Armed Forces, Cuba|
|May 17-21||Chief of Staff of Armed Forces, the Philippines|
|Aug.31-Sept 02||Minister of Defence, Laos|
|Aug. 29-30||Minister of Defence, Cambodia|
|Sept. 19-20||Supreme Commander of Royal Armed Forces, Thailand|
|Oct. 18-20||Minister of Defence, South Africa|
|Oct. 22-29||Chief of General Staff, Belgium|
|Dec. 20-23||Co-Minister of Defence, Cambodia|
|Feb. 23-27||Air Commander, Australia|
|Mar. 21-25||Deputy Director of Security Agency, Russia|
|Apr. 04-10||Chief of General Department of Logistics, Laos|
|Apr. 25-29||Chief of General Department of Defence Intelligence, South Africa|
|Jun. 01-03||Navy Commander, Thailand|
|Jun. 01-04||Director of Federal Bureau, Russia|
|Jun. 07-09||Assistant Minister of Defence, USA|
|Jun. 20-Jul.01||Air Commander, Cuba|
|Jul. 02-08||Deputy Chief of General Staff, Laos|
|Jul. 12-13||Army Commander, Thailand|
|Jul. 17-19||Air Commander, Malaysia|


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|Jul. 21-25|Delegation of Bureau of Central Military Commission, China|
|Aug. 01-05|Army Commander, Cambodia|
|Aug. 02-06|Governmental Special Section, Laos|
|Sep. 26-30|Delegation of Governmental Special Section, Cambodia|
|Oct. 16-20|Deputy Chief of General Political Department, the People’s Army of Laos|
|Oct.30-Nov.2|Chief of General Department of Police, Cambodia|
|Nov. 14-19|Deputy Minister of National Defence, Brunei|
|Nov. 28-30|Chairman of Ukrainian Subcommittee, Inter - Governmental Committee|
|Dec. 04-07|Chairman of Russian Subcommittee, Inter - Governmental Committee|
|2006||
|Feb. 06-09|Minister of Defence, Laos|
|Apr. 06-10|Minister of Defence, PRC|
|May 15-18|Chief of General Staff of Armed Forces, the Philippines|
|May 30-Jun.02|Minister of Defence, Republic of Korea|
|Jun. 04-06|Secretary of Defence, USA|
|Jun. 07-11|Chief of General Political Department, Laos|
|Jun. 12-17|Chief of General Staff, Republic of South Africa|
|Sep. 10-12|Minister of Defence, Laos|
|Dec. 20-24|Commander of Armed Forces, Malaysia|
|Jan. 05-07|Chief of General Department of Intelligence, Russia|
|Feb. 08-10|Commander of Army, Singapore|
|Feb. 15-16|Commander of Royal Air Force, Thailand|
|Mar. 07-10|Chief of General Department of Intelligence, ROK|
|Mar. 14-17|Chairman of Ukrainian Subcommittee|
|Mar. 14-19|Chief of Staff of Air Force, France|


###### 137


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|Mar. 28-31|Commander of Military Region I, Cambodia|
|May 02-06|Chief of Staff of Army, Russia|
|May 02-07|Committee on Defence Industrial and Logistical Cooperation, Republic of Korea|
|May 03-06|Navy Commander, Malaysia|
|May 18-24|General Department of Military Medicine, Russia|
|May 20-26|Chief of General Department of Materials, Angola|
|May 23-26|Director of Intelligence Agency, the Philippines|
|May 26-28|Deputy Minister of Defence, Laos|
|Jun. 22-26|General Department of Military International Cooperation, Russia|
|Jul. 13-16|Commander of the Pacific Command, USA|
|Jul. 14-17|Deputy Chief of General Staff, Laos|
|Aug. 02-05|Navy Commander, Republic of Korea|
|Aug. 06-12|Deputy Chief of General Staff, Laos|
|Aug. 07-10|Commander of Navy, Thailand|
|Aug. 16-22|Deputy Chief of General Staff, Laos|
|Aug. 24-28|Army Commander, Malaysia|
|Sep. 10-17|Delegation of Ministry of Emergency, Russia|
|Oct. 12-14|Deputy Minister of Defence, India|
|Oct. 13-17|Army Commander, Australia|
|Dec. 03-08|Chengdu Military Region, China|
|Dec. 06-07|Army Commander, Thailand|
|Dec. 20-24|Commander of Armed Forces, Malaysia|
|2007||
|Jan. 04-05|Supreme Commander of Thai Royal Armed Forces|
|May 02-08|Chief of General Staff, Laos|
|May 30-Jun.06|Chief of General Staff, PRC|
|Jul. 02-06|Chief of General Staff, Mozambique|
|Aug. 18-24|Chief of General Staff, Sudan|
|Sep. 24-29|Minister of Defence, Singapore|


###### 138


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|Sep.30-Oct.10|Minister of Defence, Bulgaria|
|Oct. 15-21|Commander-in-Chief of Royal Armed Forces, Cambodia|
|Nov. 15-19|Chief of General Political Department, PRC|
|Mar. 04-07|Army Chief of Staff, Japan|
|Apr. 02-04|Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Defence, Singapore|
|Apr. 19-23|Commander, Guangxi Military Region, PRC|
|Jun 10-13|Deputy Chief of General Staff, Laos|
|Jun. 10-15|Secretary, Ministry of National Defence, Cambodia|
|Jun. 15-18|General Department of Intelligence, Thailand|
|Aug. 12-14|Air Commander, Indonesia|
|Sep. 10-13|Navy Commander, Australia|
|Sep. 10-16|Governmental Special Section, Laos|
|Sep. 11-12|Army Commander, Thailand|
|Sep. 23-29|Deputy Chief of General Staff, Laos|
|Sep. 24-30|Deputy Minister of Defence, Laos|
|Sep. 24-30|Head of Central Military Procuracy, Hungary|
|Oct. 22-26|Governmental Special Committee, Cambodia|
|Nov. 07-10|Commander of Defence Intelligence, South Africa|
|Nov. 14-17|Navy Commander, the Philippines|
|Nov. 13-18|Air Commander, New Zealand|
|Nov. 08-13|Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defence, USA|
|Nov. 28-30|Deputy Chief of General Staff, Laos|
|Dec. 03-07|Chairman of Russia-Vietnam Cooperation Subcommittee|
|Dec. 06-07|Chief of General Department of Intelligence, Russia|
|Dec. 06-08|General Secretary of Defence, Italy|
|Dec.10-14|Chairman of Ukraine -Vietnam Cooperation Subcommittee|


###### 139


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|Dec. 12-13|Commander of the Pacific Command, USA|
|Dec. 18-20|Army Commander, Thailand|
|Dec. 18-22|Chairman of Belarus - Vietnam Cooperation Subcommittee|
|2008||
|Feb. 17-20|Minister of Defence, Laos|
|Feb. 26-29|Chairman of Committee of Chief of Staff, India|
|Mar. 24-26|Minister of Defence, Cambodia|
|Apr. 2-4|Commander of Defence Forces, Singapore|
|May 12-18|Chief of General Political Department, Laos|
|Jul. 7-8|Supreme Commander of Thai Royal Army|
|Aug. 6-9|Commander of Defence Forces, New Zealand|
|Nov. 6-7|Minister of Defence, Poland|
|Nov. 9-13|Chief of General Staff, Bulgaria|
|Nov. 18-22|Chief of General Staff, Belarus|
|Nov. 30-Dec. 5|Secretary General of Defence, Algeria|
|Dec. 23-26|Minister of Defence, Pakistan|
|Jan. 14-17|Division 2, Division 3 and provinces of Northern Laos|
|Jan. 20-22|Army Commander, the Philippines|
|Jan. 23-30|Subcommittee of Belarusian Inter-Governmental Committee|
|Mar. 2-12|Subcommittee of Russian Inter-Governmental Committee|
|Mar. 9-13|Air Commander, Singapore|
|Apr. 21-23|Air Commander, Thailand|
|May 18-21|Commander of 13th Air Corps, USA|
|May 27-29|Director of Defence Intelligence, Singapore|
|Jun. 25-28|Navy Commander, Thailand|
|Aug. 20-21|Army Commander, Thailand|
|Jul. 27- Aug. 2|Deputy Director of Russian Federal Agency|
|Sep. 7-12|Army Chief of Staff, Rwanda|
|Jul. 10-13|General Department of Intelligence, ROK|


###### 140


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|Oct. 6-12|Commander of Air Force, Cambodia|
|Oct. 6-8|Commander of Army, Singapore|
|Oct. 9-11|Deputy Minister of National Defence, India in Security Dialogue|
|Oct. 20-24|Commander of Special Military Region, Cambodia|
|Nov. 2-6|Deputy Chief of General Political Department, China|
|Dec. 7-12|Command of Army, Cambodia|
|Dec. 14-18|Deputy Commander, Chief of Staff of Air Force, Russia|
|First 6 months of 2009||
|Feb. 19-21|Supreme Commander of Thai Royal Army|
|Mar. 8-12|Commander in Chief of Cambodian Royal Army|
|Mar. 20-24|Chief of General Staff, China|
|Feb. 12-14|Commander of Navy, Thailand|
|Feb. 15-17|Deputy Chief of General Staff, China (in transit)|
|Feb. 23-26|Army Training Command, India|
|Feb. 24-26|Navy Commander, Malaysia|
|Mar. 8-13|Commander of Pacific Fleet, USA|
|Mar. 16-18|General Department of Logistics, India|
|Mar. 17-21|Navy Commander, Cambodia|
|Mar. 23-25|Navy Commander, Indonesia|
|Apr. 28 – May 1|First Deputy Chief of General Political Department, PDRK Army|
|Apr. 7-11|Commander of Eastern Navy, India|
|Apr. 13-15|Navy Commander, Singapore|
|May 26-29|Minister of National Defence, Belarus|
|May 11-15|Chief of General Staff, Laos|
|May 5-6|Deputy Minister of Defence, Japan|
|May|Army Command, Russian Armed Forces|
|May 13-17|Secretary of Defence, New Zealand|
|May 14-25|Russian and Ukrainian Veterans in Vietnam War|


###### 141


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|May 21-24|Chairman of Russian Subcommittee, Russia - Vietnam Intergovernmental Committee on Military Technical Cooperation|
|May 23-31|Director of Defence Legal Agency, South Africa|
|Jun. 17-29|Belarusian Veterans in Vietnam War|
|Jun. 15-19|Secretary, Ministry of National Defence, Cambodia|
|Jun. 10-13|Pacific Air Commander, USA|
|Jun. 8-12|Minister of Defence, Laos|
|Jun. 8-12|Chief of General Department of Logistics, Laos|
|Jun. 18-24|Chief of General Department of Logistics, Laos and his family|
|Jun. 20-27|Army Commander, Cambodia|
|OUTGOING VISIT||
|Time|Delegation|
|2005||
|Mar. 2-7|Minister of National Defence to Laos and India|
|Apr. 3-10|Chief of General Staff to Myanmar and the Philippines|
|May 10-14|Chief of General Political Department to Laos|
|Oct. 25-28|Minister of National Defence to PRC|
|Jan. 16-19|Deputy Chief of General Staff attended ASEAN Chief of General Staff Meeting in Malaysia|
|Mar. 20-25|Commander of the 7th Military Region to Cambodia|
|Mar. 25-30|Commander of the 5th Military Region to Cambodia|
|Mar. 24- Apr. 7|Navy Commander to Russia and Poland|
|Apr. 10-15|Deputy Chief of General Staff to PRC|
|Apr. 4 – May 1|Deputy Minister of National Defence accompanied Prime Minister to Australia and New Zealand|


###### 142


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|May 3-10|Deputy Minister of National Defence to Cambodia|
|May 17-20|Deputy Minister of National Defence attended the ARF Security Policy Meeting in Vientiane, Laos|
|May 15-21|Deputy Chief of General Staff to Russia|
|Jun. 19-29|Deputy Minister of National Defence accompanied Prime Minister to the USA and Canada|
|Jun. 12-18|Commander of the 4th Military Region to Laos|
|Jun. 19-27|President of National Defence Academy to the UK|
|Jul. 25-29|Commander of Border Guard to Cambodia|
|Jul. 3-14|Deputy Chief of General Staff to the UK and Hungary|
|Jul. 31 – Aug. 5|Deputy Chief of General Staff attend ed the Pacific Army Commander Meeting in Thailand|
|Sep. 5-14|Deputy Chief of General Staff to Sweden|
|Sep. 7-12|Deputy Chief of General Staff to India|
|Sep. 25-30|Deputy Chief of General Staff attended the ASEAN Army Commander Meeting in Brunei|
|Sep. 4-10|General Director of the General Department of Defence Intelligence to the Philippines and Indonesia|
|Oct. 10-13|Navy Commander to the Philippines|
|Oct. 18-22|Commander of the 9th Military Region to Cambodia|
|Nov. 14-20|Deputy Minister of National Defence to France|
|Nov. 10-12|Deputy Chief of General Staff attended ASEAN Defence Force Commander Meeting in the Philippines|
|Nov. 14-25|Chief of General Political Department to PRC|
|Dec. 10-16|Navy Commander to France and Italy|


###### 143


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|2006||
|Jan. 2-9|Commander of the 7th Military Region to Cambodia|
|Jan.9-13|Navy Commander to Cambodia|
|Jan. 12-14|Commander of the 7th Military Region to Cambodia|
|Feb. 13-19|Chief of General Political Department to India|
|Mar. 8-11|Minister of National Defence to Malaysia|
|May 7-13|Minister of National Defence to South Africa|
|Sep. 24-30|Chief of General Staff to Laos and Cambodia|
|Oct. 15-22|Chief of General Political Department to PRC|
|Nov.27-Dec. 7|Chief of General Political Department to Cuba|
|May 8-10|Deputy Minister of National Defence attended the 1st ADMM in Malaysia|
|Apr. 16-May 1|Deputy Minister of National Defence attended the ARF Security Meeting in Malaysia|
|Feb. 13-20|Deputy Chief of General Staff to Southern Laos (1)|
|Mar. 2-10|Deputy Chief of General Staff to Southern Laos (2)|
|Mar. 21-27|Commander of Air Defence-Air Force to Ukraine|
|Jun. 3-7|Commander of the 9th Military Region to Cambodia|
|Jun. 5-10|General Director of the General Department Of Defence Intelligence to Ukraine|
|Jun. 11-21|Deputy Chief of General Staff to Sweden|
|Jun. 6 – Jul. 3|Chief of General Department of Defence Industry to France and some European countries|
|Jul. 2-9|Deputy Minister to Austria|
|Aug. 8-12|Commander of Capital Military Region to Laos|
|Sep. 26-Oct.8|Vice Chairman of National Committee of Search and Rescue to the USA|
|Oct. 17-2?|Deputy Chief of General Staff to the Republic of Korea|


###### 144


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|Oct. 21-5?|General Director of the General Department of Defence Intelligence to Russia|
|Oct. 11-19|Chief of General Department of Defence Industry to South Africa|
|Oct. 28 – Nov. 3|Navy Commander attended the West Pacific Navy Commander Meeting|
|Nov. 13-5?|Deputy Chief of General Staff attended Asia - Pacific Defence Force Commander Meeting in Malaysia|
|Nov. 20-4?|Commander of Air Defence-Air Force attended the Air Commander Meeting in Indonesia|
|Nov. 28-?|Deputy Minister of National Defence to Laos|
|Nov.30-Dec. 3|Deputy Chief of General Staff to Thailand|
|Nov. 24 – Dec. 12|Deputy Minister of National Defence to three CIS countries|
|Dec. 14-15|Deputy Chief of General Political Department to Malaysia|
|Dec. 16-18|Commander of the 7th Military Region to Cambodia|
|Dec. 26-30|Deputy Chief of General Political Department attended the Governmental Special Section in Laos|
|2007||
|Mar. 12-19|Minister of National Defence to Laos and Cambodia|
|Mar. 23-25|Minister of National Defence attended the ADMM in Indonesia|
|May 27-31|Chief of General Political Department to Laos|
|Jun. 16-24|Chief of General Staff to Russia and Belarus|
|Aug. 26-31|Minister of National Defence to PRC|
|Oct. 7-20|Chief of General Political Department to South Africa and Algeria|
|Nov. 11-15|Minister of National Defence to Singapore and attended the ADMM|


###### 145


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|Jan. 22-26|Deputy Chief of General Political Department to Cambodia|
|Jan. 9-13|Deputy Chief of General Staff to Laos (1)|
|Feb. 2-11|Deputy Chief of General Staff to Laos (2)|
|Mar.10-23|Deputy Minister of National Defence to Australia, New Zealand and Brunei|
|May 11-19|Commander of the 7th Military Region to Cambodia|
|May 22-30|Commander of the 5th Military Region to Laos and Cambodia|
|Apr. 24-29|Leaders of 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 7th and Capital Military Regions to PRC|
|May 16-22|Commander of the 5th Military Region to Laos|
|May 23-25|Deputy Minister of National Defence attended the ARF Security Policy Meeting in the Philippines|
|May 31 – Jun. 4|Deputy Chief of General Staff attended the 6th Shangri-La Dialogue in Singapore|
|Jun. 11-15|Commander of the 7th Military Region to Republic of Korea|
|Jul. 18-26|Deputy Chief of General Political Department to Russia|
|Aug. 1-3|Deputy Chief of General Staff attended the ASEAN Chief of General Staff Meeting in Singapore|
|Aug. 5-10|Deputy Chief of General Staff attended the 5th Pacific Army Commander Meeting in Australia|
|Aug. 18-26|Deputy Chief of General Staff to Russia|
|Aug. 24 – Sep. 6|Chief of General Department of Defence Industry to Russia and Israel|
|Oct. 17-20|Deputy Minister of National Defence attended ADSOM in Singapore|
|Oct. 30 – Nov. 2|Deputy Chief of General Staff attended the Asia- Pacific Defence Leader Meeting in Hawaii, USA|
|Oct. 29-Nov. 2|Deputy Chief of General Staff to Cambodia|


###### 146


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|Oct. 7-11|President of National Defence Academy attended the ARF Defence Academy President Meeting in Australia|
|Nov. 1-5|Deputy Minister of National Defence to Cambodia|
|Nov. 17-21|Deputy Minister of National Defence to Laos|
|Nov. 19-25|Deputy Chief of General Staff to Thailand and attended the ASEAN Army Commander Meeting|
|Nov. 20-25|Commander of the 4th Military Region to Laos (1)|
|Nov. 20 – Dec. 12|Commander of the 4th Military Region to Laos (2)|
|Nov. 27 – Dec. 2|Deputy Minister of National Defence attended the Security Dialogue in India|
|Nov. 30 – Dec. 4|Deputy Chief of General Staff to Thailand|
|2008||
|Jan. 6-10|Chief of General Staff and the 2nd Military Region to Laos|
|May 28 – Jun. 1|Chief of General Political Department to Cambodia|
|Jun. 25 – Jul 6|Chief of General Political Department to Russia and Belarus|
|Aug. 10-16|Minister of National Defence to Myanmar and Malaysia|
|Jul. 31 – Aug. 3|Chief of General Staff attended the Defence Force Commander Meeting in Thailand|
|Sep. 21-28|Chief of General Political Department to People Democratic Republic of Korea|
|Sep. 20 – Oct. 2|Minister of National Defence to Russia and Belarus|
|Nov. 30 – Dec. 5|Chief of General Staff to PRC|
|Jan. 6-12|Navy Commander to Thailand and Malaysia|
|Jan. 22-26|Navy Commander to Republic of Korea|


###### 147


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|Jan. 22-26|Deputy Minister of National Defence attended the Inter-Governmental Committee of Bilateral Direction in PRC|
|Apr. 21-28|Deputy Minister of National Defence to Austria|
|Apr. 24-29|President of National Defence Academy to Laos|
|Apr. 22 – May 4|General Department of Defence Intelligence to Nicaragua and Chile|
|May 13-24|President of National Defence Academy to France|
|May 20-31|Deputy Minister of National Defence to Switzerland and Finland|
|May 31 – Jun. 6|General Department of Defence Intelligence to Venezuela|
|May 30 – Jun. 2|Commissar of Air Defence-Air Force Service attended the 50th anniversary of Malaysia Air Force|
|Jun. 21-28|The Central Military Procuracy to Russia|
|Jul. 14-18|Capital Military Region to Laos|
|Aug. 2-8|Deputy Minister of National Defence to Cuba|
|Aug. 17-25|Presiding Judge of the Central Military Court to South Africa|
|Sep. 18-25|Commander of the 2nd Military Region to Laos|
|Sep. 23-26|Deputy Chief of General Staff attended an exercise in PRC|
|Sep. 24-29|Deputy Minister of National Defence attended the 10th meeting of the Inter-Governmental Committee|
|Oct. 12-14|Deputy Chief of General Staff accompanied Prime Minister to Australia|
|Nov. 10-12|7th and 9th Military Regions and the Border Guard Command to Cambodia|
|Nov. 25-26|Deputy Minister of National Defence accompanied Prime Minister to Laos|
|First six months of 2009||
|Feb. 18-27|Minister of National Defence to Laos, Cambodia, Thailand and attended the 3rd ADMM|


###### 148


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|Mar. 30 – Apr. 3|Chief of General Political Department to Laos|
|Feb. 10-14|Commissar of Air Defence-Air Force Service to India|
|Feb. 15-20|Deputy Chief of General Political Department and the Governmental Special Section to Laos|
|Feb. 21-28|General Director of the 2nd General Department to South Africa|
|Feb. 22-25|Commander of the 9th Military Region to Cambodia|
|Feb. 21 – May 1|Deputy Minister of National Defence to Ukraine and Republic of Korea|
|Mar. 11-17|Navy Commander to Singapore and India|
|May 30 – Apr. 3|Commander of the 5th Military Region to Cambodia|
|Apr. 12-25|Deputy Minister of National Defence to Norway, Ireland and Turkey|
|Apr. 7-12|Deputy Minister of National Defence to PRC|
|Apr. 19-21|Deputy Minister of National Defence to Cambodia|
|Apr. 20-23|Navy Commander attended the 60th anniversary of China Navy|
|Apr. 7-11|Commander of Border Guard to Cambodia|
|May 28 – Jun. 1|Minister of National Defence attended the 8th Shangri-La Dialogue|
|May 4-11|Deputy Chief of General Staff to Italy and Austria|
|May 6-12|General Director of the General Department Of Defence Intelligence to Japan and Republic of Korea|
|May 17-20|Deputy Chief of General Staff attended the ARF MOD and ASPC|
|May 31 – Jun. 6|Standing Deputy Chairman of the National Committee of Search and Rescue to the USA|


###### 149


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|Jun. 21-27|Chief of General Staff to Malaysia and Indonesia|
|Jun. 12-20|Deputy Chief of General Political Department to Germany|
|Jun. 13-23|Commissar of Air Defence-Air Force Service to France and Spain|
|Jun. 25 – Jul. 3|Standing Deputy Chairman of the National Committee of Search and Rescue to France|
|Jun. 29 – Jul. 3|Commander of the 5th Military Region to Laos|


###### 150


-----

**APPENDIX 11**

**FRIENDLY PORT CALLS BY FOREIGN MILITARY**

**VESSELS**

|FOREIGN NAVY VESSELS TO VIETNAM|Col2|
|---|---|
|Time|Delegation|
|2005||
|Mar. 29 – Apr. 2|US Navy vessel and 223 crew to Ho Chi Minh City|
|May. 10-13|2 Thai Navy vessels and 247 crew to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Jun. 9-13|Indian Navy vessel and 215 crew to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Aug. 15-17|3 Malaysian Navy vessels and 435 crew to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Nov. 5-7|Indian Navy vessel to Da Nang|
|Nov. 22-26|French Navy vessel to Da Nang|
|Nov. 27 – Dec. 2|5 Russian Navy vessels to Da Nang|
|2006||
|Jun. 8-11|Indian Navy vessel to Da Nang|
|Jul. 1-6|2 US Navy vessels to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Aug. 26-30|2 New Zealand Navy vessels to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Sep. 9-12|Indonesian Navy vessel to Hai Phong|
|Sep. 28 – Oct. 3|Australian Navy vessel to Da Nang|
|Sep. 25-29|French Navy vessel to Hai Phong|
|Oct. 21-26|UK Navy Geological Survey vessel to Ho Chi Minh City|
|2007||
|Feb. 5-10|French Navy vessel to Hai Phong|
|Mar. 18-21|2 Malaysia Navy vessels to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Apr. 11-16|Australian Navy vessel to Da Nang|
|Apr. 11-15|2 Thai Navy training vessels and 228 crew to Ho Chi Minh City|


###### 151


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|May 15-25|2 Indian Navy vessels and 910 crew to Hai Phong|
|Jun. 26-29|Pakistani Navy vessel and 702 crew to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Jul. 15-25|US Navy Peleliu Hospital vessel to Da Nang|
|Aug. 8-13|Singaporean Navy vessel and 250 crew to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Sep. 9-11|Republic of Korean Navy vessel and 610 crew to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Oct. 17-20|US Navy Bruce Heeze vessel to Da Nang|
|Nov. 14-18|2 US Navy vessels to Hai Phong|
|Dec. 14-15|Philippines Navy vessel and 130 crew to Ho Chi Minh City|
|2008||
|Mar. 3-7|3 Japanese Navy vessels and 900 crew to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Apr. 17-21|Indian Navy vessel and 300 crew to Hai Phong|
|Apr. 23-26|Thai Navy vessel and 300 crew to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Jun. 30 – Jul. 4|French Navy VAR vessel to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Jun. 4-8|Canadian Navy Regina vessel to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Jun. 19-29|US Navy Mercy Hospital vessel to Khanh Hoa|
|Aug. 25-29|Australian Navy vessel to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Sep. 15-18|Singaporean Navy vessel to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Oct. 18-21|US Navy vessel to Da Nang|
|Oct. 31 – Nov. 5|South African Navy vessel to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Nov. 18-22|Chinese Navy training vessel to Da Nang|
|Dec. 14-16|Republic of Korean Navy vessel to Ho Chi Minh City|
|First 6 months of 2009||
|Apr. 9-12|2 Indian Navy vessels to Hai Phong|
|Apr. 10-14|Singaporean Navy vessel to Ho Chi Minh City|
|May 1-5|Brazilian Navy vessel to Ho Chi Minh City|
|May 19-24|French Navy vessel to Da Nang|


###### 152


-----

|Time|Delegation|
|---|---|
|Jun. 16-19|Thai Navy vessel to Ho Chi Minh City|
|Jun. 19-23|4 Russian Navy vessels to Da Nang|
|Jun. 23-25|US Navy Heezen vessel to Da Nang|
|VIETNAM NAVY VESSEL’S OUTGOING VISIT||
|Jul. 3-6|2 Navy vessels and 98 crew to Sattahip Por t, Thailand|
|Jun. 24-27|2 Navy vessels and 104 crew to Zhanjiang Port, PRC|


###### 153


-----

###### CONTENTS

**FOREWORD** 7


**Part One SECURITY SITUATION AND**
**NATIONAL DEFENCE POLICY**


11


1. SECURITY SITUATION 13

1.1. The World and Regional Situation 13

1.2. Vietnam 16

2. NATIONAL DEFENCE POLICY 18

2.1. Fundamental Issues of the National Defence Policy 18

2.2. Foreign Relations and Defence Cooperation 23

**Part Two BUILDING THE NATIONAL DEFENCE** 31


1. BUILDING THE NATIONAL DEFENCE
POTENTIAL


34


1.1. Building Political-Spiritual Potential 34

1.2. Building Economic Potential 36

1.3. Building Scientific and Technological Potential 39

1.4. Building Military Potential 41

2. BUILDING DEFENCE FORCES 44

3. BUILDING NATIONAL DEFENCE POSTURE 45


4. THE LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT OF
NATIONAL DEFENCE

4.1. The Leadership Role of the Communist Party of
Vietnam over VPA and the National Defence


48

48


4.2. State Management of National Defence 51


4.3. Directions to Enhance the Leadership and Man agement
in National Defence

**Part Three BUILDING THE PEOPLE’S ARMY**
**AND THE MILITIA AND SELF-DEFENCE**
**FORCE**

1. ORGANIZATION OF VPA AND THE MILITIA
AND SELF-DEFENCE FORCE


58

61

63


1.1. Vietnam People’s Army 63

1.2. The Militia and Self-Defence Force 84

###### 154


-----

2. GUIDELINES FOR THE BUILDING OF VPA AND
THE MILITIA AND SELF-DEFENCE FORCE


90


2.1. The Building of the Vietnam People’s Army 90

2.2. Building the Militia and Self-Defence Force 100

**CONCLUSION** 103

**APPENDICES** 107


Appendix 1: Organization and Structure of the Ministry of

National Defence of Vietnam

Appendix 2: List of Vietnam’s National Defence Attach é

Offices

Appendix 3: List of Major Academies, Colleges of the

Vietnam People’s Army

Appendix 4: List of Major Research Institutes of the Vietnam

People’s Army


109

110

113

116


Appendix 5: Traditional Days of Major Units 117

Appendix 6: List of Economic-Defence Zones 118

Appendix 7: List of Major Defence General Corporations 119

Appendix 8: List of major Agreements on Bordering Issues 120


Appendix 9: Military Flag, Military Badge, Insignia,

Uniforms


121


Appendix 10: Exchange of High-Level Military Delegations 136

Appendix 11: Friendly Port Calls by Military Vessels 151

###### 155


-----

###### NHÀ XUẤT BẢN THẾ GIỚI
 46 Trần Hư ng Đạo, Hà Nội, Việt Nam
 Tel: 0084.4.38253841 – Fax: 0084.4.38269578
 Email: thegioi@hn.vnn.vn
 Website: www.thegioipublishers.com.vn

## QUỐC PHÒNG VIỆT NAM

###### Chịu trách nhiệm xuất bản

 TRẦN ĐOÀN LÂM

In 4000 bản, khổ 16 x 24 cm, tại Trung tâm Chế bản và In - Nhà

xuất bản Thế Giới. Giấy chấp nhận đăng ký kế hoạch xuất bản số:

###### 1065-2009/CXB/3-263/ThG, cấp ngày 17 tháng 11 năm 2009.
 In xong và nộp lư u chiểu Quý IV năm 2009.

 156


-----

