1
Contents	
Minister’s Foreword 	
Abstract
IntroductionChapter 1   Core Defense Challenges
Section 1   Trends and Challenges of the Strategic EnvironmentSection 2   Military Threats and Risk of WarSection 3   Driving Force and Dynamics of Defense Transformation Section 4   Major Tasks of Defense Reform
Chapter 2   National Defense Strategic Guidance
Section 1   National Defense PolicySection 2   National Defense StrategySection 3   Military Strategy
Chapter 3   Defense Transformation Planning
Section 1   Defense OrganizationSection 2   Force StructureSection 3   All-Volunteer ForceSection 4   Force Planning MechanismSection 5   Armaments Development MechanismSection 6   Joint Operations Command MechanismSection 7   Human Resources DevelopmentSection 8   Defense Expenditure ManagementSection 9   Combining Defense with Civilian Needs 2
46
18
2626
30
43
50
62
63
64
70
7676
78
83
87
89
94
97
106
109
2Chapter 4   Guidance for Joint Warfi  ghting Capability Development
Section 1   Joint C4ISR Capabilities
Section 2   Joint Information Operation and Electronic Warfare 
Capabilities
Section 3   Joint Counter Air Capabilities
Section 4   Joint Sea Control Capabilities Section 5   Joint Ground Defense Capabilities Section 6   Asymmetrical Warfare Capabilities Section 7   Reserve Mobilization Capabilities Section 8   Joint Logistics Capabilities Section 9   Overall Intangible Combat Capabilities  
Afterword116
117
121
124
128
131
136
138
141
147
153
3Since taking office, President Ma Ying-jeou has been implementing 
various new policies, pursuing fundamental reforms, improving foreign 
relations, and, in particular, resuming dialogues across the Taiwan 
Strait. President Ma's pragmatic efforts at improving interactions with the PRC have dramatically eased cross-strait tension to the benefit of security in the Strait and across the Asia-Pacific region. As far as 
defense policy is concerned, President Ma has repeatedly emphasized 
building a "Hard ROC" defense and consolidating the military strategic concept of "resolute defense and credible deterrence", so that 
the Republic of China would act as a peacemaker in the Asia-Pacific 
region. Under this conceptual guidance, the Ministry of National Defense (MND) has initiated a series of reviews and consolidated measures aimed at building a "small but smart and strong" modern 
force capable of deterring potential military aggressors from taking 
reckless actions and serving as a solid buttress for the Government in cross-strait negotiations. 
The Amendment to Article 31 of the National Defense Act passed 
by the Legislative Yuan on July 17, 2008 mandates the MND to submit a Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) within ten months after every new president takes office in order to review and confirm 
defense strategy and military strategy, and provide a vision for 
future development. The MND has thus established a task force and a consultant group of experts and scholars from the private sector. 
Elements of defense studies—including defense strategy review, 
military strategy revision, force structure adjustment, defense organization re-structure, implementation of an “all-volunteer force”, and joint warfighting capability assessment—were combined into Minister’s Foreword
4this project to form a comprehensive review of our national defense. 
The purpose is to identify the roadmap for defense reform and 
force development in the QDR and provide a clear and responsible 
explanation to the Legislative Yuan and the public.
This first publicly announced QDR describes the prospects and 
reform directions of the ROC Armed Forces in the face of challenges 
in an evolving strategic environment. The Armed Forces will make 
a concerted effort to implement comprehensive reforms and conduct 
a full-scale transformation, and thereby ensure that the measures to 
improve organizational structure, force structure, planning procedures, human resources development, resource allocation, and warfighting capability buildup can effectively meet the objectives of the defense 
strategy.
The ROC stands at a historic turning point, confronted by many 
difficulties and barriers. It is vital that the entire nation reach a consensus, achieve unity of purpose, face up to the challenges, and 
build a new future with wisdom and courage. The Armed Forces bear a heavy responsibility of safeguarding national security and creating peaceful, stable conditions that allow us and future generations to 
enjoy a peaceful and secure environment, as well as a bright future of 
sustainable development. 
As there may inevitably be some shortcomings in this first-ever 
QDR of the ROC, I sincerely invite all to share their advice and support with us. The Armed Forces will maintain an open-minded thinking and listen to a wide range of views concerning defense strategy and force planning. The ultimate goal is to ensure deliberated and feasible 
defense policies and thereby safeguard our national security.
March 2009Minister of National Defense
5ABSTRACT
I. Legal Basis & Background       
1. The Legislative Yuan passed the amendment to Article 31 of 
the National Defense Act on July 17, 2008. It became effective 
on August 6 after being signed by the President. The 4th 
paragraph was added as: “The Ministry of National Defense 
shall, within ten months after each presidential inauguration, 
publicly submit a Quadrennial Defense Review to the Legislative Yuan.”
2. The first publication of the Republic of China (ROC) Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) has three major 
implications:
(1)  The President’s overarching concept of national defense is embodied in the policy planning of the Ministry of National 
Defense (MND), solidifying the concept of “civilian control over the military”.
(2 )  The country’s strategic planning system is further consolidated, as the QDR follows the President’s overarching 
concept of national security in shaping defense strategy and 
force planning.
(3)  The establishment of a four-year periodical review mechanism enables the MND to conduct comprehensive assessments of 
Most terms or phrases in quotation marks are directly translated from special 
ROC military acronyms and jargons.
6major policies and articulate the vision for future reforms and 
development.
II. Conceptual Framework
1.  The fi  rst ROC QDR is based on the central theme of “building 
a professional armed force and maintaining peace in the 
Taiwan Strait”, with a thinking logic of “future strategic 
environment analysis, strategy examination, organizational re-structuring, force planning, and resources utilization”. The 
QDR is comprised of four chapters, namely, core defense 
challenges, national strategic guidance, planning for defense 
transformation, and guidance for joint warfighting capability 
development.
2.  Prospects of defense and security challenges are stressed in the 
QDR, while appropriate defense and military strategies and actual steps of defense transformation are devised accordingly to set the course of capability development for the Armed 
Forces and effectively ensure national security.
III. QDR Summary
1. Core defense challenges
(1) Trends and challenges of the strategic environment
a. The Asia-Pacific region is relatively stable. However, the 
international clout of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) 
is expanding, gravely challenging the role of the ROC in 
the regional security environment. Participation in regional 
security cooperation is therefore urgently imperative for the 
ROC.
7b. Security tensions in the Taiwan Strait area are gradually 
diminishing. In support of overall government policies, the 
MND needs to formulate appropriate strategies to direct 
future force development.
c. The trend toward globalization necessitates paying greater attention to unconventional security issues. The Armed 
Forces have a duty to address these issues and assist the 
government to protect the people’s lives and property.
(2)  Military threat and risk of war
a. Currently, there are both opportunities and challenges for 
the security of the Taiwan Strait area. Despite easing cross-strait military tension, the PRC has never renounced the use 
of military force against Taiwan. Vigilance for readiness 
preparation, therefore, cannot be relaxed.
b. The PRC has been aggressive in the development of surveillance and reconnaissance satellites, electronic 
warfare, information operations, ballistic and cruise 
missiles, and air, maritime & landing operations capabilities. There are growing threat against the C
4ISR systems, sea/
aerial lines of communication, and homeland defense of 
the ROC. The PRC has also initiated a “three-front war”—
legal, public opinion, and psychological warfare—to create 
advantages over the ROC in these areas.
(3)  The driving forces and dynamics of defense transformation
a. The impacts from new military technologies and patterns of 
war
Evolving military technologies and patterns of war in the 
information age continue to drive transformation and reform 
8of the Armed Forces.
b. The challenge of maximizing cost-effectiveness in defense 
budgets
With limited defense resources, the strategies for resource 
utilization should be refi  ned to achieve maximum effi  ciency.
c. The requirements of supporting national and social 
development
In conjunction with national economic strategy, the 
national defense development should devote defense 
resources to overall economic development to create benefi  ts for the entire society.
(4)  Major tasks of defense reform
a. Rapid changes in the environment and multifaceted defense 
challenges call for the MND to streamline simultaneously its organization, mechanisms and operations to create greater 
organizational effi  ciency for attaining defense missions.
b. Tasks of defense reform include defense organization, 
force structure, an all-volunteer force, the force planning mechanism, the armaments development mechanism, 
the joint operations command mechanism, and human 
resources development.
2. National defense strategy guidance
(1) Defense policies
The purpose of national defense is to safeguard national 
security and maintain the livelihood of the people and sustainable development of the country. Given current and 
prospective strategic environment and imminent threats and 
9challenges, the Armed Forces are proactively engaging in a 
defensive capability buildup under the President’s guidance 
of building a “Hard ROC” defense. The Armed Forces have a mission of defending the homeland and deterring wars, 
thereby serving as a solid buttress for the government in its 
pursuit of cross-strait peace, regional stability and national 
prosperity.
(2) Defense strategy
Defense strategy is the actual planning and concrete 
measures for the realization of a “Hard ROC” defense. The specific strategic objectives are “war prevention”, “homeland 
defense”, “contingency response”, “conflict avoidance”, and “regional stability”. They are elaborated below:
a. war prevention
Establish a “Hard ROC” defense force, enhance credible 
deterrent and defensive countermeasure capabilities, and realize an all-out (general civilian mobilization) defense; 
and participate in regional security cooperation and promote 
cross-strait military confidence building measures (CBMs) at the opportune moment to prevent cross-strait conflicts.
b. homeland defense
Deter enemy invasion with elite forces, sufficient President Ma’s phrase in Chinese would translate: “solid as bedrock,” signifying 
a rock-solid and impregnable defensive force that, by implication, could not be dislodged, shattered, or breached by a numerically superior enemy force during an attempt to attack or invade ROC territory. The abbreviation for the Republic of China, ROC, happens to rhyme with the word “rock” in English, allowing word play that does not exist in the original Chinese formulation.
10early warning, effective force preservation, efficient joint 
warfi  ghting capabilities and a solid all-out defense.
c. contingency response
Enhance crisis awareness, control, and response, and 
assist the government in disaster relief and prevention and responding to situations endangering national security.
d. confl  ict avoidance
Closely monitor activities in Taiwan waters and airspace, 
management risk factors, enhance contingency response 
capabilities, and abide by the principles of “not provoking 
incidents, not escalating conflicts, and avoiding hostile actions”, as well as readiness regulations, to prevent military 
confrontations or accidents.
e. regional stability
Promote security dialogue and exchange, and undertake 
greater responsibilities regarding international security issues, such as security of sea/aerial lines of communication, 
countering weapons proliferation, counter-terrorism, and humanitarian relief, therefore making positive contributions 
to peace and stability in the Asia-Pacifi  c region.
(3) Military strategy
Under the guidance of defense strategy, the military 
strategy of the Armed Forces can be coined as “resolute defense and credible deterrence”. When war is inevitable, 
the military should exercise its joint operational capabilities, incorporate all-out defense capabilities, and engage in 
homeland defense, in order to reject, repel, and eliminate 
enemy forces and ensure national security. To reach these 
11goals, the Armed Forces need to effectively accomplish the 
following missions:
a.  resolute defense, to ensure the integrity of national territories;b. credible deterrence, to maintain strong and deterrent war-
fighting capabilities;
c. counter blockade, to secure sea and aerial lines of 
communication;
d. joint interdiction, to prevent enemies from approaching ROC 
territory; and
e. ground defense, to prevent enemy forces from landing.
3. Planning for defense transformation
(1) Defense organization
In accordance with the principle of “accountability and 
specialization”, the MND is reviewing and modifying the 
division of authority and responsibilities and work procedures 
for various departments.
(2) Force structure
The Armed Forces currently have a strength of 275,000, 
which, in the future, will be downsized to 215,000. This target 
is set in consideration of defensive operational requirements 
and availability of human and financial resources. The ROC 
intends to build a “small but smart and strong” force. 
(3) All-Volunteer Force
The ROC is developing an all-volunteer force, with 
planning divided into three phases: “planning preparation”, 
“project formulation”, and “implementation and validation”. 
In the process, the MND will annually reduce the number 
of draftees and increase the number of volunteers while 
12reviewing benefits for voluntary soldiers. Regulations are   
to be revised and complementary measures formulated to 
achieve the target and complete the transition by December 
2014.
(4) Force planning mechanism
Since the defense organizations are changing, it is 
imperative to refi  ne the PPBS (planning, programming, and budgeting system) and military investment case building procedure to enhance strategy formulation and force planning.
(5) Armaments development mechanism
Resources in the public and private sectors shall be 
integrated to facilitate technologies transfers, research and 
development, production, maintenance, and sales. Such 
integration is important for force development and readiness. 
(6) Joint operations command mechanism
Consolidate the “joint operations command mechanism” 
that is “consistent and accountable in peacetime and wartime” to maximize effectiveness of the joint operations command. 
(7) Human resources development 
Based on the objective of “purpose-oriented and plan-based 
education”, human resources development must meet defense 
transformation requirements, with education advanced to 
boost human resources quality, so that, after leaving military 
life, discharged military personnel can further contribute to 
national development and societal needs.
(8) Defense expenditure management
In principle, the level of defense expenditure accounts 
for no less than 3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), 
13but the actual amount may fluctuate if national economic 
development, major government policies or progress of the 
all-volunteer force so require. The MND will adhere to 
the principles of “practical force planning and reasonable 
budgetary allocations” to effectively allocate and apply 
defense resources.
(9) Combining defense with civilian needs
Industrial cooperation, technology transfer, defense 
outsourcing, and military property release are measures to 
facilitate domestic technological and industrial development, 
increase employment opportunities, and fulfill the needs for national infrastructure projects and local development. This 
way, defense resources can contribute to driving domestic 
economic growth and prosperity.
4. Guidance for joint warfighting capability development
(1) Joint command, control, communications, computers, 
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C
4ISR) 
capabilities
Establish “integrated command and control, real-time 
communication, and precise intelligence surveillance and 
reconnaissance” capabilities to develop networked C4ISR 
systems.
(2)  Joint information operation and electronic warfare capabilities
Establish “early warning, rapid response, effective 
countermeasures, and delaying enemy offensive” to ensure 
information and electronic security and superiority.
(3)  Joint counter air capabilities
Establish “early surveillance and reconaissance warning, 
14long-range precision engagement and joint multilayer 
interception” capabilities, in order to gain air dominance in 
desired airspaces, and safeguard the sea and air space of the 
Taiwan Strait.
(4)  Joint sea control capabilities
Develop “high efficiency and performance, rapid 
deployment, and long-range strike” capabilities, to deter enemy invasion, and secure sea lines of communication.
(5)  Joint ground defense capabilities
Establish “digitized, multi-dimensional, and agile” ground 
combat and special operations capabilities to effectively defend national territory.
(6) Asymmetrical warfare capabilities
Develop the capabilities to attack the enemy’s center of 
gravity and critical vulnerability, and employ innovative tactics and techniques while coordinating with basic land, 
maritime, and air combat capabilities, to strike at the enemy’s 
weak points and overcome its advantages, in order to counter 
an enemy invasion.
(7) Reserve mobilization capabilities
Establish deterrence-capable reserve combat capabilities 
with “on-site mobilization and engagement” and “timely 
mobilization and engagement”.
(8) Joint logistics capabilities
Establish “precise logistics management and rapid logistics 
support” capabilities, and raise the operational efficiency of combined logistics.
(9) Overall intangible combat capabilities
15Set the overall objectives as follows: “solidify national 
identity, cultivate patriotic integrity, nurture honorable virtues, 
clarify military discipline, harness force solidarity, consolidate 
a winning determination, counter enemies’ psychological 
warfare, and establish all-out defense”. 
IV. Perspectives for the Future
In the face of the changing strategic environment, the MND has 
compiled its very first QDR to address future challenges and introduce future planning and reform directions. The MND is fully devoted 
to implementing defense transformation and improving operational 
capabilities in order to effectively achieve national defense strategic 
objectives. Subsequently, the MND will apply effective management 
and evaluation mechanisms to ensure the realization of all the 
objectives laid out in the QDR, so as to realize the President’s defense concept, achieve the goals of “war prevention” and “resolute defense 
and credible deterrence”, and facilitate the sustainable development of 
the ROC in a peaceful and stable environment.
1617INTRODUCTION
I. Legal Basis and Background of the Quadrennial Defense Review
In accordance with Article 137 of the Constitution of the Republic 
of China, the Armed Forces shall have a mission of "protecting 
national security and maintaining world peace”. The Ministry of 
National Defense shall observe the principle of “Taiwan first and in 
the interest of the people” as announced by the President and adhere to 
the concept of “preventive defense”. To ensure a peaceful and secure 
environment for the nation’s development and prevent armed conflicts 
from endangering people's lives and properties, the MND is committed to maintaining an appropriate defense force during peacetime as a 
means of deterring war, preventing conflict, protecting the homeland, 
and fending off any potential aggressors. Due to the complexity 
and seriousness of the challenges it faces, the MND must conduct 
a pragmatic, full-scale review of the national security environment, 
cross-strait relations, and military threats to formulate appropriate 
defense strategies, promote the transformation of the Armed Forces, and review defense policies and the priority of force development, in 
order to strike an optimal balance between strategic needs and resource 
limitations, and thereby ensure that the Armed Forces' strength can 
achieve national security objectives. 
To ensure that the defense readiness complies with overall strategic 
guidance and is subject to legislative supervision, the Legislative 
Yuan passed the "Amendment to Article 31 of the National Defense 
18Act" on July 17, 2008, which was promulgated by the President on 
August 6, 2008. The newly-added Paragraph 4 of this article states. 
“The Ministry of National Defense shall, within ten months after each 
presidential inauguration, publicly submit a Quadrennial Defense 
Review to the Legislative Yuan.” The purpose of amending this 
law was to allow review of existing defense policies by each newly-
inaugurated president and to ensure that the President's defense 
blueprint and strategic ideas are refl  ected in MND policies. The QDR also provides the Legislative Yuan with a basis for reviewing and 
supervising the MND's policy implementation. 
II. Signifi  cance of the Quadrennial Defense Review
The issuance of the first QDR has three important implications. 
Firstly, the QDR incorporates the President's overarching concept of 
national defense in the MND's policy planning, and further solidifi  es the concept of “civilian control over the military”. Secondly, the 
QDR follows the President's overarching concept of national security 
in shaping the MND’s defense strategy and force planning, thus 
consolidating the strategic planning system and ensuring that the 
ROC Armed Forces' organization, plans, and capabilities effectively 
support defense strategies and fulfill military missions. Thirdly, the 
establishment of a four-year periodical review mechanism will enable the MND to conduct comprehensive assessments of major defense 
policies and policy planning, integrate internal views, incorporate a 
broad range of external recommendations, and articulate the vision for 
future reforms and development based on an up-to-date thinking. 
19Unlike most conventional policy reviews, the QDR not only 
examines the current state of the Armed Forces, but also performs 
an integrated assessment and proposes forward-looking reforms. 
The QDR relies on an assessment of the future strategic environment 
and trends to determine the goals the Armed Forces must attain, 
capabilities they must possess, and readiness they must achieve to 
respond to future security challenges. The QDR further examines the 
Armed Forces' current deficiencies and shortcomings, and lays out appropriate transformation strategies and reform measures accordingly. 
In other words, the QDR is not just a retrospective or summary 
review, but also a new starting point and roadmap for further progress. Accordingly, the MND must engage in a series of carefully thought-
out planning, assessment, and improvement actions, and pragmatically 
assess existing strategies, organizations, plans, resources, priorities, 
and focuses to update defense strategies and attain national security 
objectives. 
III. Methodology and Logic behind the Quadrennial Defense 
Review
The compilation of this QDR adopted the logic of the "strategy 
to task" principle. This is to say, in order to uphold national interests and achieve national security objectives, it is necessary to forecast the future security environment and determine defense challenges and 
opportunities, and use this information to map out defense strategies 
and military strategies and the missions needed to realize them. This 
process will allow development of key abilities corresponding to 
mission needs, and facilitate the acquisition of weaponry needed to 
create effective fighting power. 
20Therefore, the QDR's role in the Planning-Programming-Budgeting 
System (PPBS) is to clarify defense strategy guidance and the focus 
of future military capability development, thereby guiding the 
formulation of “force planning concepts” and “force buildup program” 
within military strategy plans. This will ensure that the allocation of 
defense resources can satisfy force requirements in accordance with 
defense strategy plans, and achieve the goals of force development and 
national defense. 
IV. Framework of the Quadrennial Defense Review
The compilation of this QDR is based on the defense concept 
proclaimed by the President on numerous occasions and the policy 
directives of the Minister of National Defense. The QDR task force 
recruited staff from policy offi  ces and agencies of the MND. Experts and scholars from the private sector were also invited to form a 
consulting team. The QDR comprehensively examined the Armed 
Forces' current systems, mechanisms, and major policies 
and plans in a forward-looking manner to identify problems and 
defi  ciencies and formulated improvement methods to determine future 
strategic guidance and directions of force development. 
The QDR contains four chapters: "Core Defense Challenges", The full name of the Armed Forces planning and budgeting system is the 
"Planning, Programming and Budgeting System (PPBS). This system is used by the MND to perform strategic decision-making and resource management, and employs a series of interconnected documentary procedures to tightly coordinate strategies, plans, and budgets. The system enables the effective utilization of defense resources to achieve anticipated strategic objectives.
21"National Strategic Guidance", "Planning for Defense Transformation", 
and "Guidance for Joint Warfighting Capability Development." 
The logical process consists of identifying security challenges and, 
accordingly, formulating strategic guidance and specific actions 
of defense transformation to serve as the foundation for building 
capabilities needed by the Armed Forces. The purpose is to enhance 
efficiency of defense organizations, strengthen self-defense capabilities, 
effectively safeguard national security, and collaborate with various administration measures of the government, so as to achieve the goals 
of creating peace and maintaining stability across the Taiwan Strait. 
The following is a summary of the QDR: 
1.  Core defense challenges 
In the foreseeable future, key challenges facing Taiwan's 
defense include coping with changes in regional and cross-
strait security environments, countering military threats from 
the PRC, updating strategies, restructuring the Armed Forces, 
to develop a mix of defensive capabilities, and facilitating 
economic development with defense investments. To address the aforementioned challenges, the MND must utilize 
limited resources to promote transformation measures for 
organizational efficiency, critical military capabilities, joint 
warfighting capabilities, defense technology advancement, 
industrial development and all-out defense. 
2. Defense strategic guidance 
Taiwan's defense strategy seeks to protect national security, 
keep the Taiwan Strait free of war, and enable the people 
to live and work in peace and contentment. The country's 
current defense strategy has the objectives of war prevention, 
22homeland defense, contingency response, conflict avoidance, 
and regional stability. By building a "Hard ROC" defense 
and participating in regional security cooperation, the Armed 
Forces can deter potential aggressors from taking reckless 
actions. The military strategic concept is "resolute defense 
and credible deterrence”. When war is inevitable, the Armed 
Forces shall exert joint warfighting capabilities and also draw 
on civilian sector resources in an all-out defense to deter, defeat, and annihilate the enemy and safeguard national security. 
3.  Planning for defense transformation
 Transformation is a fundamental task in defense strategies, 
which enables the Armed Forces to cope with the evolving 
strategic environment and diversifi  ed challenges in the future. 
The MND must strike an appropriate balance between 
dealing with current security threats and promoting reform 
and transformation. Critical transformation elements include 
organizational efficiency, force structure, transitioning into an 
all-volunteer force, force planning, armaments development mechanism, joint operations command mechanism, human 
resources development, defense expenditure management, and 
combining defense with civilian needs. 
4.  Guidance for joint warfi  ghting capability development 
Based on the guidance of defensive defense and the military 
strategic concept of "resolute defense and credible deterrence", the ROC Armed Forces must consolidate various warfighting capabilities on the basis of improved joint operations effi  ciency 
in order to achieve “strategic sustainment and tactical 
decisiveness”, dissolve enemy attempts to achieve a quick 
23victory, and seize on a strategic turning point. Key items include 
joint C4ISR, joint information operation (IO) and electronic 
warfare (EW), joint counter air, joint sea control, joint ground 
defense, asymmetric warfare, reserve mobilization, joint 
logistics, and intangible combat capabilities. 
2425Chapter 1 
CORE DEFENSE CHALLENGES
Section 1   T rends and Challenges of the Strategic 
Environment
I. The Armed Forces Needs to Proactively Participate in Security 
Cooperation in an Evolving Regional Environment
Currently, the strategic environment in the Asia-pacific is relatively 
peaceful and stable. The region is witnessing accelerated economic integration as economic development is the first priority for the majority of states within the region. Conflict and war are seen as a 
destructive behavior. Under mutual reciprocal gestures of goodwill 
from both sides of the Taiwan Strait as the ROC transitions to a 
new administration, there have been constructive improvements to 
cross-strait relations, opening the way for concrete interaction and cooperation.
Furthermore, the US-Japan security agreement and US-Republic 
of Korea Mutual Defense Treaty still exist, benefiting the maintenance 
of stability in the East Asia region. In the foreseeable future, there is a 
very low probability of war between states in the region. However, the 
emergence of many transnational security issues, such as international 
terrorism, weapons proliferation (including small arms and weapons of 
mass destruction), illegal activities from armed groups (such as pirates), 
epidemics and pandemics, and major natural disasters, have become 
increasingly more threatening towards the security and interests of 
26various states. Multilateral cooperation is urgently needed to remedy 
these issues.
Also, rapid growth of the overall national capabilities of the PRC 
is producing fundamental changes to the security situation of Taiwan, 
which needs to be seriously looked upon. In the last 30 years, the 
economic growth, political stability, and military and diplomatic 
capabilities of the PRC have increased dramatically. In particular, it 
has improved its relationships with countries around the world through economic, energy, and security diplomacy, allowing it to participate in 
major international affairs, and attain decisive leadership in relevant 
issues. In contrast to the PRC’s infl  uence in regional security affairs, Taiwan’s participation in regional security affairs is comparatively 
minor, creating severe challenges to Taiwan’s role in regional security.
In order to address possible trends that may be unfavorable for 
Taiwan’s role in regional security, to integrate common interests in 
regional security, and to prevent transnational security threats, the 
ROC Armed Forces need to continue increasing the number of its 
partners and avenues for military exchanges, proactively participate in regional security cooperation activities, and, through the establishment 
of military CBMs, explore possibilities of cross-strait security 
cooperation to maintain peace in the Taiwan Strait and stability in the 
region.
II. The Armed Forces Need to Undergo Strategic Adjustments to 
Address Changes in the Security Situation of the Taiwan Strait
Since taking office in May 2008, President Ma has upheld the 
principle of “Taiwan fi  rst and for the interest of the people”, adopting a pragmatic stance in the approach to cross-strait matters. This has 
27improved concrete benefits for the people and a gradual easing of 
cross-strait tensions. Under the ROC constitutional framework and 
the “no unification, no independence, and no use of force” policy, the 
government is offering the principles of “facing reality, pioneering a 
new future, shelving controversies, and pursuing win-win solutions” 
in cross-strait interactions, exploring a balance of mutual cross-
strait interests, and seeking peace in the Taiwan Strait. The PRC has 
also reciprocated such goodwill. The governments on both sides have resumed interaction and negotiations through intermediating 
organizations, opening the way for interaction and cooperation. Thus, 
subtle changes are occurring in the security situation over the Taiwan Strait.
The Armed Forces’ strategic plans and force development and 
readiness undertakings must be effective in responding to changes 
in the strategic environment. They should also be guided by national 
interest and the government’s overall state policies. Despite the current 
relatively relaxed security situation over the Taiwan-Strait, the PRC’s 
rapid development in military capabilities remains the most direct security challenge for Taiwan. Mainland China’s progress is as much of 
an important opportunity for the nation, as it is an obvious threat. And 
the ROC Armed Forces’ responsibility is to minimize such threat so 
that Taiwan can enjoy a peaceful external environment and create more 
development opportunities thereafter. 
During ROC's pragmatic cross-strait interaction with the PRC, the 
Armed Forces must still maintain strong defense capabilities, so that Taiwan can enjoy protected national security and establish a more 
lasting peace over the Taiwan Strait. In order to address developing 
trends in the strategic environment, the Armed Forces needs to 
28review national defense strategy and military strategy in accordance 
with the President’s concept of “deepening peaceful ideologies and 
consolidating self-defense capabilities”, and formulate new guidance 
and directions to lead force developments and enhance combat 
readiness, thereby maximizing our national interests.
III. The Armed Forces Need to Address Unconventional Security 
Threats with the Emergence and Development of Globalization 
Trends
Since the revolution of information technology, third-wave 
industrial revolution, and the emergence of a global market economy, 
the world has been evolving towards globalization. This wave 
of globalization has loosened up national boundaries, deepened the interdependence between states, and seriously challenged the 
political and administrative capabilities of governments in dealing 
with globalization-related issues. In particular, the emergence of 
transnational actors and non-state actors has become a major infl  uence 
in international security affairs and national security.
After the “9/11 terrorist attack” in 2001, subsequent developments 
have increasingly highlighted the destructiveness of international 
terrorist activities and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction 
(WMDs) against national security. Counter-terrorism has become a diffi  cult mission that requires long-term commitment and multilateral 
cooperation from modern states. The ROC Armed Forces have thus 
established the policy guidelines of “counter-terrorism and contingency 
response” in the last several years to address the threat of global 
terrorism, and undergo development of relevant response capabilities. 
In the future, the Armed Forces will continue to enhance risk warning 
29and control mechanisms and increase rapid response capabilities in 
order to effectively support national counter-terrorism missions.
In addition, under continuous influence of globalization, 
unconventional security issues such as naval escorts (to prevent piracy 
assaults), defense against chemical and biological threats, control of 
trans-regional epidemic outbreaks, and major disaster relief, etc., have 
become increasingly important. In the face of globalization and an 
international security environment with deepening interdependence, the ROC Armed Forces need comprehensive measures to address 
unconventional security threats and establish professional capabilities 
to perform missions of “military operations other than war (MOOTW)”, enhance emergency responsiveness, risk management, and post-
occurrence rescue, so as to support the government in protecting the 
people’s livelihood, property, and security, and safeguarding national 
interests.
Section 2   Military Threats and Risk of War
I. Opportunities and Challenges Co-exist in the Taiwan Strait 
Security Situation
Since the new administration came into office, it has been striving 
to create an environment for cross-strait reconciliation and peace, and to seek opportunities to resume dialogue and communication, so 
that the two sides have now resumed negotiations. However, although 
cross-strait relations are gradually improving and military tensions have somewhat decreased, the two sides are still militarily confronting 
30each other. Since the PRC has never renounced the use of military 
force against Taiwan, the ROC still faces palpable military threats. 
Therefore, vigilance for readiness preparation cannot be relaxed.
The development of this security situation is attested by the following 
facts:
1. The PRC has yet to renounce the use of military force against 
Taiwan
Article 8 of the Anti-Secession Law passed by the PRC 
in March 2005 stipulates that, under specific circumstances, the PRC government regards itself as entitled to employ 
non-peaceful and other necessary means against Taiwan. This article provides the PRC with certain ambiguities and 
fl  exibilities in terms of means, forms, and timing when dealing 
with Taiwan. If cross-strait military conflict occurs, the PRC 
could cite this legislation to legitimize its military actions and 
inhibit any potential international intervention.
2. PRC military preparations still aim at Taiwan
Despite the PRC’s reciprocation, to some degree, of the 
ROC’s goodwill, Beijing’s military preparations still indicate 
that combat against Taiwan remains an important priority and 
possible option. Concrete facts include:
(1 ) Establishment of advanced guided missile brigades in 
the Guangdong, Fujian, and Jiangxi areas, and continued 
deployment of short and medium-range ballistic missiles 
covering all of Taiwan.
(2) Deployment of new air defense missiles (S-300PMU2 and 
HQ-9), with ranges covering areas surrounding airports in Taiwan and air patrol areas.
31(3) Deployment of advanced fighters in airbases within 600 
nautical miles from Taiwan, including Russian-made Sukhoi 
aircraft (SU-27 and SU-30 fighters).
(4) Continued developments of submarine capabilities, with activities extended to Taiwan’s eastern coast and approaching 
the middle of the Pacific Ocean.
(5) The PRC Navy has organized trans-regional and long-range navigation training groups, with activities going beyond the first island chain, gradually increasing its strategic depth in 
coastal defense. 
(6) Continued expansions of amphibious landing, coast-to-coast 
rapid landing, and airborne capabilities, as well as exercises 
in triphibious assault operations.
(7) In coastal areas of Zhejiang and Fujian provinces, exercises of joint sea-and-air blockade and control, and precision strikes 
have been conducted on offshore islands.
(8) The deployment of new anti-ship missiles (YJ-62A) in coastal areas of Fujian that cover targets throughout the Taiwan Strait.
3. The PRC’s military modernization lacks transparency
The PRC’s military developments are relatively opaque, 
which, in recent years, continue to be a sensitive issue to surrounding nations in the Asia-Pacific. The white paper of 
China’s National Defense in 2008, released on January 20, 
2009, indicates that its defense budget for 2008 was $417.769 billion RMB. This does not include research and development 
(R&D), People's Armed Police funding, weapons sale profits, 
and external revenues from defense industries. Despite visible 
32disparities between different sources on estimates of the PRC’s 
military expenditures, most estimates agree that the PRC’s 
offi  cially announced defense budget was palpably lower than the 
actual amount. Also, in recent years, the PRC insists to external 
observers that the growth of its defense budget merely refl  ects 
its economic development and budgetary revenues, as opposed 
to military expansion. However, this explanation can hardly 
dispel suspicion.
With over a decade of consecutive double digit percentile 
growth in its defense budget, the PRC’s military modernization efforts have received alarming amounts of funding, which have facilitated its military reforms and weapon and equipment 
upgrades. Although the long-term objective of the PRC’s 
military modernization is to establish regional and global 
military capabilities that are not entirely targeted at the Taiwan 
Strait situations, the PRC’s increasing military capabilities 
endows it with increasingly more powerful capabilities 
against Taiwan. Furthermore, the PRC has never renounced the intention of using of military force against Taiwan, which 
imposes increasing pressure on our national defense and 
security.
4.  Cross-strait military CBMs are yet to be established
Despite the fact that current cross-strait reconciliations 
lead to an opportunity for peace over the Taiwan Strait, and the two sides may be able to engage in broader interaction and cooperation in the future, the longstanding military standoff 
over the Taiwan Strait remains the most complex and diffi  cult 
problem between the two sides. After President Ma assumed 
33the presidency, he called on the PRC many times to withdraw 
ballistic missiles deployed against Taiwan, and proposed cross-
strait negotiations for “establishing military CBMs to relieve 
military pressure over the Taiwan Strait and avoid possible 
military accidents or armed conflicts.
However, so far the cross-strait CBMs have seen limited 
development. Currently, each of the two sides has partially 
adopted declaratory, transparent, or somewhat tacit measures, such as announcement of defense reports, revelation of plans for 
major military exercises, and self-imposed limitations on aircraft 
and ship maneuvering activities. No further implementation of communication (such as setting up hotlines), regulatory (such 
as code of conduct over the Taiwan Strait and military aircraft 
and ship encountering agreements), or limitation measures (such 
as limitations on the deployment of specific forces and military 
activities, as well as force reduction) have been achieved, 
signifying that the risk of cross-strait military accidents or 
conflicts still exists.
Overall, in view of the relative weakening of the ROC’s 
military capabilities as compared to the strengthening of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA), Taiwan does not intend to 
engage in an arms race, and will also not provoke and cause 
conflicts. However, the ROC must still remain steadfast in 
its determination for self defense and consolidate defense 
capabilities to deter the possible occurrence of war. When the time is ripe, the ROC will further promote cross-strait military 
CBMs to improve understanding through communication, 
resolve hostility through interaction, and proactively participate 
in regional cooperation to maintain peace over the Taiwan Strait 
34and stability within the region.
II. Major Threats from the PRC
Based on factors such as the PRC’s military modernization progress, 
strategic concept development, force structure and deployment, and 
capabilities to research and produce weapons, it can be said that the 
PRC’s capabilities in launching a war against Taiwan have increased 
dramatically. Currently, the PRC is proactively developing surveillance/reconnaissance satellites, electronic warfare, information warfare, 
ballistic missiles and cruise missiles, air warfare, naval warfare, and 
landing assault capabilities. In the future, it will become a severe threat 
against the ROC’s C
4ISR , sea/aerial lines of communication, and 
homeland defense. Additionally, the PRC may employ the “non-military three-front war” to secure legal, public opinion, and psychological 
advantages Details explained as follow:
1. Surveillance, reconnaissance and satellites capabilities 
The PRC has currently deployed over 30 positioning, 
navigation, communication, surveillance, research, and 
meteorological satellites. In the future, it will accelerate its 
aerospace research projects, with emphasis on launching and 
deploying surveillance, communication, and navigation satellites 
to create comprehensive capabilities such as surveillance systems, global navigation, and jam-resistant communication. In 
wartime, they can provide electronic warning and jamming, and 
support precision strikes with anti-radiation unmanned aircraft, 
ballistic missiles, and cruise missiles.
Also, by using beyond-visual-range sky-wave and 
ground-wave radars in conjunction with warning aircraft, 
35unmanned reconnaissance aircraft, and other surveillance and 
reconnaissance equipment, the PRC possesses around-the-clock 
surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities over the western 
Pacific, eastern Taiwan, and the Okinawa. Additionally, on 
January 12, 2007, the PRC successfully destroyed a discarded 
low-orbit weather satellite with a medium-range ballistic missile, 
indicating that it has attained anti-low-orbit satellite capabilities. 
In the future, it will continue to develop anti-satellite weapon platforms that pose threats to the normal operation of Taiwan’s 
satellite communication.
2. Electronic warfare capabilities
The PLA ’s ground electronic warfare (EW) forces are 
equipped with new communication jamming equipment, and 
have established various jamming sites. The PLA Air Force 
has deployed long-range jamming aircraft, anti-radiation 
unmanned aircraft, and anti-radiation missiles. In recent years, 
there has been an emphasis on conducting exercises in complex 
electromagnetic environments. In wartime, the PRC can engage in electronic jamming against the ROC Armed Forces and 
disable our command, control, information, and communication 
capabilities.
In the future, the PRC will develop EW equipment for 
fixed wing aircraft, helicopters, and unmanned aircraft, 
accelerate electromagnetic pulse (EMP) munitions, and other 
electromagnetic weapons, and proactively research and develop low-frequency EMP, kinetic interceptors, and other innovative 
weapons to seize electromagnetic advantage in the battlefield 
and engage in an offensive war.
363. Information operation capabilities
The PLA has established professional information operation 
(IO) units to research and develop computer viruses, devise 
tactics and fighting techniques, and establish capabilities to 
attack the enemy’s computer systems and networks. It will wage 
information operations against its enemy by means of joint 
military and civilian participation, combining civilian network 
resources and information technology personnel to form a large network of assault capacity.
In recent years, there have been experiments, launched from 
mainland China or locations out of China, on network hacking, intelligence gathering, wireless network infiltration, and virus 
attacks against Taiwan. It is very possible that, in wartime, 
the PRC may aim at disrupting our political and military 
information networks, causing overall failure of Taiwan’s 
normal information system operations. 
4. Ballistic and cruise missile capabilities
The PLA has currently deployed more than 1,300 short-
range ballistic missiles and cruise missiles in areas opposite 
Taiwan. Various kinds of improved missiles continue to be 
mass-produced and gradually assigned to the PLA.
In the future, the PLA will continue to research and 
manufacture high precision and interception-resistant ballistic 
missiles, and deploy supersonic cruise missiles, which enable 
rapid multi-wave missile assaults against Taiwan, and it can conduct precision strikes against Taiwan’s critical political and 
military infrastructures, airports, sea ports, and military bases.
375. Air operations capabilities
The PLA ’s Air Forces against Taiwan consist of air defense 
missiles, fighters and bomber aircraft. Currently, there are 
approximately 700 new-generation fighters, which can engage 
in combat against Taiwan without resupply on the ground first. 
In the future, the PRC will continue researching and improving 
early warning aircraft and command and communication 
aircraft to enhance aerial command, control, and target acquisition capabilities, acquire aerial refueling aircraft to 
extend air combat radius, and mass-produce new fighter and 
bomber aircraft (J-10, J-7, and H-6 missile aircraft), Sukhoi series fighters, and unmanned combat aerial vehicles (UCA Vs) 
to dramatically increase the PR C’ s air assault  and surprise 
attack capabilities against Taiwan.
Additionally, the PLA has combined the Russian S-300 series 
missiles and indigenous Red Flag series of air defense missiles, 
forming a multilayer air defense network that contains short, 
medium, and long-range defense layers, with range covering airspace around the centerline of the Taiwan Strait, severely 
limiting the cruise range of the ROC fighters and threatening 
the safety of Taiwan naval and aerial surveillance forces in the 
Taiwan Strait.
6. Maritime operations capabilities
( 1 ) Surface warfare: The PLA Navy has completed its 
purchase of the “Sovremenny” class missile destroyers, and manufactured its own large combatant ships, large 
multipurpose landing ships, and new missile speedboats. In 
the future, it will continue to consolidate mobile maritime 
force buildup required for adapting to an information-based 
38environment, and increase overall offshore and blue water 
warfi  ghting capabilities, to achieve its objective of preventing 
foreign forces from intervening in theaters of operation by 
sea.
(2) Submarines: In recent years, the PRC has accelerated 
its research and manufacture of new nuclear-powered 
and conventional submarines, and purchased Kilo-
class submarines from Russia, which greatly increases its underwater combat capabilities capable of partially 
blockading Taiwan and interrupting the ROC’s maritime 
interdiction forces.
(3) Aircraft carriers: The PRC has been proactively pursuing 
research and manufacture projects of aircraft carriers in recent years, indicating its intention and determination to 
develop sea control capabilities in blue waters. With the 
establishment of its aircraft carrier battle groups in the future, 
they will pose severe threats to the waters east of Taiwan, 
with ability to directly attack Taiwan’s eastern military facilities, or cut off the Taiwan’s sea lines of communication 
(SLOCs) to the external world, and hence limit the mobility 
and strategic depth of the ROC Armed Forces.
7. Landing assault capabilities
The PRC currently possesses numerical advantages in 
its ground forces against Taiwan. Currently, its contingency mobile striking forces are fully equipped, organized, and trained, with emphases on engaging in combined amphibious 
assault operations in foreign terrains. They can engage in 
combat immediately without pre-combat training. In recent 
39years, the PLA has continued to enhance training and exercises 
in seizing coastal islands, and strengthening its triphibious 
assault capability.
In the future, the PRC will continue to construct large 
multipurpose landing ships, new amphibious landing ships, 
and hovercraft to increase its amphibious operation capacity, 
so as to establish capabilities to transport two amphibious 
mechanized infantry divisions at the same time and reduce the time required for force projection. In addition, the PRC is 
researching,   manufacturing and purchasing large transport 
aircraft and utility helicopters from abroad to increase its airborne/air assault capacity and establishing triphibious attack 
and combined ground and air operation capabilities. Combining 
its Second Artillery Corps, and precision maritime and air 
strike capabilities, the PRC is now capable of seizing and 
blockading Taiwan’s offshore islands. In the future, as its air and 
sea transport and logistics capabilities improve, it will greatly 
increase its chances of winning the war against Taiwan.
8. The “three-front war” against Taiwan
By incorporating the non-military three-front war (legal, 
public opinion, and psychological warfare) into its military 
thinking, and in conjunction with its modern warfare ideology 
which integrates political, economic, diplomatic, military, and 
psychological means, the PRC is able to employ measures other 
than military capabilities to assist in achieving its objectives of war. 
The essence of the PRC’s “three-front war” may include 
utilizing legal warfare to seek justification and legitimacy in 
40starting a war, employing public opinion warfare to influence 
national consciousness and acquire international support, thus 
producing a psychological intimidation effect on Taiwan, and 
conducting psychological warfare, with a two-prong strategy 
scheme that offers peaceful resolution and exerts military 
intimidation at the same time, to disrupt our willpower to resist 
and achieve its objectives of “attaining decisive results with a 
small fi  ght” or “winning without fi  ghting”.
III. Possible PRC Military Actions against Taiwan
According to the analyses of current PLA capabilities and future 
developments, its possible course of military action against Taiwan can be categorized into fi  ve types:
1. Military intimidation
The PLA may wage psychological warfare against Taiwan 
by means of escalating the intensity of its military activities, 
adjusting force deployments, including forward deployments, 
Field Training exercises, and firepower demonstration, and 
use media infl  uences to exaggerate the seriousness of military 
situation over the Taiwan Strait, so as to stoke internal panic in 
Taiwan and undermine our willpower and morale.
2. Partial blockade
The PLA may use its Second Artillery Corps, navy, and air 
force to conduct partial blockades against Taiwan’s important 
ports, offshore islands, and routes connecting to the outside 
world, and blockade or seize Taiwan’s offshore or remote 
islands, in order to shatter the will and morale of the populace, 
cripple our economic lifeline, depress our internal and external 
41environment, and force a peace negotiation on their terms.
3. Surgical strikes
The PLA may use ballistic missiles, cruise missiles, and air-
launched land attack missiles to bombard Taiwan’s command 
systems, political and economic centers of gravity, decisive 
critical nodes, and symbolic targets, and gradually escalate and 
intensify its offensive against Taiwan in order to achieve the 
objectives of delivering punitive strikes and disrupting Taiwan's solidarity, or gaining an upper hand in military actions by 
collapsing Taiwan's will to fight.
4. Asymmetric warfare
In conjunction with low-damage, high-efficiency, quick, 
and decisive military actions, the PLA may employ special 
operation forces and hidden agents to conduct decapitation 
operations. Furthermore, the PLA may employ cyber and 
information operations, and other feasible measures to disrupt 
Taiwan’s critical political, economic, military infrastructures, 
and information systems, so as to debilitate C
4ISR systems and 
cripple the ROC Armed Forces’ counter strike capabilities
5. Rapid landing
The PLA may combine the employment of its Second 
Artillery Corps with its armed forces to wage a large scale triphibious invasion against Taiwan, emphasizing quick fighting 
and quick victory, with the objective of forcing the ROC to 
plead for peace before possible foreign powers’ intervention and creating an irreversible fait accompli  to block international 
intervention.
From the aforementioned analysis of possible PRC military 
42activities and given the fact that the PRC currently does not 
possess suffi  cient capabilities to conduct an amphibious landing 
assault against Taiwan and prevent foreign intervention, if the 
PRC does employ military actions to achieve its political ends 
in the near future, then it is more likely to employ approaches 
that include strategic intimidation, partial blockades (including 
seizure of offshore islands), strikes against critical nodes, or 
asymmetrical warfare. In the future, when the PRC acquires the capabilities to seize Taiwan, or, when certain circumstances so 
urgently require, it may directly wage a large-scale invasion on 
Taiwan.
Section 3   Driving F orce and Dynamics of Defense 
Transformation
I. Impacts from New Military Technologies and Patterns of War
Because of rapid advance in modern technology, the effectiveness of 
weaponry is increasing day by day, especially in military applications 
of aerospace surveillance, electromagnetic frequency mapping, digital 
information, nanotechnology, precision guidance, and high energy 
lasers technologies. Advanced states around the world are motivated 
to develop operational concepts such as transparent battlefield, electromagnetic attack and defense, joint air and ground operations, 
long-range elimination of enemies, and precision strike, thereby 
resulting in the gradual evolution of the pattern of modern warfare, and 
shaping a wave of global military reforms. Having looked at the effects 
of modern technologies in military applications and their developmental 
43trends and witnessed the Persian Gulf War (1991), Kosovo War (1999), 
Afghanistan War (2001), and US-Iraq War (2003), the Armed Forces 
have been keenly aware that modern high technology warfare has 
undergone several characteristic changes, including:
1. Multi-dimensional battle space
The battle space of modern warfare had gone from the 
traditional three geographical dimensions (ground, sea, air) to a multi-dimensional one to include space, electromagnetic dimension, network dimension, and psychological dimension. 
Therefore, the undertaking of war is no longer confrontations 
between two parties in a single dimension. More emphasis needs to be placed on the relationship and effective integration of multi-
dimensional capabilities, and achieving victory through joint 
operations.
2. Information advantages and battlefield awareness
Modern information and electronic technologies have 
advanced rapidly, allowing those with information advantages on the battlefield to lift, to a certain extent, the fog of war, and further cut off the enemy’s information and communication 
networks, thus monopolizing information on the battlefield. 
In the future, battlespace will become more transparent, and 
awareness for battlefield situations will become much more 
important. The ability to accurately and quickly capture and 
process battlefield intelligence will be essential for precision 
strikes on the weaknesses of the enemy’s forces and ensuring success of operations.
3. Precision destruction and attacks on center of gravity 
Because of the weapon systems developments in surveillance, 
44precision guidance technologies, modern warfare increasingly 
emphasizes precision strike on the enemy’s strategic center 
of gravity, with the intention of disrupting the enemies’ 
psychological balance and collapsing their will to fight and 
subsequent warfighting capabilities. The relative advantages 
of this operational pattern can reduce the duration of a war, 
personnel casualties, and collateral damage to non-combat 
personnel and facilities.
4. Non-contact warfare
Great improvement in the penetration capability, strike 
power, and precision of modern weapons is blurring the traditional distinction between front-line and rear areas. By 
utilizing long-range strike weapons, information operation 
and network attacks, one can directly penetrate or infiltrate an 
enemy’s defense systems and execute effective strikes against 
that enemy’s critical political, economic, or military targets while 
avoiding direct contact and engagement.
5. Asymmetric warfare
After the end of the Cold War, advanced industrialized states 
have enjoyed military advantages. Their potential enemies have 
thus developed asymmetrical methods in hopes of overcoming 
these advantages while striking at their weaknesses. The 
result was the 9/11 Incident and other terrorist attacks, along 
with unconventional warfare doctrines, such as “unrestricted 
warfare”. Currently, asymmetrical warfare has become an approach to conquer an enemy. The core idea focuses on 
employing innovative operational tools or tactics to conquer 
large forces with smaller ones, and gain an advantage against a 
militarily advantaged adversary.
456. Combat command requires swiftness and adaptability
Under the development of modern command, control, 
and communication technologies, military decision-makers 
and battlefield commanders are able to rapidly assess enemy 
situation, issue orders, and direct operations. Especially, since 
the modern battlefield is more fickle and complex than before, 
tactical opportunities may emerge and disappear swiftly. 
Therefore, the emphasis of operational command has changed from detailed pre-planed actions to controlling battlefield 
contingencies and flexibly to adjust missions. Future warfare 
will rely more and more on rapid and accurate early warning, battlefield awareness, command, control, and real-time 
communication capabilities.
7. Infrastructure security and defense
As societies and economies develop in the information age, 
states are increasingly dependent on critical infrastructures to maintain the functioning of political and economic systems. 
Therefore, the vulnerability of these infrastructures makes them important targets for attacks during military conflicts, affecting 
the sustainment and utilization of a state’s overall warfighting 
potentialities.
8. Immediate reserve mobilization and combat deployment
The operational environment of the Taiwan Strait defense is 
unique, with characteristics such as shorter warning time, faster operation tempo, and broader sources of threats. In order to rapidly respond to sudden and urgent operational situations, the 
maneuver and deployment of reserve forces have to satisfy the 
requirements of immediate mobilization and rapid operational 
46support.
Facing the wave of global revolution in military affairs, the ROC 
Armed Forces are fully pushing for military transformation. This is not 
only a necessary course of action to address the operational pattern in 
this information age and capture the characteristics of modern warfare, 
but also the key to successfully forestall the enemy and overcome 
stronger enemy forces with inferior defense forces. The opportunity for 
the ROC Armed Forces lies in capitalizing on the current innovation juncture, practically assessing current force structure, and accelerating 
the transformation of critical warfi  ghting capabilities, so as to cope with 
the challenges of future warfare.
II. The Challenge of Maximizing Effi  ciency of the Defense Budget
The defense budget is an important basis for executing national 
defense policy as well as the fi  nancial source for implementing force 
planning and development. The amount of national defense investment 
is determined by the government’s overall policy objectives and the 
intensity of external security threats. As a nation, Taiwan needs to 
assess external military threats and appropriate investments in national 
defense development in order to safeguard the fruits of political and 
economic development. Under the framework of the overall national 
economic development and allocation of financial resources, how the MND can most effectively allocate and apply limited defense 
resources, and utilize today’s budget to address tomorrow’s threats, 
would require reasonable calculation and cautious planning.
In the next several years, the Armed Forces will face the 
challenge of maximizing benefi  ts of the defense expenditure. In order 
to construct “Hard ROC” national defense capabilities and take into 
47consideration overall national developmental factors, the Armed 
Forces need to undergo a series of transformational planning and 
reform measures to establish the most appropriate force level. The 
Armed Forces also need to improve defense planning mechanisms 
and procedures, including increasing the forward looking of strategic 
planning, discreetness of formulation requirements, integration of 
weapon procurements, and appropriateness of resources allocation and 
prioritization.
In addition, the MND needs to adhere to the spirits of “precise 
planning and proper utilization of national finances” to consolidate its strategy for utilizing defense resources. And in order to effectively reduce the nation’s overall financial burden, the MND needs to 
use methods such as future financial projections, defense planning 
assessments, and cost-benefit analyses to carefully plan and allocate 
defense resources, reasonably budget for defense requirements, 
and cut back on unessential expenditures. In particular, personnel 
maintenance budget is legally mandated as an obligatory expenditure, 
which should be accurately budgeted and allocated. The operational maintenance budget should first satisfy demands such as weaponry 
and equipment availability and readiness exercises that are essential to 
maintain warfighting capabilities. The military investment budget will 
be predicated on enhancing the overall joint warfighting capabilities 
of the Armed Forces, with priority given to the construction of critical 
capabilities and urgently needed items for readiness, so as to ensure 
credible defense capabilities.
48III. Incorporating the Needs of National and Social Development
The reforms of the Armed Forces mutually interact with changes 
in the social environment; and the situation of national domestic affairs 
and economic development also have a major impact on the Armed 
Forces’ development and readiness. According to the “Projections of 
Population for Taiwan, ROC: 2008 – 2056”, published by the Council 
for Economic Planning and Development of the Executive Yuan, 
Taiwan’s birth rate will continue to decrease from 205,000 births in 
2008 to 135,000 births by 2056. In other words, the supply of draftees 
will decrease dramatically in the future. The current military service system and the current force level will eventually face shortages of 
draft-eligible men.
Therefore, the Armed Forces need to streamline force level, and 
gradually replace the conscription system with the volunteer system, so 
that volunteer soldiers with longer service periods can achieve greater 
professionalism, more robust psychological caliber, and more stable 
adaptability, thus enabling a numerically smaller but high quality force to exert greater warfighting effectiveness. The implementation 
of an all-volunteer force, however, is not only a revolution in military 
affairs but also an important plan for the nation’s human resources. 
In the future, when the active force are replaced by volunteers, the 
eligible draftees who have received their short-term military training 
as required by constitutional obligation could then return to society for 
further education, employment, or research work, so that the driving force and dynamics of the nation’s development and social progress 
can be developed in tandem.
In addition, because defense expenditure and military investment 
are relatively large to other outlays, they place considerable burden 
49on central government finances and furthermore severely challenge 
overall national finances in the face of current global economic crisis. 
If the benefits and effects of defense investment can be expanded to 
strengthen the nation’s overall economic development, then defense 
and civilian needs can be addressed simultaneously, jointly creating a 
value chain that allows defense development to also create economic 
benefits and contribute to the people’s livelihood. 
For example, long-term and stable investments in military 
technology research and development can contribute to the improvement of dual-purpose (military and civilian purposes) 
technologies and assist with the enhancement of the nation’s overall technological capabilities. Meanwhile, the establishment of long-term 
and stable capabilities to indigenously manufactured defense weapon 
systems could collaborate with the government’s policy of expanding 
domestic demands to increase the value of the nation’s existing 
investments and industrial production, encourage economic prosperity, 
and assist in alleviating unemployment problems. Therefore, the MND 
has to continue improving armaments development mechanisms, defense technology research and development, armaments investments, 
and system life cycle management, so that, as the Armed Forces undergo 
transformation, defense development and national development can be 
combined together to create a win-win situation.
Section 4   Major Tasks of Defense Reform
 Warfighting capability development for the Armed Forces needs 
to be adjusted according to security threats and national defense strategy. Therefore, in the face of complex strategic environment 
50and multifaceted mission challenges, the MND’s organization, 
mechanisms, and procedures, as well as the functionality, organization, 
and structure of the Armed Forces should be systematically evolved to 
enhance organizational effectiveness and accomplish national defense 
missions. As the Armed Forces gradually implement the important 
processes of transformation, several reform issues should be taken as 
key priorities for the MND in the next few years, including:
1.  modifying the MND and services HQs organization to boost 
organizational effi  ciency;
2.  planning for force structure adjustment to enhance the quality 
of forces and improve overall warfi  ghting capabilities;
3.  implementing an all-volunteer force and recruiting professional 
manpower to develop a competent force;
4.  improving the force planning mechanism and consolidating 
strategic planning and force development functions;
5.  reviewing the armaments development mechanism, and 
establishing comprehensive scientific research and weapon 
acquisition and management functions;
6.  refining the joint operations mechanism to establish unified 
command functions for both peacetime and wartime; and 
7.  reforming the mechanism for human resources development to 
cultivate professional civilian and military personnel.
I. Adjust National Defense Organization
Since the implementation of the National Defense Act and the 
Organization Act of the Ministry of National Defense (simplified as the “Two Defense Acts” hereafter) in 2002, the MND has been 
carrying out national defense organization re-structuring projects, 
51and has essentially ascertained an organizational framework for the 
division of labor among military policy, operations, and armaments. 
The organization and functions of policy staff, joint staff, and service 
HQs have achieved expected efficiencies after comprehensive reviews 
and adjustments. However, despite several partial adjustments, some 
newly established units still exhibit operational problems, which need 
to be fundamentally resolved or improved in order to attain better 
efficiencies. Because defense organizations are large with complex functions, it is necessary to utilize modern management methods 
and tools to carry out appropriate reforms in existing organizational 
conventions. This will ensure improvements in organizational efficiencies under the precondition of preserving optimal operational 
experience in organization.
In the future, modifications to MND agencies should adhere 
to the spirit of the Two Defense Acts to undertake more practical 
designs. The MND will adhere to the function-oriented principle  in 
other words, adopt the logic of ensuring functional requirements, 
establishing units and agencies, devising required specialties and posts to make appropriate assessments and cautious planning to proceed 
with measured organization re-structure, as opposed to indiscriminate 
organizational downsizing, and construct modern organizations that 
satisfy the unique national needs. Relevant principles include:
1.  The organizational adjustments of the MND’s agencies should abide by the spirit of the Two Defense Acts, carefully 
considering professional functionality, authorities and responsibilities among military policy, operations, and 
armaments branches, and proceeding with unit establishment, 
merger, or deactivation according to function-oriented 
principles.
522.  In accordance with the principle of “accountability and 
specialization”, perform comprehensive reviews on the 
divisions of authorities and responsibilities of all systems, and 
work procedures to adjust various specialty staff systems, 
functions, and responsibilities.
II. Plan for Adjustments to Force Structure
The size of the Armed Forces has always been dictated by 
operational requirements and strategic ideologies. Since 1949, the 
large offensive forces intended for “offensive operations at the right 
time” and “unity of offense and defense” have gradually changed 
to a medium scale defense force intended for defensive defense and “resolute defense”. For several decades, the level of the Armed Forces 
has trended downward with streamlining, and the force structure of 
army troops as the mainstay, and Navy and Air Force as auxiliaries in the earlier years has changed to a more balanced development among 
ground, air, and naval forces according to mission characteristics. In 
recent years, the Armed Forces continue to review force structure and 
mission requirements according to enemy threats and military strategic 
concept in order to reduce force level and adjust the organizational 
structure of forces. The level of the Armed Forces has gradually 
shrunk from 452,000 personnel in 1997 to 400,000 in 2001, 385,000 in 2004, 296,000 in 2006, and 275,000 in 2008.
Currently, the MND is operating on the military strategic 
concept of “resolute defense and credible deterrence” to fulfi  ll Taiwan 
and Penghu defensive missions. In coordination with plans for an 
all-volunteer force and weapon systems replacement and through 
validation by modeling and simulation and war gaming, the MND will 
53be able to determine the functionality and organization of all forces and 
define the compositions of key force elements (main combat forces), 
so as to establish proper force structure (including type, organization, 
number, and balanced ratio for forces of all services) and construct an 
efficient and competent armed forces to fulfill requirements for defense 
operations. 
III. Implement an All-Volunteer Force
Because the ROC population structure is trending towards having 
fewer children, the number of draft-eligible men will continue to 
decrease in the future. Furthermore, in recent years, the mandatory 
military service period has been shortened, which results in a great increase in the soldier turnover rate and causes fluctuation in the curve 
of readiness training, making it difficult to maintain readiness levels. 
Seeing that modern armed forces need to face multifaceted threats and multifarious missions, and at the same time, advanced armaments 
increasingly require higher quality of integrated systems, procedures, 
professional knowledge, and operational skills, the ROC Armed 
Forces urgently needs to increase the more qualified and of volunteer 
personnel to act as the mainstay force, in order to retain the efficiency 
of training and combat. In the future, the ROC has to establish a “small 
but smart and strong” active force that can immediately engage in combat missions to cope with wars that occur without warning, and 
ensure adequate time for reserve forces to complete mobilization and 
pre-combat training, thereby accomplishing the objective of homeland 
defense.
To address demands for competent personnel to cope with high 
technology warfare, and incorporating economic developments and 
54societal changes, the Armed Forces are gradually increasing the ratio 
of volunteer soldiers by reducing conscription demands annually 
and accordingly increasing volunteer soldiers’ posts. In addition, by 
recruiting competent and motivated personnel of appropriate age, and 
developing towards an all-volunteer force, the ROC will construct 
a professional, competent, and all-volunteer force. The efforts to 
develop an all-volunteer force need to be coordinated with assessments 
and appropriate planning on force requirements, organization and equipment, overall force level, current manning ratios, budgetary 
support capabilities, defense manpower replenishment, force training, 
and legislation refinement, so as to gradually and successfully transition to an all-volunteer force without causing gaps in readiness. 
Additionally, in order to deal with the reduction of the active force level 
after transformation, the MND should also review enhancements to 
mobilization, organization, training, and employment of reserve forces, 
so as to utilize the warfighting capabilities of all-out defense during 
wartime.
IV. Refi  ne Force Structure
The Armed Forces’ regulations and procedures for strategic and 
force planning is the planning and budgeting system. That system 
was devised in 1968 with reference to the spirit of the U.S. military’s “planning, programming, and budgeting system (PPBS)”, and has 
now been in place for over 30 years since its formal implementation 
in 1975. During this time, the U.S. military has undergone several 
important reforms, and revamped its system in 2003 as the “planning, 
programming, budgeting, and execution system (PPBES)”, which 
reintegrated planning procedures for defense strategy and military 
55strategy, refined the complex and time-consuming procedures during 
the planning stage, and enhanced post-implementation efficiency 
assessment and review. The ROC Armed Forces’ planning and 
budgeting system was, since it was implemented, revised twice 
respectively in 1983 and 1993, and furthermore subjected to procedural 
reviews and amendments in 2004 and 2007, in coordination with 
the organizational adjustments and authorities and responsibilities 
refinement as a result of the implementation of the Two Defense Acts.
In terms of design principles behind the system, the Armed 
Forces’ planning and budgeting system contains systematic and logical relevant procedures, covering environmental assessments, strategy formulation, resources allocation, planning, budgeting, 
policy implementation, and evaluation and control, setting a 
systematic foundation for the ROC’s policy implementation and force 
developments, so as to provide sufficient flexibility for the Armed 
Forces’ strategy planning and force acquisition mechanisms, effectively 
address environmental and threat changes, and accomplish effective 
allocation and strict control of defense resources. In the future, the MND should continue to coordinate organizational adjustments to 
devise operation procedures that are capable of achieving modern 
managerial efficiencies, so as to enhance the interconnections among 
strategy, planning, budgeting, and execution, increase the efficiency of 
defense resources employment, and accomplish the objectives of force 
planning.
V. Review the Armaments Development Mechanism
The development of advanced technologies has not only changed 
the mode of warfare, but also affected the development of weapons and 
56the direction of force development. With the advent of high technology 
warfare, the Armed Forces have focused on establishing a system for 
advanced weapon research, development, production, purchase, repair, 
and maintenance in recent years, in hopes of combining military and 
civilian technological capacities to fulfi  ll future warfare requirements. 
Also, as dictated by Article 22 of the National Defense Act, the 
Armed Forces should seek to gradually accomplish the objective 
of creating a self-reliant defense establishment. However, there are obvious insuffi  ciencies in the ROC’s independent defense technology 
developments, meaning that domestic military and civilian technology 
exchange and international armaments cooperation have yet to be integrated in order to stimulate normal armaments development, 
increase capabilities of the defense industry, and fulfill the Armed 
Forces’ weapon acquisition requirements.
In the future, the Armed F orces ’ armaments development  
mechanism should integrate with national economic developments, 
devise forward-looking armaments procurement strategies through 
systematic armaments investments in order to fulfill the Armed Forces’ readiness requirements. Simultaneously, transformation of the 
Chung-Shan Institute of Science and Technology and integration of 
military and civilian defense industry resources should be undertaken, 
so that military and national technology developments can be mutually 
utilized to create a win-win situation. In terms of foreign weapon 
procurement, it should effectively support national defense strategy and 
the military strategic concept, and fl  exibly adopt either the “US Foreign Military Sale” or “Direct Commercial Sale” approach, so as to rapidly 
and reliably acquire advanced and needful defensive armaments from 
external sources, upgrade armaments in the shortest time possible, and 
57secure mutual benefit and cooperation with international industries. 
In terms of autonomous research and development, the ROC should 
increase the budgetary ratios of high-tech military research and 
development, extensively recruit technological talents, increase the 
standards of defense technology, prioritize the establishment of rapid 
response capabilities, and autonomously develop highly functional and 
highly precise weaponry, so as to gradually accomplish the objective of 
a self-reliant national defense.
VI. Improve the Joint Operations Command Mechanism
Modern warfare emphasizes speed and timeliness. Battlefield 
situations may be complex, ambiguous, and unstable. Joint operations 
command requires simplicity and efficiency in order to seize 
opportunities on the battlefield and defeat enemies. In recent years, 
the organization and operational procedures of the Armed Forces’ joint operations command mechanism has rapidly accelerated the 
speed of command, as validated by the Han-Kuang series exercises 
throughout the years. However, whether or not the joint operations 
command mechanism satisfies future defense operations requirements 
remains to be evaluated. In addition, it should be repeatedly tested and 
validated through computer war gaming and field training exercises 
to ensure its validity and effectiveness. Article 13 of the National Defense Act stipulates that the General Staff Headquarters (GSH) is 
the joint operations command mechanism for the Armed Forces. The 
GSH should have complete joint operations command functions that 
satisfy both joint operations command efficiency and staff functions of 
military operations branch. Organization and operational procedures 
58of relevant mechanisms are important topics for future reviews and 
refi  nement.
In the future, the Armed Forces should still be striving to establish 
a joint operations command mechanism that is “consistent and 
accountable in both peacetime and wartime,” and is able to suffi  ciently 
utilize the effectiveness of joint operations. The mechanism should also 
establish a network system that allows direct command and control 
of strategic execution at all levels through the Armed Forces’ joint operations command center, so as to be characterized by “simplicity in  
command of force employment”, “shortened chains of command”, and 
“rapid and precise command”.
VII. Defense Human Resources Development Reform
Other than high-tech weapons, the most important key to 
victory in modern warfare is the competence of personnel. In their 
reform in military affairs, advanced states around the world all 
have placed great emphasis on fostering national defense personnel, 
with specific focus on more knowledge-oriented and professional 
training, in order to effectively address the requirements of high-
tech warfare and future defense challenges. As the division of 
labor for Taiwan’s national defense affairs becomes more and more 
precise, personnel requirements will accordingly emphasize more on professionalism. Besides, because of reduction in the size of national 
defense organizations and the overall force level trending downwards, 
the MND will be in more urgent need than the past to foster and 
employ talented individuals, retain competent personnel, and 
remove unqualified ones. Therefore, it is necessary for the MND to 
59appropriately review and reform systems and policies, in coordination 
with the personnel management system (including career management 
transferring and promotion), regarding professional military education, 
including basic education, intermediate education, and advanced 
education, and problems relating to refining the system of and 
improving the quality of non-commissioned officers and soldiers.
Furthermore, since implementation of the Two Defense Acts, the 
MND has started to introduce civilians (civilian officials for national defense) into the national defense system. Although this has nominally 
fulfilled legal requirements, due to imperfections in the initial planning 
and follow-up execution, it has led to problems such as uneven civilian personnel quality, job posts not being performed with required skills, 
newly employed personnel not receiving basic defense knowledge 
training, and high-level civilian officials being unable to receive 
advanced strategic education. Therefore, the utility of introducing 
civilian personnel has not reached expectations, which requires 
comprehensive reviews and the establishment of forward-looking 
and all-encompassing training, education, and management systems for defense civilian officials, so as to foster a truly competent defense 
civilian force to contribute to defense affairs.
6061Chapter 2
NATIONAL DEFENSE STRATEGIC 
GUIDANCE
Article 137 of the Republic of China’s Constitution stipulates, “It 
shall be the objective of the national defense of the Republic of China 
to safeguard national security and preserve world peace.” In addition, 
Article 5 of the National Defense Act states, “The Republic of China Army, Navy and Air Force (ROC Armed Forces) shall abide by the 
Constitution of the Republic of China, swear allegiance to the nation, 
protect the people, and perform assigned duties in order to ensure 
national security.”
On the aforementioned basis, the ROC’s defense establishment 
aims to defend national security, safeguard the public’s livelihood and 
sustainable development. Assessing the current strategic environment, threats and challenges, the ROC Armed Forces, in accordance with 
the concept of “preventive defense”, shall actively build modern 
defense capabilities to effectively defend national territories, deter war, 
maximize opportunities for the nation and minimize threats, and act as 
a solid buttress for the government in its efforts of pursuing cross-strait 
peace, maintaining regional stability, and creating national prosperity.
In the international community and Asia Pacific region, the ROC 
is striving to maintain peace in the Taiwan Strait, promote regional stability, and play the role of “peacemaker”. The purpose of ROC’s 
force development is to defend national security, preparing for but 
not seeking war; absolutely not provoking or launching attacks; and 
abiding by international norms against developing nuclear weapons 
or other weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). The ROC will never 
62pose a threat to any other country. In addition, the ROC seeks to avoid 
military confrontations through participation in regional security 
cooperation, promoting cross-strait military CBMs and other confl  ict 
prevention measures; and maintaining peace and stability together with 
other countries in the region.
Section 1   National Defense Policy
The MND has developed its national defense strategy and 
military strategy in accordance with the President’s national defense policies of building a “Hard ROC” defense force and establishing 
comprehensive defense capabilities that “cannot be intimidated, seized, 
devoured, or crashed”, as the foundation for planning national defense 
transformation and the direction of future warfighting capability development. Concrete means are intended to achieve the following six 
objectives:
1. Establish an elite force: Enhance defense capabilities, push for 
defense transformation, strive for peace in the Taiwan Strait, 
and ensure sustainable national development and prosperity for the people.
2. Promote an all-volunteer force: Gradually establish an all-
volunteer force, devise and implement relevant complementary 
measures, appropriately adjust force structure, and streamline 
the military organization.
3. Strengthen intangible combat capabilities: Consolidate national 
identity, shape solid military discipline, push for administrative reforms, foster military virtues, and cultivate the military 
personnel’s sense of honor.
634. Refine the armaments mechanism: Acquire necessary weapon 
systems, elevate defense technology research and development, 
effectively utilize technology transfers and industrial 
cooperation, and build a self-reliant defense.
5. Enhance cooperation with friendly countries and allies: Promote military exchanges, strive for strategic cooperation, 
expand sources of intelligence and early warning, observe 
regional situations, and ensure national security.
6. Improve benefits for military personnel: Improve welfare for 
military personnel, realize benefits for military dependents, 
provide assistance to civilians, consolidate support for military dependents, and boost the morale of the Armed Forces.
Section 2   National Defense Strategy
I.  National Defense Objectives 
In accordance with the President’s overarching concept on 
national security, Taiwan’s defense strategy deploys in strategic 
planning and concrete measures to implement the “Hard ROC” 
defense policy. In order to ensure national security, the MND has 
devised defense strategy and defined objectives and methods to direct 
the formulation and implementation of military strategy. Current objectives of national defense are:
1. war prevention;
2. homeland defense;
3. contingency response;
4. conflict avoidance; and
645.  regional stability.
II. Actions to Achieve the Objectives
1. War prevention
(1) Build “Hard ROC” defense capabilities
Warfighting capability preservation and infrastructure 
protection should be enhanced to strengthen sustainment 
after the enemy’s first strike. Joint operations capabilities should be fully exploited and favorable force, space, and time 
conditions seized to annihilate enemies in pertinent sea areas 
and airspace. In addition, reserve mobilization capabilities 
should be developed proactively and all-out defense practiced 
to effectively defend our homeland.
(2) Establish “credible deterrence” capabilities
Defensive countermeasures capabilities will continue to 
be enhanced, asymmetrical warfare capabilities researched and developed, technological superiorities integrated, self-
reliant defense realized, and information technology-driven 
suppression capabilities established, so as to employ “credible 
deterrence” capabilities to achieve the objective of “resolute 
defense”.
(3) Establish cross-strait military CBMs
In the current stage, the MND is undertaking relevant 
planning in accordance with the government’s overall policy 
guidance, and issues and agendas of cross-strait negotiations. 
Thereafter, as conditions mature in domestic and overseas 
environments, and in cross-strait situations, the MND will 
adopt “steady, pragmatic, and incremental” approaches and 
65follow the short, mid, and long-term agenda to gradually 
establish cross-strait military CBMs for preventing conflicts 
in the Taiwan Strait and lowering the probability of war.
(4) Promote regional security exchange and cooperation
Interaction with countries in the Asia-Pacific and 
other friendly nations will be enhanced, regional security cooperation proactively supported, and bilateral or multilateral 
cooperative relationships developed, so that Taiwan can play a more active role in pursuing security order in the Asia-Pacific, 
and contribute to maintaining regional security.
2. Homeland defense
(1) Build elite armed forces
In order to address the demand for highly skilled manpower 
for high-tech warfare, and considering changes in economic and social conditions, the MND will develop an “all-volunteer 
force” by employing gradual approaches to annually decrease 
the number of draftees and accordingly increase the number 
of volunteers. Concurrently, the MND is also pushing to amend laws and regulations and adjust manning, equipping, 
and organizations in order to effectively increase the 
competence of military personnel and establish elite armed 
forces.
(2) Enhance early warning capabilities
To cope with rapid changing global situations and the 
expansion of China’s military capabilities, the Armed 
Forces is accelerating the integration of existing intelligence, 
surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) capacity to enhance 
early warning systems. Simultaneously, intelligence exchange 
66with neighboring and friendly nations will be enhanced, and 
international military situations, enemy threats, and high-tech 
weapon system developments will be closely monitored to 
increase strategic and tactical early warning capabilities.
(3) Enhance warfi  ghting capability preservation
Warfighting capability preservation measures in response 
to the threats of the enemy’s sudden high-intensity assaults should be enhanced, and backups for operational functions of all major systems established. Paralysis caused by combat 
damages during the early stages of operations and subsequent 
compromising of the Armed Forces’ sustained operational capabilities should be prevented. In addition, necessary 
support should be provided to ensure continued operation 
of critical infrastructures, such as telecommunication, 
transportation, energy, water supply, and nuclear plants. 
Protection of critical military infrastructures should be 
enhanced in order to maintain sustained operational 
capabilities.
(4) Establish effi  cient joint operations capabilities
Given the objective of elevating the efficiency of joint 
operations, various operations capabilities should be 
developed, and joint operations command mechanisms 
improved in order to create relative advantages in military 
operations, execute joint defense operations, and deter enemy 
incursions.
(5) Consolidate all-out defense capabilities
The all-out defense education should continue to be 
promoted, public support for an all-out defense rallied, 
67relevant ministries and agencies coordinated, and defense 
mobilization realized to establish a comprehensive all-out 
defense system.
3.  Contingency response
(1) Enhance surveillance, awareness, and monitoring capabilities
In the face of multiple security threats, intelligence 
from relevant ministries and agencies should be effectively 
combined and a comprehensive systematic monitoring framework established, so as to integrate intelligence, timely 
warning, and early response measures to effectively defuse a 
crisis.
(2) Refine contingency response mechanisms
When the nation faces threats of terrorist activities or 
sudden attacks from hidden enemies, the joint operations 
command mechanism should, immediately deploy rapid 
response units to support responsible agencies and local 
governments in quickly quelling crises to accomplish the 
objectives of “preventing internal jolts and external assaults”.
(3) Build effective disaster relief and response troops
Under existing organization and force structure, response 
units capable of immediate response and disaster relief 
capabilities should be assembled. Once the nation faces a 
major disaster, appropriate forces through legal procedures 
to support disaster relief operations should be dispatched as 
requested or assigned by local governments or responsible authorities in order to protect the people’s lives and property.
4.  Conflict prevention
(1) Establish military conflict prevention mechanisms
68Under the joint operations command mechanism, activities 
in Taiwan’s surrounding sea areas and airspace should be 
strictly monitored, and factors of dynamic and static security 
threats identified to fulfill the “crisis prevention, situational 
awareness, contingency response, rapid management, and 
escalation avoidance” requirements.
(2) Abide by regulations on confl  ict avoidance
During execution of various missions, forces at all levels 
should abide by the principle and readiness regulations 
of “not provoking incidents, not escalating conflicts, and 
reducing hostile actions” to avoid military confl  ict caused by miscalculation or accidents.
( 3 ) Enhance capabilities of contingency response and 
management
Rapid response simulations and exercises should be 
enhanced to familiarize procedures of handling various 
contingencies, so that should such incidents happen, they can 
be rapidly contained or resolved to reduce damage.
5.  Regional stability
(1) Participate in regional defense and security dialogues
Participation in regional affairs should be proactive and 
security dialogue and exchange should be increased. More responsibilities in global security issues such as upgrading 
defense and security cooperation, preventing weapon 
proliferation, deterring of terrorist activities, and enhancing humanitarian assistance should also be assumed to make 
positive contributions to the peace and stability of the Asia-
Pacifi  c region.
69(2) Contribute to securing regional sea and aerial lines of 
communication 
Systematic channels for strategic communication and 
security cooperation with regional countries over security 
maintenance issues of sea and aerial lines of communication 
should be established in order to ensure freedom of movement 
of international transportation routes and play a key role in 
facilitating regional stability.
(3) Participate in regional anti-terrorism and humanitarian 
assistance activities
Unconventional security issues such as terrorism, piracy, 
natural disasters, and pandemic diseases have become severe threats to international security and stability in recent years. 
Upholding the belief of peacekeeping, the ROC will fully 
support counter-terrorism activities and assist with regional 
humanitarian relief efforts to fulfill its responsibilities as a 
global citizen.
Section 3   Military Strategy
I. Military Strategic Guidelines and Objectives
In view of factors such as the security environment in the 
surrounding areas, strategic postures of Taiwan and potential enemies, and future force developments, the ROC Armed Forces has adopted 
“resolute defense and credible deterrence” as its military strategic 
concept, under the defense strategy guidance of “war prevention, 
70homeland defense, contingency response, conflict avoidance, and 
regional stability”. The armed forces have also adhered to the 
principle of “preventing war but not fearing war, and preparing for 
but not provoking war”, and will never evoke wars. Only when war is 
inevitable will the ROC integrate its joint armed forces, combined with 
overall all-out defense capabilities, to engage in homeland defense to 
reject, repel, and annihilate the enemy, and ensure national security.
In order to implement the military strategic concept of “resolute 
defense and credible deterrence”, the ROC Armed Forces need to effectively carry out the following missions:
1. Resolute defense—ensure the security of national territories
In conducting defensive operations, the Armed Forces need 
to possess capabilities of surviving the enemy’s first strike, 
averting decapitation, maneuvering forces to counter strikes, 
and sustained operations to achieve the objectives of “strategic 
sustainment and tactical decisiveness”. Strategically, the Armed 
Forces will assume a defensive posture to fight for depth of 
defense and create advantageous conditions. Tactically, the Armed Forces need to sufficiently utilize favorable conditions 
on force, space, and timing, and apply the overall capabilities of 
all-out defense to resist enemy invasions and ensure territorial 
security.
2. Credible deterrence—maintain dependable warfighting 
capabilities
The Armed Forces should effectively integrate the 
interoperability of weapon systems, upgrade effectiveness of joint operations, enhance defensive countermeasures 
capabilities, and faithfully execute combat training and 
71readiness missions, forcing the enemy to rationally calculate 
the costs and risks of invasions, thereby deterring any hostile 
intention to launch an attack.
3.  Counter blockade—maintain sea and aerial lines of communication
Most of the ROC’s major strategic supplies and materials are 
imported, and thus sea and aerial lines of communication are 
critical to national survival. In peacetime, the Armed Forces need to maintain security in the surrounding airspace and sea 
areas. In wartime, it will integrate joint operations capabilities to 
counter the enemy’s blockading forces, open safe aerial and sea transportation routes, maintain communications to the outside 
world, and ensure continuity of government functions.
4.  Joint interdiction—block enemies from approaching the homeland
When an enemy initiates an offensive, according to the 
guidelines of defense operations, the Armed Forces shall seize 
favorable conditions, apply defensive countermeasures to attack the enemy’s important military targets and amphibious 
landing forces that are assembling or embarking in our ports. 
Consequently, as the situation evolves, focus should be placed 
on two key stages, namely, “joint interdiction operations” and 
“joint anchorage area attack” to stop and annihilate the enemy 
when its warfighting capabilities are relatively weak while 
transiting across the Taiwan Strait.
5.  Ground defense—deny enemy landing and setting footholds
If the enemy attempts an amphibious landing with its 
superior naval forces and air support, the ROC Armed Forces 
72needs to apply the overall capabilities of all-out defense, 
construct defensive systems in the entire "depth defense area", 
and execute multilayered interdictions to annihilate enemy 
forces before the lodgments of landed amphibious and airborne 
troops are secured, and achieve the objective of effective 
homeland defense.
II. Future Requirements for Defense Operations
In order to fulfill the missions defined in the military strategy 
and address the conditions of battlefields in the Taiwan Strait, 
characteristics of modern warfare, and developments in military 
technologies and weapon systems, the Armed Forces’ preparedness 
for future defense operations needs to be developed according to the 
following principles:
1.  Force planning, building, and deployment must focus on 
preventing the enemy’s possible surprise, decapitation, 
paralysis, or other asymmetrical operations.
2.  Warfighting capabilities for various battle dimensions, force 
structure, command mechanisms, military doctrinal concepts, and campaign tactics and techniques should continue to be 
integrated toward a joint operations pattern in order to multiply 
warfi  ghting capabilities and create local battlefi  eld superiority.
3. All major weapon systems and platforms should acquire a 
higher level of systematic links to reduce the time required for 
the cycle of “detection – processing – decision – action”, 
Depth defense area is a geographical term that refers to the area between the 
coastal area and mountainous area of Taiwan.
73so that integrated warfighting capabilities can meet the 
objectives of effective and rapid command and control, real-
time and uninterrupted communication, and precision and high 
effective firepower.
4.  Capabilities that can stop or delay the enemy offensive and compromise enemy attempts to achieve quick victory should 
be planned and developed in order to force the enemy to 
practically assess the costs it will have to pay if it launches an invasion, thereby reducing the possibility of resorting to 
military means.
5. Facing the threats of high-intensity surprise attacks, the Armed 
Forces, in terms of defense operations, should emphasize 
redundant capacity and sustainability of operational functions, 
and enhance critical infrastructure protection to avoid main 
warfighting capabilities being paralyzed in the initial stage of 
military operations, and thereafter failing to achieve strategic 
sustainment.
6.  Considering the reality of relative quantitative inferiority in 
defensive operations, the ROC Armed Forces, when developing 
various capabilities, should focus on the effectiveness of 
contingency operations and force mobility for swifter response 
and smarter maneuver in order to seize the initiative and 
reverse unfavorable conditions.
7.  Asymmetrical warfighting capabilities tailored against the enemy’s operational center of gravity (COG) and critical vulnerabilities should be developed. When conducting defense 
operations, advantages in time and space to paralyze or block 
enemy offensives and rout invading forces should be utilized.
7475Chapter 3
DEFENSE TRANSFORMATION 
PLANNING
Section 1   Defense Organization
I. Rationale for Defense Organization Reform
According to the National Defense Act and the Organization Act 
of the Ministry of National Defense, the MND is required to build 
professional and modernized defense organizations with all units 
structured on the principle of “accountability and specialization”. To this end, the MND reviews the operations and responsibilities 
of different departments to better manage human resources and 
maximize organizational efficiency
II. Planning for Defense Organization Adjustments 
1.  Organizational structure
Based on the principle of “accountability and specialization”, 
the size of the MND Policy Staff and Joint Staff will be 
streamlined. The six military services HQs (Army, Navy, Air 
Force, Combined Logistics, Reserve, and Military Police) will 
be merged into three HQs (Army, Navy, and Air Force). The 
new structure will allow the services to focus on their specialties 
and enhance the efficiency of defense management.  
762.  Organizational functions
(1) The Two Defense Acts stipulate that the MND is responsible 
for defense administrative affairs, strategic planning, 
integrated assessment, resource allocation, human resources 
planning, reserve affairs, legal affairs, auditing, comptroller, 
military medical affairs, and armaments, as well as 
force development, readiness, warfighting preparation, training, formulating the order of battle, and devising and 
implementing operational plans and executing command 
authority.
(2)  In order to facilitate operational command of the forces, 
special agencies such as electronic surveillance and intelligence are established, and missile and electronic & 
information combat forces, which are directly subordinate 
to MND’s administrative command, are also established to 
effectively support overall operations.
3.  Military services commands
The military service commands will be given comprehensive 
functions, force planning, warfi  ghting preparation and training, 
troop management, and dedicated logistics in order to enhance 
force development and readiness capabilities. During peacetime, 
the service commands are responsible for major tasks of force 
development and readiness missions. In wartime, the military 
services support the Joint Staff in conducting warfare, and are 
also responsible for sustaining the warfi  ghting capabilities of the 
forces of each military service.
77Section 2   Force Structure
I. The Current Force Structure 
Currently the ROC Armed Forces total 275,000 members. The 
key force units of each military service are respectively combined arms 
brigades for the Army, flotilla for the Navy, and fighter wings for the 
Air Force. The force structure is organized as follows:
1.  Army HQs
(1)  Army command x 3.
(2)  Army aviation command (including airborne brigades x 2, 
special force command x 1).
(3)  Regional defense command x 4.
(4)  District command x 7.
(5)  Combined arms brigades x 7 (including mechanized infantry brigades x 3, armored brigades x 4).
2.  Navy HQs
(1)  Fleet Command (including destroyer flotillas x 2, frigate flotillas x 2, amphibious & service flotilla, special service 
flotilla, Kidd class destroyer squadron, submarine squadron, 
Navy Aviation Command, Maritime Surveillance & 
Reconnaissance Command, Coastal Anti-ship Missile Group, 
and Anti-ship Missile Boat Group).
(2)  Marine Command (including Marine brigades x 3, Marine groups x 4).
3.  Air Force HQs
(1) Joint Air Operations Command (including Combat Control 
Wing, Communication, Navigation and Information Wing, 
78and Meteorological Wing)
(2)  Tactical fi  ghter wings x 5, mixed wings x 2.
(3)  Song-shan AFB Command.
(4)  Air Defense Command.
4.  Combined Logistics Command
(1)  Combined Logistics Support Command (including regional 
support commands x 7).
(2)  Ordnance Readiness Center, Base operation bays x 2, and 
storage center.
5.  Reserve Command(1)  Regional reserve commands x 3, county and city reserve 
commands x 21.
(2)  New recruit brigades x 8, reserve training centers x 3.(3) Wartime-regimented ground reserve troops, service reserve 
troops, political warfare operations reserve troops, navy reserve troops.
6.  Military Police Command
(1)  Regional military police commands x 4.
7.  Combat Forces under the MND Administrative Command
(1)  Regional reserve commands x 3, county and city reserve 
commands x 21.
(2)  New recruit brigades x 8, reserve training centers x 3.(3) Wartime-regimented ground reserve troops, service reserve 
troops, political warfare operations reserve troops, navy reserve troops.
79II. Rationale for Force Structure Adjustments 
1.  The change of force structure is to adjust force level and 
organization in a timely manner through assessing the factors of enemy threats, the national security situation, and overall 
resources allocation. Based on the logic of “warfighting-
equipping-organizing-training” and taking affordability as a 
prerequisite, the MND has to use available resources effectively 
to level the affordable force size and structure the most cost-
effective force organization.   
2.  The size of ROC Armed Forces shall be adequately measured 
by the warfighting requirements, as it should be large enough 
to safeguard the country but not too large to cause a financial 
burden. The goal for the ROC Armed Forces are to prevent enemies form landing and establishing lodgment. Defense 
resources therefore shall mainly be allocated to major combat 
forces, and applied to develop basic and asymmetric forces 
in order to ensure the sustainability of the total warfighting 
capability.
3.  Taking “warfighting requirements”, financial affordability and available human resources into consideration, the total size of the ROC Armed Forces are planned to be 215,000 to 
accommodate both available resources and the defense needs.  The term “warfighting-equipping-organizing-training” implies that all 
equipment, organization and training are devised according to warfighting requirements.
80III. Scheme of Subsequent Force Structure Planning
The force structure planning of the ROC Armed Forces will be 
implemented in two stages, short term and long-term, as elaborated 
below:
1.  Short-term planning
In accordance with the timeline of developing an all-
volunteer force, the MND will implement and complete the fi  rst stage force level adjustment from 2011 to 2014.
(1) The existing commands (Army, Navy, Air Force, Combined 
logistics, reserve, and Military Police Commands) are to merge into three commands: Army, Navy, and Air Force.
(2)  The force development logistics is to be integrated into the 
armaments system, operational logistics returned to military 
services, and the Armed Forces’ general logistics assigned 
under the Army’s responsibility.
(3)  Reserve mobilization and recruit training missions will be 
centrally planned to incorporate the ground operations needs; reserve personnel service affairs and mechanism are planned 
to transfer to the Veteran Affairs Council.
(4)  Military Police is to concentrate on military discipline and 
legal affairs. While also serving as a garrison to the political 
leadership, the military police force will be integrated as a 
part of the ground force.
(5)  The structure and level of the Armed Forces’ major combat 
forces should be maintained and defense resources should be centrally directed to major combat forces. Outdated and 
underperforming equipment, and forces unfitted to the 
operational requirements will be examined and reviewed to 
81determine if they should be retired, merged or dismantled.
(6)  Administrative and logistic support works will be reviewed 
to take full advantage of the capacity of the private sector 
through expansion of contracting, outsourcing, civilian 
operation, and estimation contracting in order to diversify job 
posts and consolidate warfighting manpower.
(7) The ratio of civilian officials in the MND will be increased 
based on an annual review of the demand of work and specialties in agencies under MND headquarters to reduce 
the ratio of military officers and non-commissioned officers, 
and use military personnel to fulfill the demand for combat forces.
(8)  The Chung-Shan Institute of Science and Technology is to be transformed into an “administrative incorporation”.
2.  Long-term planning
(1)  The development of modernization of the Armed Forces is to 
be completed by 2023.
(2) The optimal option of force structure is to be decided by 
referring to the conclusions of the “modeling and simulation validation of future operational guidance” and “force 
structure assessment”, followed by further reviews for 
implementation in stages.
Section 3   All-Volunteer Force
I. Rationale for the Transformation into an All-Volunteer Force
1.  Pursuant to the Executive Yuan’s policy guidelines, the military 
service system is to transform into an all-volunteer force, in 
82order to attract competent personnel who are committed for 
the long term, and build an elite armed forces.
2.  After the transition is completed, the active force will entirely  
consist of volunteers, who will undertake major readiness 
and combat missions. Drafted men will receive basic military 
training and enroll in reserve personnel management after 
training. During wartime, they will be mobilized immediately 
to support homeland defense missions. 
II. Planning for the Transformation into an All-Volunteer 
Force
1.  Division of implementation stages
The entire project is planned to proceed from May 20, 2008 
to December 31, 2014, implemented in three stages: “planning 
preparation”, “project formulation”, and “implementation and 
validation”:
(1)  Planning preparation stage: May 20, 2008, to June 30, 2009
a.  Overall planning: Complete defense organizational 
adjustments (including organization and equipment, force 
structure, and billet ratios), military service transformation, 
personnel recruitment, troop training, mobilization 
mechanisms, logistics preparation, benefits and rights, 
retirement, and complementary plans.
b. Legislative amendments: Once complete amendment of 
major military service system related laws and regulations and core implementation action items have been thoroughly 
planned, complementary legislation will then be amended. 
Afterwards, as the project progresses, more legislative 
83amendments may be incorporated to control the schedule of 
legislative amendments.
c. Project initiation: Complete the formulation of the 12 essential measures (including organization and equipment) 
and execute project initiation.
(2) Project formulation stage: July 1, 2009 to December 31, 2010
Based on the results of implemented planning tasks from 
the first stage, complementary legislative amendments 
or additional legislations are then to be completed. 
After evaluating current defense financial conditions, 
wages, benefits, living quarters construction, and facility improvements on a timely and sequential basis should be 
implemented ahead of schedule, so as to increase recruitment 
incentives to help achieve recruitment targets in the 
“implementation and validation” stage with desired effects.
(3)  Implementation and validation stage: January 1, 2011, to December 31, 2014
Set out annual targets for implementation, validation, and 
evaluation, and modify accordingly in order to reach the target of 100% volunteer recruits.
2. Complementary measures
(1)  Combine military service obligations with sustainment of 
reserve warfighting capabilities
During the period of military service transformation, for 
the purpose of sustaining overall warfighting capabilities, the length of conscription service will still be one year. After 
achieving the goal of an all-volunteer force, the conscripts 
will receive four months military training and undergo 
84reserve mobilization training in order to continue building 
and maintaining reserve warfighting capabilities on both 
quantitative and qualitative bases for territorial defense.
(2)  Improve working environments and benefits for military 
personnel
The quality of working environments and benefits for 
the troops are tied to the morale and support from military 
dependents, which affect recruitment and retention results. In the future, the MND will continue to evaluate and improve 
the forces’ working environments, and design certain 
benefi  t and protection policies to attract more competent and professional youths to join military service, broadly recruit 
private sector elites, improve personnel competence, and also 
reduce existing concerns for currently serving soldiers so that 
they can fully focus on their jobs. Major items include to:
a. establish optimal working environments;b. provide reasonable treatment, rights, and benefits for 
military personnel;
c. expand channels for further education and establish sound 
selection and training systems;
d. strengthen comprehensive protection for retirement 
assistance (welfare) service and emergency relief; and
e. enhance caring measures for military dependents.
(3)  Budgetary requirement planning for an all-volunteer force
a. Budget for personnel maintenance should be carefully 
allocated annually based on the progress of implementation and future operational requirements of the “all-volunteer 
force”, organizational adjustments, offi  cer-to-enlistee ratios, 
85and benefits adjustments, and deliberated in association with 
the “Armed Forces’ five-year financial guidance”.
b. Based on the progress of implementation of the “all-volunteer force”, additional funds required to improve servicemen’s 
living facilities should be reviewed and incorporated into 
budget planning.
 c. Annual budgetary requirements are to be deliberated and calculated based on the principle of not exceeding the ceiling of the total defense budget.
(4)  Relevant legislative amendments
Review amendments to legislations involving the people’s 
rights and obligations and the authorities and responsibilities 
of certain ministerial management agencies based on the 
progress of implementation of the “all-volunteer force”, and 
process 22 legislative amendment initiatives on military 
service, service requirements, obligations, retirement 
assistance, military personnel benefits, and insurance 
coverage in two stages:
a. In the current stage, as far as the main and essential 
legislature for transforming into an “all-volunteer force” 
is concerned, the MND has completed four amendment 
drafts, namely, the Act of Military Service System, Service 
Regulations for Officers and Non-Commissions Officers 
in the Army, Navy, and Air Force, Military Service 
Regulations for Volunteers, Military Personnel Insurance Regulations, and submitted to the Executive Yuan for 
review. In the future, when the Legislative Yuan passes the 
amendments, complementary measures for an all-volunteer 
force will then be fully inaugurated.
86b. Afterwards, implemented and validated results should be 
incorporated and actual requirements based on the progress 
of implementation of an all-volunteer force considered to 
comprehensively amend relevant legislations of the MND 
and other ministerial authorities before 2014, so as to perfect 
legal requirements for an all-volunteer force.
Section 4   Force Planning Mechanism
I. Principles for Refi  ning the Force Planning Mechanism
With the Two Defense Acts as a legal foundation, actual steps are 
being implemented to enhance strategy device and force development 
planning. They include refi  ning organizational structures to maximize 
effi  ciency, reviewing authorities and areas of responsibilities, adjusting 
operational procedures, and building function-oriented planning and 
budgetary procedures for the Armed Forces.
II. Plans for Refi  ning the Force Planning Mechanism
1.  Enhance organizational effi  ciency
The Two Defense Acts are used as a legal foundation to 
review organizational structure and realize professional division 
of labor between policy, command, and armaments branches. 
Thus, major defense policies will be supported by consolidated 
mechanisms and functions to cope with a rapidly changing 
environment.
872.  Measures to improve military strategic planning
(1)  Incorporate the Quadrennial Defense Review into the Armed 
Forces’ strategic planning systems to serve as guidance for 
the Ten-year Force Planning Concept and Five-year Force 
Buildup Program.
(2)  As guided by the Quadrennial Defense Review, and oriented by the Ten-year Force Planning Concept, Armed Forces’ 
Military Capabilities Review and modeling and simulations are conducted to objectively assess the Armed Forces’ joint 
operations capabilities and the overall allocation of defense 
resources, so that future warfighting capabilities requirements can be confirmed and serve as a reference for the Five-year 
Force Buildup Program.
3.  Improve projects of military investment plans
(1) With limited resources, military investment plans are based on a 
“warfighting-equipping-organizing-training” concept and resources are mostly devoted to major combat forces, while 
basic warfighting capabilities of the Armed Forces will be sustained, force gaps avoided, and asymmetric capabilities 
developed. The objective is to maximize cost-effectiveness 
to build a defense force of high competence, appropriate size, 
and strong warfighting capabilities.
 (2 ) Incorporate the T en-year F orce Planning Concept into the 
Five-year Force Buildup Program. Each service activates 
procedures for their projects based on the force buildup program, and completes the review of project documentation 
two years prior to the actual implementation, to ensure 
suitable and comprehensive investment plans.
88( 3 )  Enhance the evaluation mechanism of operational 
requirements. Other than guidance from warfighting 
requirements of joint operations, military policy and 
armaments branches should also evaluate factors such as 
forward planning, cost effectiveness, fi  nancial resources, and 
full life cycle management.
Section 5   Armaments Development Mechanism
I. Principles for Refi  ning the Armaments Development Mechanism
Under the guidance of defense strategies, the armaments 
development mechanism adopts the military strategic concepts and 
future operational requirements to evaluate weaponry acquisition 
methods, schedules, and sources and fulfill force development and 
readiness requirements on a timely and effective basis under suffi  cient 
analytical considerations. Therefore, the MND needs to effectively increase the managerial efficiency of armaments development, 
incorporate national economic development and private sector 
capabilities, promote technology transfers, R&D, manufacture, 
maintenance, and marketing, in order to accelerate the introduction 
of advanced weaponry, increase logistic support capacities for the life 
cycles of weapon systems, and fulfill missions of force development 
and readiness.
To integrate armaments resources, increase defense self-
sufficiency, establish life cycle management and support force 
89development and readiness missions, an integrated approach of 
armaments development is executed on three fronts—decision-making, 
management, and execution—with emphases of the following:
1.  Decision-making: Incorporate needs of the force development plans, and proceed with decision-making to direct armaments 
developments based on the three major strategies of acquisition, 
technology, and logistics.
(1)  Acquisition strategy planning: Apply advanced managerial 
techniques and comprehensive acquisition management 
systems, so that weapon acquisitions can yield maximum 
utility in the most cost-effective and timely manner under the precondition of fulfilling warfighting requirements.
(2)  Technology strategy planning: Anticipate future operational requirements, evaluate technological capacities, integrate 
armaments resources, and establish development blueprints 
of defense technologies to support force development and 
readiness missions.
(3)  Logistics strategy planning: With defense industry self-
sufficiency and a sustainable, credible force as a precondition, 
a system of full life cycle management is adopted to be 
complemented by supply chain management, strategic 
partnerships with the industries, and performance-based 
logistics.
2.  Management: Standardized and interoperable practices are implemented, so that the requirements, concepts, and technologies of the Armed Forces are interfaced, laying 
the foundation for armaments development. Also, relevant 
education and training will be enhanced to improve the 
90professionalism of armaments personnel.
3.  Execution: Information systems are to be established for 
armaments management, knowledge-based management and 
business intelligence applied to integrate all information related 
to armaments strategy development to support armaments 
decision-making and management.
II. Plans for Refi  ning the Armaments Development Mechanism
1.  Military investment programming
(1) In terms of the source of acquisition, the force development 
guidance and future operational requirements are used as foundations, while anticipating key technological developments and undergoing a cautious assessment, to 
decide whether domestic development, military sale, or 
commercial sale would be most ideal. Also, weaponry acquisition project management is enhanced to effectively 
manage and execute the planning, R&D, procurement, 
production, deployment, maintenance, or replacement, thus 
realizing expected performance of weapon systems to ensure 
force development and readiness missions.
(2)  In terms of allocating military investment resources, a model 
of focused developments is emphasized, giving priorities to acquisition projects related to defense self-sufficiency. The 
weaponry deployment strategy should be devised in a gradual 
manner of “adequate, good and better” to meet operational 
requirements.
2.  Defense technology development
(1) Future technology development trends should be anticipated, 
91joint operations requirements and existing core R&D 
capacities analyzed, systematic and focused R&D adopted. 
Domestic and foreign technological cooperation or technology 
transfer will also be facilitated to increase overall domestic 
R&D capacities.
(2) R&D funding for basic, applied, and critical technologies for 
system development should be increased to set the foundation 
for future weaponry development.
(3)  Defense technology R&D will be based on an outlook of 15 
to 25 years, incorporating domestic capacities and resources 
and engaging in advanced technological researches, such as aerospace, electromagnetism, fiber optics, nano technology, 
precision guidance, stealth, ramjets, low-altitude fire control 
radars, synthetic aperture radar counter measures, chemical 
warfare protection, and unmanned aerial vehicles (UA Vs).
(4)  High R&D value basic and applied technologies that are difficult to acquire or for which R&D capacities do not yet 
exist, will be commissioned to the private sector (academic or scientific research institutions). A mechanism will be 
established to monitor, evaluate and apply research results in 
support of overall weapon system development.
(5)  For non-core and insufficient capabilities, production or technological cooperation through strategic partnerships with 
industries will be employed to foster defense industries and 
improve R&D standards.
3.  International armaments exchange
( 1 )  For advanced weaponry that cannot be domestically developed, armaments exchange with advanced states 
92will be conducted to gradually consolidate the domestic 
weapon R&D capacity. The priority is set on programs 
that incorporate technological cooperation and technology 
transfer. Purchasing off-the-shelf products would be a 
secondary choice.
(2)  Professional personnel of international armaments exchange 
will be cultivated, while progress on force planning and 
project implementation will be considered when building sustainable armaments exchange mechanisms with advanced 
countries.
4.  Acquisition project management
(1)  Incorporate acquisition requirements into defense industry 
capacity developments, consolidate existing military and 
private sector capacities, and devise appropriate logistics 
strategies for project management to refine overall logistic 
support procedures and realize full life cycle management.
(2)  Promote the logistics strategic guidelines such as full life 
cycle management, supply chain management, and industrial strategic partnerships for logistics transformation of the 
Armed Forces.
(3)  Develop a standardized, unified, and integrated operation, 
and establish an integrated weapons database to increase 
effi  ciency of full life cycle management.
5.  Transformation of the Chung-Shan Institute of Science and 
Technology (CSIST)
( 1 )  In order to increase the technological development 
capabilities, expand the benefits of technology transfers, and make greater contributions for domestic economic 
93development, the CSIST will be transformed from a public 
entity into an “administrative incorporation”, hoping to 
introduce corporate management, enhance organizational 
efficiency, and increase cost-effectiveness.
(2)  Flexibility and efficiency in defense technology R&D should be increased to shorten system development timelines and 
fulfill operational requirements on a timely basis.
(3) Flexible organizations, human resources, and acquisition 
systems should be adopted to enhance adaptability in 
technology research, thus creating benefits for the Armed 
Forces and supporting future technology development.
(4) Core capacities will be improved. Transfers of dual-use 
technologies to the private sector will be expanded to drive 
domestic industry development and attract professional 
talents, thus promoting defense technologies and domestic 
economic development at the same time.
Section 6   Joint Operations Command Mechanism
I. Principles for Refining the Joint Operations Command Mechanism
 As dictated by the Two Defense Acts, the Joint Staff is the 
Defense Minister’s military command staff and the joint operations command unit of the Armed Forces. In the future, the MND will 
continue addressing organizational reforms, personnel streamlining, 
94defensive operations requirements, and consolidating the “joint 
operations command mechanism” so that it is consistent and 
accountable in peacetime and wartime and capitalizes on the command 
and control functions of joint operations.
II. Plans for Refi  ning the Joint Operations Command Mechanism
The Armed Forces’ joint operations command mechanism is 
the core of combat decision-making and command. Through the 
examination of annual Han-Kuang exercises, the organizational 
functions, inter-unit coordination, and software/hardware 
infrastructure of all functional centers have become well established. 
The organizational framework will continue to be refined according 
to MND high-level command blueprint and gradually establish digital data-link systems to improve adaptability on the battlefield. Primary 
improvements include:
1.  Integrated C
4ISR for joint operations effi  ciency
Integrated C4ISR systems are being built to improve joint 
operations command, integrate modern systems and platforms, enhance battlefield management and command efficiency, 
increase overall warfighting capabilities, improve joint 
command capabilities of the Joint Staff in directing the Armed 
Forces.
2.  Enhance information fusion and application
Develop tools for synchronized information operations at all 
levels, enhance fusion, analyses, and transmission capabilities 
between units, and expand intelligence coordination functions 
to support joint operations.
3.  Enhance overall information and electronic warfare capabilities
95Integrate IO&EW capabilities, build system compatibility, 
and incorporate IO&EW capabilities into joint operations 
command mechanism to integrate soft and hard kill into the 
warfighting capabilities, so that all levels of IO&EW planning 
are integrated with operational guidance, thus building an 
integrated form of warfighting.
4.  Simplify mobilization organization and mechanism
Wartime mobilization mechanisms should be based on 
the principle of integrating national resources to support 
military operations. Authorities and responsibilities between 
administrative and military mobilization operations should be accurately divided, and mobilization processes simplified in 
order to achieve the effect of “unified command and control, 
and integration between peacetime and wartime”.
5.  Consolidate all-out defense capability coordination mechanism and training
Each theater of operation will review and practice the 
set-up process for “all-out defense capability coordination centers” in coordination with regular military exercises. Also, 
the functions and applications of all-out defense capability 
coordination organizations should be incorporated into 
group education and training topics for officers and non-
commissioned officers, so that all levels are knowledgeable 
and familiar with the mechanism, thus building effective 
coordination capability to support military operations.
6.  Improve logistic coordination and support
Each military HQ will establish operational procedures 
for military service logistic command and control, mobile 
96emergency repairs for all repair units, and emergency materials 
acquisition, validate them through exercises, and evaluate 
amendments to relevant plans and regulations, so that, in 
wartime, each military command can effectively execute 
logistic command and control and support the execution of 
defensive operations.
7 .  Improve offensive psychological measures and overall 
intangible combat capabilities
Dedicated “political warfare centers” should be established, 
divisions dedicated to “public opinion psychological warfare” and “news broadcast” should be assigned to incorporate offensive psychological measures and enhance overall 
intangible combat capabilities in support of military missions.
Section 7   Human Resources Development
I. Vision behind Human Resources Development
 The broad definition of defense personnel covers professional 
officers, non-commissioned officers, soldiers, and civilian defense officials, which make up the foundation of the Armed Forces’ 
warfighting capabilities. Human resources development in the 
Armed Forces is based on the goal of “purpose-oriented and plan-
based education”, with the objective of fostering physically and intellectually capable, resolute, competent, and diligent personnel for 
the Armed Forces, and developing general and specialized personnel 
97for jobs in leadership, defense management, planning and evaluation, 
communication and coordination, operation execution, and technical 
duties. In the future, the MND will incorporate defense transformation 
requirements, assess current defense trends, military technology 
developments, and the mode of future warfare, continue improving 
education systems and refining education contents, and retain 
competent professional personnel, so as to improve the competence of 
the Armed Forces and enable the servicemen to contribute to national development and societal needs after leaving military life.
II. Plans for Human Resources Development
1.  Training professional officers
(1)  Enhance basic education and diversify the background of 
officers
a. This has the objective of developing modern officers who 
are well-educated in civilian and military affairs and 
professionally proficient and ethics sound. With the contents 
being sound university courses integrated with holistic 
individual education, proactive self-learning interests are to 
be cultivated to set the foundation for subsequent advanced 
education.
b. To address the disappearance of drafted officers after 
implementing the all-volunteer force, competent youths 
should be recruited to join the ranks of the Armed Forces 
to acquire appropriate replenishment for entry-level officer 
manpower. Diversification should be encouraged and 
personnel competence improved in the Armed Forces. The 
reestablishment of the Reserve Officer Training Corps 
98(ROTC) starting from 2010 should also be evaluated, with a 
planned initial requirement of 500 personnel. In subsequent 
years, amendments to the number of personnel to be trained 
annually should be reviewed to fulfill actual requirements 
and expand the source of professional offi  cers in the Armed 
Forces.
(2)  Improve advanced education, and standardize command and 
staff classes
a. The strategic and command and staff courses of advanced 
education should incorporate forward-thinking and macroscopically complete planning. In order to coordinate with organizational improvements and satisfy requirements 
for professional defense personnel, the competence of 
defense personnel across the board should be improved, 
defense educational capacity enhanced, adjustments towards 
American methods planned, and competence of officers 
raised based on the “standardized examinations and results-
based assignments” principle.
b. The dual tracks of examination and referral system should 
be used for evaluation to annually inspect the planning situation with the National Defense University’s training 
capacity increases and the Armed Forces’ personnel 
downsizing, management, and evaluation results. 
Standardized examinations should be fully implemented to 
increase the competence of the Armed Forces’ personnel.
(3)  Improve education contents and enhance course design
a. An officer’s characteristics and core aptitudes should 
be distinguished and emphasis placed on developing 
99leadership, military professionalism, and individual culture, 
and shaping proper values befitting military personnel.
b. Foreign languages (including military jargons in other languages), international affairs and regional security 
affairs classes in all levels of education should be enhanced. 
Personnel should also be trained for international military 
exchanges, regional security cooperation, and negotiation in 
order to fulfill the Armed Forces’ mission requirements.
c. Political education is based on fostering professional 
military personnel with loyalty, awareness, and a passion for 
honor, based on patriotism, enemy concepts, and military ethics as the core.
(4) Combine requirements for joint operations development, and 
plan for professional education courses
Driven by the objectives of force development and 
employment, basic, intermediate, and advanced education 
courses on joint operations should be comprehensively 
planned in combination with information and electronic technology developments, new weapon systems, and the 
mode of future warfare, so that there is consistency in the 
courses to foster joint staff officers who would be familiar 
with future warfighting decision-making models.
(5) Stringent human resources management combined with 
educational policy
Strictly plan for career management, select competent 
personnel to participate in examinations and advanced education, realize the connection between professional 
and academic background, and adopt the spirit of “strict 
100examinations and eliminations” to manage personnel 
evaluation, so as to increase the competence of the Armed 
Forces’ personnel, and realize the goal of purpose-oriented 
and plan-based education.
(6)  Realize full time education and practical training
Realize full time education examination management 
mechanisms and assignment management systems for personnel applying for advanced education, coordinated with interviews, examination supervision, and evaluation 
procedures, so as to fulfi  ll the objective of purpose-oriented 
and plan-based education and assignment.
2.  Training professional non-commissioned offi  cers (NCOs)
(1)  Framework for NCO education
The NCO education system is primarily to cultivate college 
level NCO as main objection. Those NCO and enlistee turn NCO with vocational and high school education will fill 
basic company level requirements. In addition, each military 
command will train mid and high-level NCO staff and instructors for professional and specialized branch services to 
fulfi  ll force development requirements, in coordination with 
developments in NCOs job training and NCO improvement 
systems.
(2)  NCO development method
a. Basic education: This has the objective of fostering ethical 
and well-cultured NCOs with technical specialties. Its 
contents are comprehensive technical courses that educate 
both military and civilian skills to attain professional 
certifi  cates and improve professional technical capabilities.
101b. Intermediate education: This implements combat and 
tactical specialty courses that are methodically and 
procedurally oriented towards actual combat. They should 
be planned based on a military service’s characteristics 
to focus on the unique specialty knowledge and skills of 
various military and branch services. The courses should 
also incorporate modes of future warfare and troop missions 
with supplementary courses in joint operations to provide the company-level staff with professional technical skills 
when performing missions.
c. Improve NCO standards: The five core criteria (promotions, 
assigning responsibilities, confidence building, professional 
training, and management development) should be used to 
push for building independent and comprehensive NCO 
development systems, so as to solidify company-level 
forces and consolidate overall warfighting capabilities. Plan 
of manning and equipping combat NCO and staff NCO 
posts is to be completed by 2009, gradually implemented starting from 2010 to separate officer and NCO jurisdictions 
and ensure the parallel functions of “officers plan and 
NCOs execute”, using officers to assign responsibilities to 
NCOs and utilize the skills of the NCOs. The NCO system 
transformation is to be completed by 2014 to achieve the 
objective of parallel officer and NCO development.
d.  Push for certification training: Cooperation with private 
sector skills and the Council of Labor Affairs should be 
undertaken to establish national certification standards  
and continue establishing “certification training classes for 
102the Armed Forces” in order to realize technical training. 
Servicemen are encouraged to participate, in association 
with their specialties and needs, in classes of public or 
private training agencies. This is so that NCOs and soldiers 
can acquire national technical certifications through full-
time or part-time studies, thus improving the competence of 
the Armed Forces’ manpower. After leaving their units, they 
can also immediately engage in the ranks of the national development and be of use to the society.
3.  Cultivating civilian defense offi  cials
Since the promulgation of the Two Defense Acts in 2002, the 
MND has formally introduced civilian offi  cials to participate 
in national defense affairs, with the intention of relying on the 
characteristics, professional knowledge, and administrative 
experience of permanent defense officials to engage in work 
that requires continuity, planning, and professionalism, to 
assist with defense decision-making, execution, and evaluation. 
Civilian defense offi  cials are an important asset of the Armed Forces, and need to be sufficiently planned and optimally 
utilized to yield the best utility. In the future, the MND will 
combine civilian official professions and human resources 
application and planning to establish comprehensive civilian 
defense official education and management systems, so as to 
foster competent cadres of civilian offi  cials who could utilize 
their skills, and become a stable driving force for defense policy implementation.
The MND’s relevant future improvement measures for 
civilian offi  cial training include:
103(1)  Review and realize education systems for civilian defense 
officials, open training classes for all levels as required, 
and empower civilian defense officials with familiarity in 
defense affairs through comprehensive pre-job education, 
basic education, joint staff education, and high-level civilian 
strategic education, consolidate professional finesse, and 
utilize the advantages of experienced civilian officials.
(2)  Add billets for high-level civilian defense officials to 
participate in advanced officer education (strategic and 
command and staff education) as required by the MND’s 
high-level staff operations, and combine predetermined job assignment conditions to make recommendations for training 
and plan for assignments.
(3)  Plan for “general education for new MND personnel”, and develop general education doctrines for civilian defense 
officials, so the doctrines can be incorporated into the Armed 
Forces’ doctrine development systems, and a working 
consensus and basic aptitudes can be established for new civilian officials.
4.  Training programs through FMS channels
(1)  Regulate operational rules and procedures for Armed Forces 
personnel attending foreign military schools and military 
bases for training, and uniformly manage relevant affairs 
to realize the objectives of purpose-oriented training and 
employed right after training.
(2)  When the Armed Forces cannot domestically acquire 
training, or that the Armed Forces’ training capacity cannot 
fulfill demanded requirements for military equipments and 
104new weapon operation and maintenance, military sale venues 
will be sought and personnel will be dispatched abroad to 
receive training. Selected officers will be recommended to 
attend force development or combat command classes, and  
maintenance and technical level courses will be attended by 
selected NCO. Training includes:
a. Advanced education classes in foreign command & staff, 
and strategic studies institutions;
b. Command, Control, Communication, Computers, 
Information, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance classes;
c. New weaponry operation and maintenance classes; andd. Participation in US exercises classes (including on job 
training).
5.  Physical training and maintenance
(1)  Modern warfare is unlike conventional warfare. High-tech 
weapon systems have become important factors in deciding 
victory or defeat. However, despite advancements in modern 
technologies, states around the world still greatly value physical training and competence for military personnel, so 
as to ensure the health of individual soldiers and the wielding 
of the troops’ warfi  ghting capabilities.
(2)  Understanding the importance of physical capabilities, the 
MND has long been examining the physical standards of 
military personnel of nations around the world, and the 
Armed Forces’ annual test data in terms of the troops’ professional physical capabilities, incorporating the troop 
mission characteristics and engaging in appropriate 
adjustments and amendments. In the future, the MND will 
105continue to establish positive exercise environments, and 
employ reasonable standards, disciplined training, risk control 
and management, and fair and objective assessment methods 
to gradually enhance the physical capabilities of the soldiers, 
so that personnel can achieve a balance between physical and 
mental health, enhance efficiency at work or on duty, present 
a new face for the excellence of the Armed Forces, and set the 
foundation for strong warfighting capabilities.
Section 8   Defense Expenditure Management
I. Level of Future Defense Expenditure
National defense is part of the nation’s overall policy development, 
and defense budgets are also part of the central government’s overall 
budget. In the future, the level of defense budget should be adjusted 
according to overall economic development, major government 
policies, and the progress of the implementation of an all-volunteer 
force, which, in principle, will not be lower than 3% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). However, overall force development 
requirements exhibit unstable trends with highs and lows because of 
factors such as enemy threats and progress of force buildup which 
results in the defense budget not necessarily accounting for 3% of GDP 
each year. This is to avoid insufficient resources or surpluses affecting 
the nation’s policy implementation and the stable progress of force 
development and readiness.
106Future defense budgetary requirements should be based on the 
principles of “budgeting follows programming” and “pragmatic force 
planning and reasonable budgetary allocations”. Limitation of medium 
and long-term resources should also be considered, national policy 
objectives collaborated and the Armed Forces’ PPBES combined to 
prioritize allocation of resources to various force development and 
readiness requirements. Force development objectives should be 
accomplished in stages through management mechanisms such as financial projections, defense planning assessments, and cost-benefit 
analyses, thereby striving to yield maximum efficiency with the 
smallest investment of resources.
II. Planning for Defense Expenditure Management  
In anticipation of the future defense environment and operational 
requirements, the Armed Forces will use modern management 
knowledge and techniques to proceed with resource management, 
with the objective of maximizing the utility of defense budgets. Also, 
resources are planned and allocated based on the Five-year Force 
Buildup Program, focuses of defense administration, and priority of 
force development and readiness. The principles of allocation are as 
follows:
1.  Personnel maintenance: Fulfi  llment of personnel maintenance 
requirements will be prioritized by realizing the policy guidance of the all-volunteer force and adjusting through coordination 
the overall level of personnel including incorporating 
considerations for final force level, officer-to-enlistee ratios, 
and benefi  ts adjustments. 
2.  Operational maintenance: Maintaining current warfighting 
107capabilities will be ensured through emphasizing increased 
equipment availability and sustaining readiness preparation 
training. Also, maintaining routine operations and exercises 
will be ensured through coordinating reorganization and 
review to reduce non-combat required needs and all ineffective 
expenditures.
3.  Military investment: Joint operations capabilities will be improved by coordinating the progress of force development plans and the availability of medium and long-term financial 
resources, so as to continue acquiring new weapon systems, 
develop information and electronic warfare, joint counter air, joint sea control, joint ground defense, and asymmetrical 
warfighting capabilities.
III. Improvement of the Management and Application of Defense 
Financial Resources
The military has a high demand for force development; yet, the 
defense financial resources are limited. Therefore, the application of 
resource management mechanisms are urgently needed to increase 
the utility of the application of funding and to support overall force 
development plans. Improvement measures are as follows:
1.  Establish projection models for financial supply
The projection of defense financial supply is based on overall 
considerations of economic trends, governmental financial 
stress, administrative focuses, public opinion of external enemy 
threats, as well as public support of defense. It will also be 
based on the guidance of pragmatic force development plans 
to establish effective defense capabilities through formulating 
108comprehensive and sustainable force buildup plans.
2.  Introduce cost-benefi  t and risk analysis mechanism
(1) Cost-benefi  t analysis mechanisms will be introduced during 
the programming stages for all projects to realize cost-benefi  t 
evaluation for the purpose of avoiding the effect of resource 
competition or scattering, affecting the effective application 
of defense resources.
(2) Risk assessment mechanisms will be established to review 
the feasibility of program planning and budgetary allocation. And alternatives will be introduced for high risk items, 
which will be activated when encountering difficulties and supply shortages. Then the original program and budgetary 
allocation schedule will be amended accordingly.
3.  Establish schedule control for budgetary implementation
A comprehensive schedule control measure is to be 
established to inspect execution progress and the rationality of budgetary allocations of annual administrative plans, so as 
to utilize warning functions and risk management, effectively anticipate budgetary implementation capabilities, and 
retroactively adjust budgetary allocations in time to increase 
the utility of applying budgetary resources.
4.  Eliminate parochialism and allocate budget appropriately
Service parochialism for budget allocations will be 
eliminated by incorporating the PPBES implementation results, allocating limited defense resources reasonably and appropriately for various force development and readiness 
needs, and planning budget requirements based on the Five-
year Force Buildup Program in order to accurately reflect 
109actual defense requirements.
5.  Realize cost accountability and inventory control
Annual requirements should be reviewed based on the 
spirit of “zero base budget” and “no program, no budget” to 
ensure that major weapon systems and warfighting exercise 
and training mission requirements are maintained and treated 
as priority. The combat and training missions should be 
effectively supported and warfighting capabilities sustained through effective inventory control and promotion of cost 
accountability. Stored supplies for equipment that is planned 
for retirement should be reviewed to avoid “prepared but not being used” or “needed but not being prepared” situations.
6.  Build cost responsibility management frameworks 
In order to comply with centralized system operations 
and enhance the wielding of joint operations and combined warfighting capabilities, plans should be made to establish 
the cost responsibility system as the foundation for resource 
allocation, management, application, and cost accountability, so as to facilitate evaluation of the effectiveness of defense 
policy implementations.
Section 9   Combining Defense with Civilian Needs
I. Industry Cooperation Program
1.  Seize the opportunities of foreign military purchases, employ 
proactive and forward planning, integrate and ensure industry 
cooperation requirements in accordance with assessment 
results. Regulate the volume of industry cooperation and 
110prioritize negotiations for key items. Encourage domestic 
production, assembly, and transfer of maintenance technologies 
for defense articles, in order to upgrade technological levels 
and consolidate the foundation of defense self-reliance.
2.  Industry cooperation will be imposed on any foreign weapon 
purchase costing over US $5 million dollars, and 40% of the 
total cost will be the minimal for industrial cooperation. The 
Ministry of Economic Affairs and military, public, and private technological and industrial agencies will be incorporated 
through the Integrated Product Team model. Domestic defense 
technologies and industrial resources will be integrated through technological capacity assessments, and then complete the 
comprehensive planning and execution of industry cooperation 
projects.
3.  Over the years, industry cooperation volume accrued is 
valued at approximately 8.6 billion US dollar credits. Military 
procurement accounted for 6.2 billion US dollar credits, or about 
72% of total volume. All the accrued volumes were under 
the Ministry of Economic Affairs’ centralized utilization. 
Regarding the allocation of all the dollar credits, if categorized 
by how the funds were used, 50.2% of total volume was for technology transfers, and the remainder was for personnel 
training, domestic purchases, and other purposes. If categorized 
by the industry that the funds were allocated to, then 85.9% 
Industrial Cooperation Credit is the money amount of agreed activities such as 
investment, procurement,R&D, training, technology transfer, marketing assistance, etc.while implementing industrial cooperation program. It takes "US dollar Credit" as its counting unit but not in real US dollar form.
111of total volume was for the aerospace industry, such as the 
software technology transfer for the Mirage fighters, building 
factory capacity for the radars of F-16 fighters, and production 
of 40mm grenade launchers, which are very beneficial for 
Taiwan’s aerospace and defense industries.
4.  Currently, the MND has requested a minimum 40% industrial cooperation of the cost of defense items that the US 
Government agreed in October 2008. This includes attack helicopters, Patriot III missiles, E-2T upgrade, submarine-
launched Harpoon missiles, and medium-range anti-armor 
missiles, which can potentially result in some 2.75 billion US dollar credits industry cooperation volume. These credits 
will be devoted to direct industrial cooperation projects, such 
as simulator assembling cooperation and building missile 
maintenance centers, which will enhance the capabilities of 
Taiwan’s military industry.
II. Technology Transfer
1. Introduce technologies required by the ROC and transfer them to the private sector by technology transfer through industry 
cooperation, to fill domestic technological gaps. This will 
enhance and integrate capacity in research, development, and all levels of production and establish a comprehensive value-
added chain in the defense industry, raising the capacity of the 
defense industry.
2.  Apply measures such as strategic maintenance outsourcing, certification, manufacturing, and repair of military articles, and 
direct domestic purchase of parts, accessories, and components 
112to integrate the private sector’s technological capacities and 
defense requirements, thus achieving the dual objective of 
establishing a self-reliant defense and supporting the domestic 
industry and economy.
3.  Continue implementing dual-use technology plans, gradually 
transform defense technology capacities for industries, create 
ancillary civilian industrial uses from defense technologies, 
and improve contractors’ capabilities in producing military articles and engage in research and development of armaments.
4.  Assess domestic and foreign technological capabilities 
according to future operational requirements, and establish short, medium, and long term defense technology development 
roadmaps through integration of military and civilian 
technological resources, to provide optimal choices for defense 
procurement.
III. Defense Outsourcing
1.  Pursuant to Article 22 of the National Defense Act, which 
directs the MND to consolidate efforts of the private 
sector to develop defense technology industries to establish 
an autonomous national defense infrastructure and the 
considerations for policies of driving economic growth, outsourcing has been proactively promoted, including research, 
development, production, maintenance of weapon systems and 
procurement of general military articles, which has the dual 
function of establishing a self-suffi  cient defense and supporting 
economic prosperity.
2.  In accordance with the policy of “the Armed Forces will not 
113build capacities or make foreign purchases of goods that can 
be supplied by domestic producers”, Armed Forces capacities 
that are “non-sensitive, ineffective for combat preparations, 
and non-essential” will be outsourced to private sector through 
“government owned and civilian operated” mechanism and 
“strategic maintenance outsourcing” to gradually foster the 
production and maintenance capabilities of military articles by 
domestic contractors.
3.  Domestic purchases or contracting will be realized from the 
obtainable defense budgets deducting the part of requirements 
of “foreign purchases and maintenance of controlled weapons”. From 2003 to 2008, there was approximately NT$ 690 million 
of production each year. In the future, through production of 
weapon equipments such as “large missile boats” and measures 
of “government-owned and civilian-operated military 
supply factories” and “strategic maintenance outsourcing” 
for maintenance of active weapon systems, it is expected 
to produce the value of NT$ 85 billion dollars, and benefit employment opportunities in the private sector, and increase 
domestic technological and industrial capacities.
4.  Contracting out the research, development, and production of weapon systems required by the Armed Forces will be 
applied through the “domestic industrial production capacity 
assessment” mechanism to seek capable domestic contractors 
through arrangements with the Ministry of Economic Affairs’ Industrial Development Bureau and industrial associations.
114IV. Overall Military Bases Usage
1 .  Realignment of force deployments and a reduction in  
restricted areas will be reviewed based on considerations 
for the efficiency of overall national land development and 
local economic development needs, and to address balanced 
developments between national security, local development, 
and civilian needs, and under the precondition of not impacting 
defense readiness, in order to conserve manpower of land 
management, and release lands to provide for national political 
and economic development and local development, stimulate domestic economic growth and prosperity, and yield maximum 
benefi  ts from the utilization of land resources.
2. Totally 1,500 hectares of military land has been released in 
recent years based on government policy and local development 
needs. Gradual relinquishment of appropriate military lands 
will be evaluated in the future, in conjunction with land use 
adjustment requirements of new forces, and considering force restructuring plans by the military property relinquishment 
policy team, referencing the “operational regulations for 
military property relinquishment”, in order to fulfill national 
economic development and local development needs.
115Chapter 4
Guidance for Joint Warfighting 
Capability Development
In accordance with the guidance of “defensive defense” and 
the military strategy of “resolute defense and credible deterrence”, 
and to achieve the objective of “strategic sustainment and tactical 
decisiveness” to defeat the enemy’s attempts in gaining quick victories, the Armed Forces need to establish warfighting capabilities that meet 
joint operations requirements. In other words, the development of 
all capabilities should help increase joint operations capabilities, and 
utilize the functions of an integrated entity, so as to create relative 
advantages, and achieve the objective of defense operations.
The ROC Armed Forces’ joint operations is focused on 
establishing long range precision operation and synchronous joint engagement capabilities, so as to integrate the warfighting 
capabilities of the Armed Forces, and apply precision strikes, 
multilayer interceptions, anchorage area and beachhead attacks, 
and asymmetrical operations to effectively disable the enemy’s 
operational center of gravity, and execute joint interdiction and 
anchorage area and beachhead elimination, thus effectively defend our 
homeland. Relevant capability developments include joint command, control, communication, computers, information, surveillance, 
and reconnaissance (C
4ISR), joint information operations (IO) and 
electronic warfare (EW), joint counter air, joint sea control, joint ground defense, asymmetrical warfare, reserve mobilization, Joint 
logistics, and overall intangible combat capabilities.
116Section 1   Joint C4ISR Capabilities
I. Vision
Joint C4ISR seeks to establish integrated command and control 
(C2), real-time communication, and accurate intelligence surveillance, 
and reconnaissance (ISR) capabilities, build networked C4ISR systems, 
improve electromagnetic spectrum management, and enhance the Armed Forces’ C2 systems and communication and electronic 
protection capacities for important positions. This will ensure troops at all levels can utilize shared information platforms and common 
operational picture (COP) to manage battlefield intelligence so as to 
optimize the overall warfi  ghting capabilities of the Armed Forces.
II. Current Developments
1.  Command and control systems
(1) The Armed Forces have gradually completed the integration 
of existing sensors, advanced weapon system platforms, and 
communication and information networks in accordance with 
the joint operation requirements.
(2) Enhancement of weapon platforms, surveillance systems, and 
digital C2 and weapon control capabilities of command units 
in all levels of the Armed Forces continues to be carried out.
(3) When engaging in defense operations, the Armed Forces 
needs to establish shared C2 platforms to effectively integrate warfi  ghting capabilities.
(4) Existing human resources information and logistics 
information systems are now widely used by operational units 
117in all levels to support all types of work and management 
requirements. However, they still need to be integrated with 
C2 systems.
2.  Communication systems
(1)  For joint communication systems, the Armed Forces are 
establishing fiber optics, digital networks, wireless networks, 
satellites, and public and private communication systems to 
form a multi-path, multi-backup, secure, and jam-resistant transmission network.
(2) Development and improvement of the Armed Forces’ 
joint communication system is focused on the integration of transmission platforms, expansions of communication 
network bandwidth, continuous improvements in jam-
resistance capabilities, enhancements in protection against 
electromagnetic pulse, and development and manufacturing 
of encryption devices.
3.  Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance systems
(1) The Armed Forces’ ISR systems are able to monitor air 
and maritime activities in the nation’s surrounding sea and 
airspace. However, the warning capabilities against PRC 
ballistic missile attacks and cruise missile attacks should be 
continuously enhanced.
(2) The mobility of electronic (telecommunication) parameters 
collection equipment is yet to be enhanced and their 
frequency analysis capabilities increased to meet future operation requirements. 
(3) Target detection rates of the Armed Forces’ new radar 
systems have been improved, but it is still necessary to 
enhance the development of anti-stealthy technology and 
118capabilities in response to early warning threats and reaction 
time requirements.
III. Future Objectives
1.  Joint command and control systems
(1) Planning and building of the networked C4ISR systems will 
be continued. These advanced datalinks will enable troops 
at all levels to acquire real-time information and battlefield 
image and monitor real-time activities on the battlefield by increasing battlefi  eld transparency.
(2) Functions of joint operation C2 systems will continue to 
be enhanced and decision support systems established 
to improve battlefield management capabilities, such as 
battlefield surveillance and control, combat planning and decision-making, and troop command and control, so as 
to achieve the objective of “being able to see, hear and 
command” throughout the whole theater of operation. 
(3) Improve operational management system functions such 
as personnel, logistics, and communication, information, 
and electronics should be improved and integrated with C2 
systems.
(4) The survivability and anti-jamming capabilities of the Armed 
Forces’ joint operation command, control, communication, and computer facilities should be enhanced.
2.  Joint communication systems
(1) Integrating communication transmission platforms
Complete the establishment of multi-path, automatic 
switch, secure, and stable optical fiber and microwave 
119communication and transmission backbone networks for the 
Armed Forces to connect and integrate strategic and tactical 
communication networks.
(2) Enhancing system security and backup capabilities
Establish integrated wireless communication networks with 
digital transmission, security, and anti-jamming functions for the Armed Forces, and construct emergency communication 
backup and support capacity for important positions and electromagnetic pulse protection capabilities for critical 
positions.
(3) Establishing capabilities to utilize public and private  
communication facilities and techniques
Establish database that contains all state and privately 
owned facilities which have military support applications, and plan practical means for taking over and supporting military 
applications, which will be validated through training and 
exercises.
(4) Planning for building new-generation satellite communication 
systems
In coordination with the policy of national satellite 
development and integration, the Armed Forces are planning to build new-generation satellites in order to construct satellite 
communication systems capable of secure communication, 
high survivability, and integrated application to fulfill joint 
operation requirements.
3.  Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance systems
(1) Acquire various surveillance and reconnaissance equipment 
to effectively extend surveillance coverage and obtain all-
120source early warning information of enemy situations, so as 
to provide early warning and protection functions.
(2) Procure electronic surveillance equipment and gradually 
upgrade mobile surveillance capabilities to ensure sustained 
operational capabilities.
(3) Continue improving counter-stealth techniques, extend threat 
warning and response time, and improve target identifi  cation 
rates to increase battlefield transparency and capture the intelligence and warning of the enemy movement and 
imminent threat.
Section 2   Joint Information Operation and  
Electronic Warfare Capabilities
I. Vision 
Joint information operations (IO) and electronic warfare 
(EW) seek to establish “early warning, rapid response, effective 
countermeasures, and delaying enemy offensive” so as to defend the 
security of our C2 systems, weapon fire control, radar systems, and 
communication platforms, and to avoid enemy exploitation, paralysis, 
and sabotage. This will ensure comprehensive information and electronic security and advantages throughout the duration of defense 
operations.
121II. Current Developments
1.  Joint information operation capabilities
(1) In peacetime, IO emphasizes maintaining the security 
of information systems and networks, and continuously 
accumulating information security and protection capabilities. 
In wartime, information security is ensured and information 
advantages attained to utilize overall IO capabilities.
(2) Information security policies are being formulated and 
information security systems and backup mechanisms for 
all levels of forces are also being established. Mechanisms such as backup servers in alternate locations and backup data 
storage for important information systems are also being 
established to enhance system survivability. This will ensure 
proper continuity of information operations, and subsequently 
integrate information security systems as planned to achieve 
the objective of joint defense.
(3) Methods such as media, education, training, and certification 
will continue to be used to disseminate information security knowledge, and enhance personnel understanding and 
capabilities of information security.
2.  Joint electronic warfare capabilities
(1) The Armed Forces have established various electromagnetic 
parameter databases, which are regularly amended or updated in order to fully employ overall warfighting capabilities.
(2) Currently the MND has undertaken necessary augmentation 
of all EW jamming equipment as planned to provide electronic shield for the entire Taiwan.
(3) Some critical C2 positions have already been established to 
122enhance protection capabilities for these positions as planned.
III. Future Objectives
1.  Joint information operation (IO) capabilities
(1) All information security systems and mechanisms should be 
integrated to increase early warning and joint information 
security and protection capabilities.
(2) Security and protection measures of military networks should 
be uniformly planned and methods such as joint surveillance and reconnaissance used to closely monitor network 
information activities. Capacity of information security and 
protection networks should also continue to be enhanced.
(3) Safety inspection capacity for information facilities should 
be established in stages in accordance with international and domestic information security product inspection standards.
(4) Standardization of the Armed Forces’ information 
organization and manpower allocation should be planned to educate and train professional information personnel, so 
as to enhance response capabilities for information security 
matters.
2.  Joint electronic warfare (EW) capabilities
(1) The Armed Forces should establish projections for developing 
mid and long-term electronic warfare capabilities, incorporate 
EW development trends from various nations into the 
Armed Forces’ EW development, and gradually increase 
and integrate future EW C2 platforms in order to consolidate 
overall warfi  ghting capabilities.
123(2) Establishment of initial EW capacity for the Armed Forces 
should be completed, and electromagnetic protection 
capabilities comprehensively planned to increase battlefield 
survivability.
(3) The constitution of threat warning capabilities for all major 
combat forces should be completed and electromagnetic 
protection capacities at all major positions integrated to 
establish comprehensive joint EW protection capabilities.
Section 3   Joint Counter Air Capabilities
I. Vision
Joint counter air operations seek to establish early detection 
and warning, long-range precision engagement, and joint multilayer 
interdiction capabilities with automated combat control as the 
backbone. Integration of all fighters, UA Vs, missile defense and 
ground-based air defense weapons, and enhanced base and position 
defense and logistic support capabilities will ensure “accurate intelligence indication, flexible command and control, all theater 
defense, and all-weather combat”. Vying for air superiority in desired 
airspace, gradually destroying or disabling the enemy’s air warfighting 
capabilities, weakening the enemy’s operation systems and sustainment 
capabilities, and ensuring the security of air defense over the Taiwan 
Strait.
124II. Current Developments
1.  Current counter air operations capabilities are developed 
through focusing on and following the order of IO, EW, joint 
force preservation, joint interdiction, and homeland defense, 
proactively building capacity for long-range surveillance and 
missile defense, and integrating C4ISR systems to increase 
battlefield management capabilities, establishing long-range 
penetration, precision strike, and joint suppression capabilities, 
and enhancing overall air defense and comprehensive logistic 
support capabilities.
2.  All primary fighters are equipped with short, medium and 
beyond-visual-range missiles, which can simultaneously 
engage multiple targets. The F-5 and IDF fi  ghters are capable of conducting day time air to ground attacks, while the F-16 
aircraft have all-weather air to ground attack capabilities, 
which facilitates joint interdiction missions.
3.  In terms of homeland defense operations, the Air Force is 
planning, as battle situations dictate, to dispatch forces to fi  ght 
for partial air superiority in combat zones, and coordinate the 
air defense forces and fi  repower to form core attack power in order to effectively conduct joint counter air operations.
4.  Currently, the greatest threat to the ROC’s air defense is the 
PRC’s tactical ballistic missiles deployed across the Taiwan 
Strait. The Armed Forces are proactively building ballistic 
missile defense systems to defend critical political, economic, 
and military targets. In addition, combining the soon to be 
established missile warning centers, the joint operations center is able to effectively command the upgraded Patriot II air 
125defense missile systems, the Patriot III, and Tien Kung III anti-
air missiles that are planned to be procured, thereby forming a 
comprehensive missile defense system.
III. Future Objectives
In order to prevent the enemy from using air and missile strikes 
to attack our important bases and positions, effectively maintain the 
operational functions of major weapon systems, and ensure the success of defense operations, capabilities required by future joint counter air 
operations include:
1.  Surveillance, warning, and combat control capabilities
(1) Perform replacement for fixed radars and capability upgrade 
for mobile radars, build ROCC (region operation control centers), renew automatic air defense systems, effectively 
integrate overall aerial intelligence and information, establish intelligence and information sharing environments, and 
increase the level of operational precision.
(2) Upgrade capabilities of aerial warning aircraft to enhance 
early warning capabilities.
(3) Enhance all-weather radar surveillance, missile attack 
warning, COP, radar decoys, and Identification Friend or Foe 
(IFF) capabilities.
2.  Air interdiction and suppression capabilities
(1) Sufficiently procure interim fighters before the acquisition of 
next-generation fighter aircraft in order to maintain counter 
air operations capabilities.
(2) Procure missile systems with long-range and multi-target 
126engagement capabilities, anti-radiation missiles, and air-to-
ground scattered and remote attack precision weapons to 
enhance air-to-air and air-to-ground combat capabilities for 
primary fi  ghters.
(3) Procure EW aircraft and aerial refueling aircraft, and renew 
relevant software and hardware facilities to enhance the 
overall effi  ciency of counter air operations.
(4) Continue building advanced digital datalink systems and 
enhance digital C2 capabilities for existing fi  ghter aircraft in order to enhance overall capabilities to secure air superiority.
(5) Procure next-generation fighters with EW, stealth, aerial 
refueling, short-range take-off and landing, beyond-visual-range attacks, and precision ground attack capabilities, and 
unmanned combat aerial vehicles (UCA Vs).
3.  Joint air defense and missile defense capabilities
(1)  Establish comprehensive missile defense systems, increase 
the Armed Forces’ overall missile defense capabilities, continue implementing capability upgrades for the Patriot II missile systems; subsequently, incorporate the establishment 
of long-range warning radars, missile warning centers, and 
the procurement and deployment of Patriot III , Tien Kung 
III, and SM-II missile systems.
(2)  Integrate various short, medium, and long-range air defense 
firepower, and build multilayer air defense interdiction 
networks to utilize comprehensive warfighting capabilities with “unified command, multilayer defense, and joint 
interdiction” characteristics, and ensure the integrity over 
national territories.
127(3) Upgrade system functions for the 35-mm air defense guns, 
and develop new low-altitude and short-range air defense 
systems, and land-based air defense missile systems, so as to 
enhance overall air defense capabilities.
4. Protection capabilities for bases and positions
Harden defensive works, disguise, rapid repairs of runway 
and taxiway, and counter anti-radiation missiles, and improve redundant and resilient capabilities.
Section 4   Joint Sea Control Capabilities
I. Vision
Joint sea control operations seek to establish “high efficiency and 
performance, rapid deployment, and long-rang strike” capabilities. 
By utilizing integrated command, control, intelligence, surveillance, 
and reconnaissance systems, the Armed Forces will construct three-
dimensional mobile maritime strike forces to control and prevent 
the enemy from exploiting our territorial waters, reject the enemy’s invasions, and ensure the security of sea lines of communication 
(SLOCs) and freedom of movement.
II. Current Developments
1.  Currently, the Armed Forces’ sea control capabilities include 
land-based surveillance and reconnaissance sites, various types 
of primary and auxiliary combatant ships, amphibious ships, 
128mobile surveillance, reconnaissance and strike platforms, and 
airborne anti-submarine warfare (ASW) and reconnaissance 
forces. In coordination with early warning and mobile 
deployment, the Armed Forces are able to engage in counter 
strike operations against enemy maritime forces with three-
dimensional, multilayer interdiction, and rapid response 
capabilities.
2.  The purpose of the ROC maritime force is to ensure the control 
of area of maritime operation and maintain safe transition to foreign countries and the security of naval bases. At the initial 
stage of defense operations, the Armed Forces will utilize joint surveillance to monitor enemy activities and appropriate 
forces to open escort routes, so as to ensure supplies of civilian 
and military required materials. In addition, force deployment 
and employment are being adjusted as required by combat 
situations, air forces coordinated, and regional ASW and direct 
and indirect convoy escort employed to maintain safe maritime 
transportation to foreign countries.
3.  In wartime, all kinds of surveillance measures to gain early 
warning and monitor enemy movement will be integrated in order to preserve forces. Then, as situation develops, 
maritime maneuver should be appropriately executed, and 
favorable timing and locations selected to occupy tactically 
advantageous positions, concentrate on partially superior forces 
in coordination with aerial and coastal forces to interdict the enemy’s main combat forces and landing fleets, and support 
coastal strike forces to block and destroy the enemy’s follow-up 
forces.
129III. Future Objectives
In order to effectively block or delay the enemy’s attempt to 
control Taiwan’s surrounding waters, maintain sea and aerial lines 
of communication, and deny and destroy the enemy’s invading 
amphibious forces, the planned objectives of the future development of 
joint sea control capabilities include:
1.  Joint maritime and air operations capabilities
Establish sea control capabilities with stealth, speed, long-
range, mobility, precision, robust strike power, and superior protection capability, to execute mobile strike and anti-submarine operations, and eliminate the enemy in favorable 
waters. Major developments include:
(1) Plan for the procurement of submarines, large and medium 
surface combatant ships, and new generations of missile 
boats, and reinforce aerial ASW, minesweeping, and mine 
warfare capabilities to construct effective sea control and 
mobile strike forces in order to conduct counter blockade and joint interdiction operations.
(2) Integrate digital communication, digital datalinks, broadband 
satellite communications, satellite positioning, and command, 
control, communication, and intelligence systems, to 
construct advanced tactical datalinks and maritime and 
aerial intelligence, command, and control systems, so as 
to effectively monitor maritime and aerial intelligence surrounding Taiwan’s waters.
(3) Enhance large area early warning capacity, establish 
surveillance capacity for large and important maritime 
regions surrounding Taiwan, and effectively integrate air, 
130maritime surface, and underwater forces to execute joint 
surveillance, training exercises, and combat missions.
(4) Build a new-generation integrated C2 systems, and upgrade 
existing capabilities in COP displays, fleet operational C2, 
operation decision support, and battlefi  eld management.
(5) Procure air-launched stand-off precision anti-ship weapons in 
order to enhance maritime and aerial interdiction capabilities.
(6) Procure mine hunters and minesweeping helicopters to 
improve mine countermeasures capabilities and ensure the safety of SLOCs.
2.  Logistics support capabilities
Enhance the capabilities of logistic support, rescue, 
recovery, and personnel evacuation, including procuring new 
fuel and munitions supply ships and salvage vessels.
Section 5   Joint Ground Defense Capabilities
I. Vision 
Joint ground defense operations seek to establish “digitized, 
multi-dimensional, and agile” ground warfighting and special 
operations capabilities. In addition, in accordance with the principles 
of “depth deployment, rapid response, long-range engagement, and 
precise elimination of enemy forces” and the operational guidance of 
“anchorage area destruction, beachhead and landing fi  eld annihilation”, joint ground forces must fully control and monitor battlefield 
131transparency throughout the duration of homeland defense operations, 
so as to eliminate enemy airborne assault, landing, special operations, 
and rear infiltration forces, and ensure the safety of defensive positions, 
bases, and facilities.
II. Current Developments
1.  Current ground defense capabilities are focused on developing 
joint operation capabilities, and continuous enhancement of force structure, doctrine developments, and innovative tactics 
and techniques to address multi-dimensional battlespaces and 
incorporate overall requirements in rapid force and firepower 
projection, surveillance, and strike capabilities required in 
future defense operations. Currently the ground forces are proactively procuring new attack and utility helicopters to 
enhance overall ground and aerial warfighting capabilities and 
establish rapid mobile strike capabilities.
2.  To counter the enemy’s “decapitation, dismantling, and 
disabling” actions, the ground forces are enhancing special 
operations capabilities, proactively researching and developing 
special operations tactics and techniques, procuring special 
operations tools, and establishing training and education 
channels, so as to develop professional special operations 
forces. Also, in order to achieve the objective of “long-range engagement and precise elimination of enemy forces”, the 
ground forces are now building short-range air defense weapon 
systems and new multiple-launch rocket systems, constructing 
long-range, precision, and high efficiency weapons required for 
joint interdiction, and enhancing ground-based counter air and 
132sea control capabilities, so as to attain warfi  ghting capabilities 
required for attacking the enemy during maritime transit and 
eliminating the enemy at the beachhead.
III. Future Objectives
Ground operations require capabilities that meet the needs of 
various stages of combats, including joint anchorage area attacks, 
beachhead combat, counter strike operations, anti-airborne operations, and operations in depth defense positions. In addition, the ground 
forces need to enhance short-range, mobile surveillance, and target 
acquisition capabilities, as well as improving force preservation 
capabilities. Future objectives for ground force development are 
planned as follows:
1. Joint anchorage area attack capabilities
(1) In accordance with the operational guidance of “attacking 
the enemy at sea”, the Armed Forces seek to achieve the objectives of strengthening “long-range systems, precision 
weaponry, and armed forces integration”, effectively integrate 
C
4ISR systems, and establish early warning, long-range 
precision strike capabilities to eliminate the enemy during 
transition across the strait. Required capabilities include 
enhancing artillery (rocket) firepower, digitized howitzer 
fi  repower, army aviation attack capabilities, fi  re coordination 
capabilities, the capabilities of countering rapid amphibious 
landing platforms, and land-based mobile anti-ship fi  repower.
(2) The MND will continue acquiring new multiple-launch 
rocket systems and UA Vs, and procure new utility and attack helicopters to execute joint anchorage area attacks.
1332.  Beachhead combat capabilities
(1) In accordance with the guidance of “determined victory 
at beachhead”, the ground forces have to stop the enemy 
from landing and establishing lodgment by sealing ports, 
controlling beach areas, defending footholds and decisive 
barrage at landing ship line. Required capabilities include 
anti-armor and counter anti-armor strike capabilities, as well 
as capabilities to secure, block, and destroy sea ports.
(2) In the future, the ground forces need to be equipped with 
high-efficiency anti-armor missiles, short-range anti-armor rockets, new tanks, and so on.
3.  Mobile counter strike capabilities
(1) Shortly after the enemy lands on a beach and has not yet built 
up sufficient strength, use “superior mobility, overwhelming 
firepower, and integrated air and ground” combat capabilities 
to counter strike and eliminate the enemy, to prevent the 
enemy from assembling their forces and advancing further. 
Required capabilities include enhancing troop mobility and fires coordination.
(2) Production of light and medium tactical wheeled vehicles 
and armored infantry combat vehicles will be initiated in 
the future, to upgrade mobile strike capabilities. Also, new 
self-propelled howitzers, new tanks, and armored cavalry 
combat vehicles will be built in order to fulfill warfighting 
capabilities required for conducting contingency and mobile strike missions.
4.  Anti-airborne capabilities
Improve “surveillance and tracking, integrated air defense, 
134mobile sweeping” capabilities to disrupt enemy assaults, 
force concentration, and supporting landing operation. 
Required capabilities include enhancing command, control,  
communication, surveillance, reconnaissance, and theater level 
air defense.
5.  Depth defense positions capabilities
For urban, significant terrain defense and protection of 
critical infrastructure, in accordance with the all-out defense 
guidance of “independent defense, joint theaters of operations, 
and multilayer interception”, the ROC ground forces will 
ambush the enemy and limit enemy activities, so that the enemy cannot penetrate and control depth defense positions of 
the ROC. Required capabilities include enhanced night combat 
capability, urban warfare capability, sniping capability, rapid 
interdiction capability, and obstacle placement capability.
6.  Mobile surveillance and target acquisition capabilities
Procure mobile air defense target acquisition radars, truck-
mounted fi  eld air defense phased array radars, and night vision 
equipment in order to increase battlefield transparency and 
operational situation awareness.
7.  Force preservation and employment capabilities
Enhance force preservation measures, such as critical 
military infrastructure protection (airports, sea ports, command posts, positions, shelters, communication facilities, radar sites, 
and etc.), camouflage, concealment, and deception (CCD), dispersion, and mobile deployment, to increase battlefield 
survivability so as to endure defense operations. 
8.  Amphibious rapid response capabilities
135Establish rapid support capabilities for all theaters of 
operation, and procure platforms and equipment for rapid 
reaction missions, such as airlift platforms, amphibious 
landing ships (dock and tank), amphibious assault vehicles, 
light and medium tactical wheeled vehicles, special operations 
assault boats, and utility landing crafts, in order to effectively 
support offshore island supplies and all theaters of operations 
when conducting ground defense and contingency response operations. 
Section 6   Asymmetrical Warfare Capabilities
I. Vision
Asymmetrical warfare capabilities seek to establish capabilities 
that are able to make decisive attacks on the enemy’s operational center 
of gravity (COG) and critical vulnerabilities, in hopes of cooperating 
with existing and future acquisitions of basic land, maritime, and 
air warfighting capabilities, and employing innovative tactics and 
means to strike the enemy’s weaknesses or limit their advantages, so as to counter enemy invasions and effectively accomplish defensive 
operation missions.
II. Current Developments
The Armed Forces’ “asymmetrical warfare” is based on the 
innovative idea to flexibly combine and employ warfighting capabilities 
other than the traditional land, maritime, and air warfighting 
136capabilities in order to maximize relative advantages to strike at the 
enemy’s weaknesses or critical vulnerabilities, limit the enemy’s 
warfi  ghting capabilities or movements, and allow us to attain greater 
freedom of movement and secure military victory.
According to the enemy’s current military developments and 
their possible future patterns of invasion against Taiwan, the Armed 
Forces need to use conventional and unconventional warfighting 
techniques to conduct defense operations. Currently, the Armed Forces are not only proactively developing basic warfi  ghting capabilities, but 
also simultaneously researching and evaluating the establishment of 
asymmetrical warfare capabilities to increase overall defense operation capabilities, so as to achieve the objectives of conquering large enemy 
forces with smaller ones, and fi  ghting outnumbered and winning.
III. Future Objectives
Currently, the Armed Forces are proactively researching the 
establishment of unconventional warfare capabilities, which will 
be coordinated with the development of operational concept and 
operational efficiency evaluations in the future, so as to develop 
tactics or identify tools that are required for asymmetric warfare to 
complement basic warfighting capabilities and effectively counter 
enemy invasions.
137Section 7   Reserve Mobilization Capabilities
I. Vision
Reserve mobilization seeks to establish credible reserve 
warfighting capabilities with “on-site mobilization and engagement” 
and “timely mobilization and engagement” characteristics, incorporate 
the implementation of all-volunteer force and force structure 
adjustments, engage in reserve troops preparations, annually renew 
weapon systems for reserve forces, and merge reserve mobilization 
organizations. Under the coordinated support of the MND’s dedicated reserve mobilization system and reserve mobilization agencies from 
government ministries and all local counties and cities, the reserve 
forces are able to consolidate and utilize overall national capabilities to 
support homeland defense operations.
II. Current Developments
Since 2004, due to the implementation of the Jing-jin (force re-
structuring) Project and policy of “separation of roles and missions 
between active and reserve forces”, the reserve forces have been 
adjusting their organizations. Current reserve forces include ground 
reserve troops (combat and combat support), service and political 
warfare reserve troops, navy and coastal reserve troops and combat 
attrition complement echelons, as well as regimented auxiliary military service teams, which account for a total of 460,000 personnel. Basic 
policy guidance for mobilization is as follows:
1 .  Assign younger reservists to combat units and more experienced personnel to technical units.
1382.  Regiment reservists who were discharged from active service 
within eight years in constant reserve units in order to retain 
training experiences.
3.  For the selection of reservists, priority will be given to those 
whose domiciles are close to the assigned combat locations, 
and whose specialties are required for the billets in order 
to fully utilize the combat willingness of protecting their 
homeland. Should the manpower be insuffi  cient, the reservist selection area will be circularly enlarged within the theater of 
operation and with the tactical location as the center.
4.  “Replenishment for shortage of equipment” for reserve forces 
should fi  rst consider acquiring those that can be mobilized, and requisitioned. For equipment that cannot be acquired through 
mobilization, the reserve forces should prepare and stockpile 
by themselves.
5. The storage locations of various weapon systems for the 
reserve forces should be in line with the garrisoned locations.
6.  Vehicles required for the replenishment of shortage of 
equipment are usually “requisitioned separately from their operators (drivers)”. Other militarily required vehicles will be 
“requisitioned together with their operators”. Heavy industrial 
machinery, ships, and aircraft will also be requisitioned 
together with their operators.
III. Future Objectives
1.  Planning guidance
(1 ) Establish credible reserve warfighting capabilities in 
coordination with the implementation of all-volunteer force.
139(2)  Review and adjust reserve mobilization organizations 
in coordination with the Armed Forces’ force structure 
adjustments.
2. Important measures
(1)  Re-structuring reserve warfighting capability
a. To address implementation of the “all-volunteer force”, the reservist selection mechanism will be adjusted, and 
existing system of “first select those who were discharged last” will be changed to a system of “manning then 
training” and “whole unit and replacement” to realize the 
“eight-year regular manning” and “compatibility between registered residence and tactical location”, so as to fulfill the 
requirements of “on-site mobilization and engagement”.
b. Expand the capacity of the new recruit brigades; enhance military training for enlistees in order to set the foundation 
for reserve warfighting capabilities.
c. Enhance education and training for reserve forces, and increase training duration and depth of education to ensure their warfighting capabilities.
d. Continue renewing weapon systems for the reserve forces, and enhance construction of storage facilities, so as to 
rapidly recover combat power during wartime, and achieve 
the objective of “on-site mobilization and engagement”.
(2)  Merging reserve mobilization organizations
a. The MND will establish a dedicated agency for reserve mobilization to coordinate and control the nation’s overall 
capabilities to support military operations.
b. Ground reserve forces will be assigned to the jurisdiction 
140of one military service, to allow unified preparation and 
employment of reserve troops, so as to enhance homeland 
defense capabilities for each theater of operation.
Section 8   Joint Logistics Capabilities
I. Vision
Joint logistics seek to establish “precise logistics management and 
rapid logistics support” capabilities; integrate logistic information and 
increase logistic operation efficiency through the control of military 
and civilian resources, so as to effectively support the Armed Forces’ 
defensive operation missions.
II. Current Developments
1.  Current status of logistics systems
(1) Mission
a. MND level
(a) Department of Resources: It is responsible for integrating 
and guiding the acquirements of defense materials; 
planning for defense technology and industrial 
development policies; and developing strategies for the 
cooperation between defense technologies and private 
sector and military industrial agencies.
(b) Armaments Bureau: It is responsible for policy planning 
related to armament development affairs, including weaponry acquisition, industrial development for defense 
141technologies, research, development, and application 
of dual-use technologies, production of military goods, 
overall logistics, industrial operation and production, 
military procurement, and testing and evaluation.
(c) Office of the Deputy Chief of the General Staff for 
Logistics (J4): It is responsible for the Armed Forces’ 
policy planning, supervision, and implementation 
regarding combat readiness and operational logistics; proposing logistic preparedness requirements and 
recommendations for resource allocations to the military 
policy/armaments systems, and supervise the distribution, maintenance, and management of acquired military 
goods; direct the establishment of logistic centers for joint 
operation agencies, provide logistics assessments, logistics 
decision analyses, and devise and implement logistic 
support plans.
b. Service command headquarters level
(a) Each military service command headquarters is in charge of policy planning for relevant logistics and supply 
policy formulation, logistic preparedness, and contract 
compliance and purchase for the “repairs, maintenance, 
and support of dedicated equipment”.
(b) The combined logistics command is responsible for logistics, supply and maintenance policies, contract 
compliance and purchase, and logistic preparedness affairs for “general equipment and service support”.
c. Regional Command level
(a) The logistics/maintenance commands of each service 
142component are primarily responsible for the maintenance 
and supply of their dedicated equipment and related 
logistic activities, and also responsible for supervising the 
professional maintenance operation of their respective 
military service’s array of logistic commands (and 
support commands), base factories, and warehouses.
(b) The combined logistic support command is responsible 
for managing and supervising supply, maintenance, transportation, munitions, and other general service for 
forward support operations.
(c) Regional support commands implement joint regional 
tasks, and are responsible for executing regional (theater of operation) supply, maintenance, transportation, 
munitions, health service, and other general tasks for 
frontline operations.
2, Current status review
(1) Logistic authorities
After the enforcement of the Two Defense Acts, logistic 
authorities are divided into the force development category and operational logistics category. However, on the military 
service level, they are separated into dedicated and general 
logistics, which are partially overlapping with the functions 
of MND-level agencies and combined logistics command, 
and are thus unfavorable for logistic management for forces 
at all levels.
(2) Combined logistics system
a. Currently, the Armed Forces’ logistic information has 
not yet been effectively integrated, which affects the 
143implementation of joint logistics, and consequently 
undermines the effective integration and utilization of 
available resources.
b. Presently, inventory management and purchase for dedicated parts and accessories of each military service 
are not compatible with the authorities and responsibilities 
of base maintenance tasks, causing inconsistencies 
between planned maintenance/production and material requirements, which affects the accuracy of inventory 
management.
c.   Purchase tasks for logistic military goods span across 
different military service command headquarters, which 
increases workload and operation time, and hence reduces 
support efficiency and the effectiveness of combined 
logistics.
(3) Structure of logistic organizations
The Navy and the Air Force both have maintenance 
troops responsible for equipment maintenance to ensure 
readiness. However, the Army Command Headquarters has 
not assigned maintenance troops for levels below army level 
command, so that their equipment maintenance and support 
activities are all assumed by the Combined Logistics 
Command. Organizationally, it lacks logistic support 
functions, which is liable to produce incompatibilities in 
logistic authorities and responsibilities, thus affecting overall warfighting capabilities.
144III. Future Objectives
The ROC Armed Forces’ logistic management will address 
the implementation of all-volunteer force and the force structure 
adjustments, clearly regulate the authorities and responsibilities of 
“operational logistics” according to the improved logistic management 
system, and incorporate business administration theories and concepts 
to build a modern logistics system for the Armed Forces. Concrete 
policy guidance includes:
1. Adjusting logistical systems and formulating/amending 
logistical operation procedures
To address the implementation of an all-volunteer force and 
the force structure adjustments, the Armed Forces will review the improved logistic operation procedures, jurisdictional 
authorities and responsibilities, and C2 mechanism, and, 
by manning and equipping experiments, further adjust the 
structure of logistic organization and formulate and amend 
necessary logistic operation procedures and regulations. This is so that logistic systems are institutionalized, standardized, and 
professionalized, and logistics authorities and responsibilities 
of the Armed Forces will be clearly defi  ned in order to fulfi  ll 
force development and readiness requirements, and enhance 
logistic support effi  ciency.
2. Building comprehensive logistic mechanisms and enhancing 
emergency logistic support
To implement an all-volunteer force, the Armed Forces will 
outsource service manpower, retain complete field logistic support capabilities, establish mobile logistic troops to provide 
immediate support, purchase mobile maintenance equipments, 
145enhance emergency repair training, and use traffic networks 
and logistics channels, so as to facilitate the transportation 
of various logistic materials to combat locations, and rapidly 
provide troops with logistic support.
3.  Implementing logistics outsourcing transformation and introducing efficiency-based logistics
In coordination with force streamlining efforts, the 
establishment of the Armed Forces’ logistic capabilities will prioritize the fulfillment of core logistic requirements. 
Hence, the Armed Forces will coordinate the willingness 
and capabilities of domestic industries to identify appropriate logistic tasks and preserve suitable logistic maintenance 
capacity. It is expected that by establishing the private 
sector support mechanism through long-term contract and 
introducing performance-based logistics, the Armed Forces 
will be able to effectively lower logistic manpower requirement 
and cost, thus maximizing the efficiency of logistic support.
4.  Integrating the Armed Forces’ logistic information and 
enhancing logistic support efficiency
Based on the “operational logistics management system”, 
the Armed Forces will integrate existing logistic information 
systems to establish an information-sharing environment. 
Therefore, the overall state of the Armed Forces’ assets and 
the efficiency of logistic operations, and the precision level and 
speed of logistic management can be accurately monitored and improved, so as to effectively execute various logistic support 
missions in both peacetime and wartime.
5.  Improving logistical professionalism and increasing the efficiency of logistical operation
146In accordance with the professional logistic skill 
requirements, the Armed Forces will consolidate logistics 
education and training provided in military technical schools, 
formulate professional skill standards, implement private sector 
certification systems, and establish robust force supervision 
systems. Therefore, the career management and exchange 
of professional logistics personnel can be realized so as to 
increase the effi  ciency of logistic operation.
6.  Using logistics channel management techniques to improve 
supply and support operation
By utilizing information technology and modern logistics 
channel management techniques, the Armed Forces will 
be able to establish central supply databases, improve the 
management and supply of inventoried military goods, simplify 
manual operation, and increase the efficiency of inventory 
activities. In addition, it is planned to develop regional (theater 
of operation) supply chains, implement the operational logistics 
management, and fl  exibly adjust and arrange logistic resources, so that the Armed Forces can receive precise supply and 
support.
Section 9   Overall Intangible Combat Capabilities
I. Vision
The overall intangible combat capabilities seek to “solidify 
147national identity, cultivate patriotic integrity, nurture honorable virtues, 
clarify military discipline, harness force solidarity, consolidate a 
winning determination, counter enemies’ psychological warfare, and 
establish all-out defense”, and establish a fierce armed force with a 
strong fighting willpower. In this way, the Armed Forces will serve 
as a stabilizing foundation for the society and combine the overall 
strength of an all-out defense to ensure national security.
II. Current Developments
The Armed Forces’ political warfare operations are facing 
changes in the nation’s security challenges, domestic politics, and 
societal environment. Hence, it is necessary to integrate with current 
trends and continuously innovate in order to fulfill the requirements of 
enhancing intangible combat capabilities and all-out defense. Currently, key tasks in developing intangible combat capabilities include:
1.  Counseling 
The three-level guardians system is the core of the 
framework for the Armed Forces’ counseling work. Necessary measures are being taken to prevent personnel injured 
from accidents caused by psychological problems. The 
measures include, in the first level, a guardian program of accident prevention, the second level, a program of providing 
counseling, and the third level a program of giving medical 
treatment. The purpose of counseling is to assist soldiers in 
solving problems and achieve preventative functions through 
educational promotions, counseling arrangement, sound 
response procedures, and research and development of effective 
148psychological evaluation tools.
2.  Cultural publicity and political education
In accordance with regulations from the ROC Constitution 
and the National Defense Act, servicemen are educated 
to be loyal to their nation, love the people, insist on the 
nationalization of the Armed Forces, adhere to the basic 
principle of “nation, responsibility, and honor”, consolidate 
their willpower to “fight for the survival and development of the Republic of China, fi  ght for the well-being of the people of 
Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and Matsu”, and at the same time 
seek the recognition and support of the population.
3.  Psychological warfare techniques
By analyzing intelligence on the PRC’s three-front 
war (legal, public opinion, and psychological warfare), 
the psychological warfare units will be able to execute 
appropriate countermeasures. Furthermore, based on defense 
operations requirements, the organization and employment of 
psychological warfare units are being reviewed, psychological warfare equipment procured, and training of psychological 
warfare skill simultaneously enhanced, so as to increase the 
Armed Forces’ overall intangible combat capabilities.
4.  All-out defense education
In accordance with the All-out Defense Education Act, 
the all-out defense education is separated into four major categories, including school education, on-the-job training in government agencies, social education, protection of historic 
defense relics, and public education. Based on five major 
educational themes, namely international situations, defense 
149policies, all-out defense, reserve mobilization, and defense 
technologies; and through formulation of education regulations, 
holding diversified activities, intensive cultural publicity, and 
public education; the MND will establish a comprehensive all-
out defense education system in order to implement various 
educational tasks.
5.  Upholding military discipline
The MND is reinforcing education to enhance military 
discipline, promote integrity, and reinvigorate honor and 
morality of military personnel. In accordance with the 
Enforcement Regulations for the Armed Forces’ Discipline, the Armed Forces will supervise and discipline violators, 
strictly uphold military discipline, establish complaint hotlines 
and pleading mailboxes, and handle accusations of criminal 
or illegal acts to maintain troop safety. In addition, Guidelines 
for Ethical Military Administration is being formulated to 
implement administrative reforms and build an ethical military 
force. The MND Procurement Audit Division is also being established to supervise procurement work so as to eliminate 
the occurrence of illegal activities.
6. Internal Security Management
“Counter intelligence, counter infiltration, counter sabotage, 
and counter upheaval” is being focused to execute security and safety education, security work, safety inspections, intelligence, 
and safety maintenance, and establish peacetime and wartime security and safety operation mechanisms and functions, so as 
to effectively eliminate security threats and consolidate internal 
safety.
150III. Future Objectives
Looking into the future, the development of the Armed Forces’ 
intangible combat capabilities is oriented as follows:
1.  Counseling
The ability of staff at all levels to discover and respond to 
potential incidents and emergencies should be enhanced. The 
servicemen should provided high quality service through all 
kinds of educational opportunities, tailored assistance and 
response measures, and diversifi  ed interaction. In addition, the 
MND is working on increasing the Armed Forces’ professional counseling capacity by incorporating social counseling 
resources and establishing regional counseling networks.
2.  Cultural publicity and political education
The MND’s statements and publicity to external audiences 
should be based on professional evaluations and factual reports to avoid inflammatory and critical depictions in order to win 
the trust of the people. Internally, enhance patriotism education and readiness vigilance, so that servicemen can appreciate the 
importance of training and maintaining service profi  ciency in 
order to safeguard national security.
3.  Psychological warfare capabilities
The psychological quality of military personnel and 
willpower to fight enemies should continue to be enhanced, new psychological warfare equipments developed, theoretical foundations for psychological warfare established, and 
psychological warfare tactics and techniques devised in order 
to establish advantages in psychological warfare and enhance 
all-out defense capabilities.
1514.  All-Out defense education
For the purpose of making the legislation more 
comprehensive, the All-Out Defense Education Act should 
be reviewed and necessary amendments made to areas 
where existing regulations are imperfect or not legislatively 
consolidated. Secondly, the all-out defense education system 
should continue to be improved to take advantage of various 
educational opportunities and activities, and media and publicity used to utilize positive educational functions and 
establish the people’s consensus for a shared fate and all-out 
defense.
5.  Upholding military discipline
The Armed Forces will devise objective management and 
implementation guidelines, improve discipline and security 
evaluation and risk management, reinforce supervision and 
inspection, expand complaint and advisory service, and 
utilize warning and prevention functions to reduce security 
risk, ensure purity of forces and warfighting capabilities enhancement, and win the support and respect of the people.
6.  Internal Security Management
To address changes of overall environment and threats to 
the force, the Armed Forces will enhance security education, security mechanisms, and safety inspection, and incorporate 
knowledge of risk management into the construction of a 
robust security net to ensure force security and safety. 
152Afterword
The MND's first QDR has finally been completed after intensive 
review and discussion in line with the principle of "in-depth 
assessment and proactive foresight" and the needs of “future strategic 
environment analysis, strategy examination, organizational re-structuring, force planning, and resources utilization”. To ensure that 
all units under the MND maintain correct cognizance of the QDR, the 
writing and editing process was accompanied by continuous, complex 
communication and coordination among various units. Furthermore, 
the MND has striven to ensure that the content of the QDR achieves 
the best possible compromise among collective thinking, respect for 
different specialized professional skills, emphasis on innovation and foresight, and the need for prudence and pragmatism. 
In order to compile this QDR, the MND organized a task force with 
personnel from staff units, service agencies, and the National Defense 
University. With assistance of a consultant group composed of experts 
and scholars from the private sector, and in accordance with the 
given defense strategy and force planning principles, knowledge and 
experience from a broad range of parties were collected to complete the review. During the compilation process, the MND has gained much 
valuable experience in areas such as forging a strategic framework 
consensus, functioning as a policy integrator, encouraging innovative 
thinking, and giving consideration to fi  nancial resource constraints, all 
of which can serve as the foundation for improving future QDRs. 
The completion of the QDR indicates that the process of defense 
153reform has reached another important milestone in the wake of the 
implementation of the Two Defense Acts since 2002. The signifi  cance 
of the QDR lies in the timely fulfillment of the requirement of new 
Paragraph 4 of Article 31 of the National Defense Act, which is to be 
accountable to the Legislative Yuan and allow the law-making body 
to understand the defense blueprint planned during the President's 
term of offi  ce and oversee the defense policies on behalf of the public. 
In addition, the MND could also take advantage of this process to perform vertical communication and horizontal integration to secure a 
consensus on strategies and major defense policies. Therefore, both the 
“process” and “results” of compiling the QDR are of equal signifi  cance to the MND. 
Looking ahead to the future, the MND must employ effective 
control and evaluation mechanisms in the next stage to ensure that 
the goals set forth in the QDR are achieved, and that the overarching 
defense concepts of the President and military strategic concepts of 
the defense minister are thoroughly realized. In addition, with the 
compilation experience of this QDR, the MND will clearly defi  ne the position of the QDR and compilation procedure in the Armed Forces' 
relevant guidelines and operation standards, which will enable all 
units to fully understand the function and substance of this strategic 
guidance document, and effectively cooperate in the implementation of 
relevant matters. 
In summary, the content of this QDR primarily refl  ects the need to 
“promote defense transformation” and “establish professional armed forces”. Starting from the mindset of “preventing war” and “resolute 
defense and credible deterrence,” it is hoped that, with the support of 
adequate funding, structural reforms such as an all-volunteer force, 
154force level adjustments, integration of joint warfighting capabilities, 
reform of defense mechanisms, and human resources development 
could be realized, and future development of joint warfighting 
capabilities impelled. The Armed Forces of the future will gradually 
evolve into an all-volunteer active force. Currently, by means of 
modeling and simulation, war games, and exercise validation, the 
MND will determine the most suitable military force structure, and 
thereby achieve the goal of improving armed forces capacity and warfi  ghting capability. 
The MND looks forward to taking advantage of a relatively 
stable security environment in the next few years to accelerate the pace of reforms, reshape the capabilities and substantially transform 
the Armed Forces. We will build a ”Hard ROC” defense force with 
advanced equipment and a high degree of professionalism to ensure 
national security, safeguard peace in the Taiwan Strait, and provide a 
foundation for the sustainable development of the country, and a secure 
basis for the people’s livelihood and prosperity.
155156