1
2
Chapter 1
Strategic Environment
Contents
Minister's Foreword
Introduction
Chapter  1  Strategic Environment
Section 1  Asia-Pacific Security Environment
Section 2  Military Situation in the Taiwan Strait
Section 3  Defense and Security Challenges
Chapter  2  Strategic Guidance
Section 1  National Defense StrategySection 2  Military Strategy
Section 3  Development Strategy for Defense Industries
Chapter  3  Force Buildup
Section 1  Force Establishment PlanningSection 2  Force Integration
Section 3  Enhancing Weapons AcquisitionSection 4  Budgetary Planning4
8
13
14
17
25
29
30
38
39
43
44
47
5455
23
Chapter  4  National Defense Reform
Section 1  Enhancing our Recruitment System
Section 2  Optimizing Personnel Quality
Section 3  Enhancing the Image of Service Members
Section 4  Caring for Service Members 
Section 5  Refining the Defense Legal System
Section 6  Simplifying Administrative Procedures
Chapter  5  Defense Industries
Section 1  Research and Development for Defense Technologies
Section 2  Developing and Producing Weapons Indigenously 
Section 3  Development of Defense Industries
Chapter  6  Civil Protection Operations
Section 1  Executing Disaster Prevention and Relief
Section 2  Safeguarding Maritime Rights
Section 3  Supporting Emergency Rescue
Chapter  7  Cooperation with Partners
Section 1  Military ExchangesSection 2  International Humanitarian Assistance
Section 3  International Cooperation on Anti-terrorism
Conclusion59
60
62
64
66
68
70
73
74
75
77
81
82
83
85
87
8889
90
92
34The Ministry of National Defense (MND), in compliance 
with Article 31 of the National Defense Act, releases the 2017 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR), the third edition after the first one in 2009. This edition is aimed at materializing 
the President's concept of national defense as strategies and 
policies, and systemically illustrating the directions and perspectives of defense policy implementation for the next four years. It does not only satisfy the people's right to know but also help the international community to understand our defense policy and military strategy.
During the compiling process of the 2017 QDR, the strategic 
dynamic in the Asia-Pacific region may be shifting with the change of government and Asia-Pacific policy of the United States. Mainland China has been increasing its defense expenditures annually, speeding up its defense and military modernization, and dramatically strengthening its power 
projection capabilities. Its acts have raised concerns among 
neighboring countries. Especially, Mainland China’s recent intimidating moves by sending flotilla with aircraft carrier Liaoning and military aircraft passing though the Taiwan Strait have posed a serious threat to our national security.
Facing a complex regional strategic environment and 
multiple security challenges, the MND has stipulated five Minister's Foreword5fundamentally defensive strategic goals and corresponding 
approaches to achieve them, to safeguard our national security. Furthermore, guided by the military strategy of “resolute defense, multi-domain deterrence” the MND is 
shaping a military force capable of delivering deterrence and 
defense to keep the enemy at bay.
Additionally, the MND has adopted innovative thinking to 
simplify the process to acquire weapons and equipment that best meet the operational requirements. A new category of 
“specialists in defense affairs” in personnel system has been 
planned to extend the career tracks of service members. To realize the policy of “self-reliant defense,” the MND is setting up a “defense technology development mechanism” to incorporate private sector capabilities into indigenous weapons development programs. Aerospace, shipbuilding, and information security are identified as the core of 
development to promote integration of our R&D in defense 
technologies and relevant industries, and to achieve the goal of “mutual support between defense industries and economic development.” 
In the next four years, the MND will actively reconstruct 
military barracks, upgrade individual combat gears, redesign military uniform and badges, and improve living facilities and 6welfare. In addition, the MND will enhance the efficiency 
of disaster prevention and relief operations, strengthen the efforts in fishery escort missions, and protect the safety and properties of our people. Based on our own capacities and 
experience, the MND will also make efforts to participate in 
foreign humanitarian assistance and disaster relief (HA/DR) missions to fulfill our international obligations as a global citizen.    
In closing, I wish to thank the members of the QDR 
consultation committee and the participating colleagues 
and staff for their full dedication and contribution, and look forward to the support and recommendations from the general public. The ROC Armed Forces always keep an open mind to different opinions, which can be good reference for future policy making and force buildup, and keep our military moving towards an elite and strong defense force.
Kent Feng
Minister of National Defense
March, 2017
7Intentionally Blank8Introduction
The Ministry of National Defense (MND), in compliance 
with Article 31 of the National Defense Act, is required to submit a Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) within ten months after each presidential inauguration. In addition 
to this introduction, the 2017 QDR consists of seven 
chapters: Strategic Environment, Strategic Guidance, Force 
Chapter 2
    Strategic Guidance
Chapter 3
    Force Buildup 
Chapter 4
    National Defense
    Reform 
Chapter 6
    Civil Protection    Operations
Chapter 7
    Cooperation     with Partners
Chapter 5
    Defense Industries
Structure of the 2017 Quadrennial Defense Review
Chapter 1
    Strategic     EnvironmentSection 1
Asia-Pacific
SecurityEnvironmentSection 2
Military Situation
in the Taiwan StraitSection 3
Defense and
Security Challenges
Section 1
National Defense
StrategySection 2
Military StrategySection 3
Development Strategy
for Defense Industries
Section 1
Force Establishment
Planning Section 2
Force
IntegrationSection 3
Enhancing Weapons
AcquisitionSection 4
Budgetary
Planning
Section 1
 Enhancing our 
Recruitment SystemSection 2
Optimizing Personnel
QualitySection 3
Enhancing the Image of
Service Members
Section 4
Caring for
Service MembersSection 5
Refining the 
Defense Legal SystemSection 6
Simplifying 
Administrative Procedures
Section 1
Research and Development
for Defense TechnologiesSection 2
Developing and Producing
Weapons IndigenouslySection 3
Development
of Defense Industries
Section 1
Executing Disaster
Prevention and ReliefSection 2
Safeguarding
Maritime RightsSection 3
Supporting
Emergency Rescue
Section 1
Military ExchangesSection 2
International Humanitarian
AssistanceSection 3
International Cooperation
on Anti-terrorism9Buildup, National Defense Reform, Defense Industries, 
Civil Protection Operations, and Cooperation with partners, structured as the figure below. 
 Chapter 1  Strategic Environment
The United States and Mainland China continue to be the 
primary influences in the current Asia-Pacific strategic situation with a “co-opetition relationship”  existing between the two powers. Unresolved territorial disputes over islands and waters in the East China Sea (ECS) and 
the South China Sea (SCS), instability on the Korean 
Peninsula, arms competition among East Asian countries, growing non-traditional security threats, and potential changes in U.S. Asia-Pacific policy are major factors shaping the strategic balance in the Asia-Pacific region, and present challenges to our national security. 
Mainland China continues to invest heavily in military 
modernization, vigorously undertaking military force 
transformation and reforming into theater commands, and is gradually acquiring force projection capability west of the Second Island Chain, adding uncertainties to the security environment in the region. In recent years, our country has faced constrains in defense financial resources and manpower, difficulty in acquiring advanced weapons 10systems, increasing threats to cyber security, decreasing 
defense awareness in the public, and increasing incidents of complex emergencies, all of which require a serious and careful response.
Chapter 2  Strategic Guidance
In order to counter the military threats and challenges to our national security, ensure our national survival and development, and safeguard our people's lives and properties, the Ministry of National Defense has developed 
five strategic goals: “Safeguard the Nation,” “Cultivate a 
Professional Military,” “Realize Defense Self-Reliance,” “Protect People's Wellbeing,” and “Strengthen Regional Stability,” along with approaches to achieve those goals. MND has adopted military strategic concepts of “resolute defense, multi-domain deterrence” to lead our direction of force buildup and establish a credible defense force. 
Additionally, the Ministry has established a “development 
strategy for defense industries” to develop advanced technologies, establish capacities to research and produce weapons systems and equipment indigenously, and spur the development of national defense capabilities and economic growth. 11Chapter 3  Force BuildUp
With a focus on integrating joint operational capabilities, 
the ROC Armed Forces continues to improve its joint operational training, establish precise logistic capabilities, enact policy reforms for mobilizing reservists, and generate a warrior spirit in the force, in order to ensure 
successful accomplishment of defense missions for our 
nation. Moreover, the MND established force development priorities, and will achieve force development goals through effective integration, allocation, and employment of defense resources, and by revising weapons system acquisition processes. 
Chapter 4  National Defense Reform
The MND is dedicated to all reform efforts, including perfecting its military recruitment system, optimizing personnel quality and enhancing the image of service members, caring for their wellbeing, refining the national defense legal system, and streamlining administrative 
functions, in order to enhance service members 
professionalism and organizational efficiency.
Chapter 5  Defense Industries
Envisioning future trends and requirements for joint 
operations, the MND has been pooling interagency 12resources to push for indigenous development and 
production of weapon systems in three core fields of aerospace, shipbuilding and information security in order to promote integration of our R&D in defense technologies 
and relevant industries, and to achieve the goal of 
“mutual support between national defense and economic development.”
Chapter 6  Civil Protection Operations
For improving efficiency of disaster relief operations 
and providing concerted assistance efforts, the MND has 
cooperated closely with the Coast Guard Administration (CGA) to protect our fishermen in our territorial waters. Furthermore, the MND will assign its naval and air assets to assist in emergency assistance and transport operations.  
Chapter 7  Cooperation with Partners
Through military exchanges, international humanitarian assistance operations, and cooperation on anti-terrorism with our partners and friendly countries, the MND has taken part in bilateral and multilateral dialogue mechanisms for security and cooperation in order to contribute to peace and stability in the region.
13
Chapter 1
Strategic Environment
The current global security environment is marked by 
complexities and uncertainties. Coupled with regional 
strategic security alliances and competitions among powers, regional situations have been facing increasing 
uncertainties. In particular, the Asia-Pacific strategy 
adopted by the new U.S. administration, foreign policies adopted by countries in the vicinity of the Taiwan Strait, political and economic arrangements of Mainland China and its rapid military development, and security issues we are facing – such as economic development, demographical structure, and composite disasters – all impact our national 
security and sustainable development.
1314
Chapter 1
Strategic EnvironmentSection 1  Asia-Pacific Security Environment
The security environment of the Asia-Pacific Region is 
marked by the coexistence of competition and cooperation. 
The direction of U.S. Asia-Pacific strategy and force 
deployment remains to be seen while the rise of China has a tremendous impact on the surrounding regions. Meanwhile, facing traditional and non-traditional security threats, such as strategic competition among regional powers, disputes of maritime rights, and proliferation of terrorism, the majority of Southeast Asian countries have begun to acquire advanced weapons and expand their security alliances in response. Challenges to our national security have emerged from these 
relevant developments.   
I. Regional Strategic Posture
The U.S. has been maintaining military cooperation with 
traditional allies, such as Japan and South Korea, and has established strategic security cooperation relationships with Southeast Asian countries. Mainland China, on the other hand, has been vigorously strengthening security relations 
with Russia and Central Asian countries, expanding the scale 
and scope of its joint exercises, and increasing its leverage on regional affairs by touting grand political and economic strategies, such as the “Regional Comprehensive Economic 15Partnership” (RCEP) and “One Belt, One Road” (OBOR). In 
addition, the situation in the Korean Peninsula is precarious. North Korea has persisted in test-firing ballistic missiles and conducting nuclear weapon tests, raising serious concerns 
internationally.  Its actions have been triggering shifts in 
relations among involved countries such as the U.S., Japan, Russia, Mainland China, and have indirectly influenced the security situation in the Taiwan Strait.  
In terms of regional cooperation, Asia-Pacific countries have 
been enhancing strategic dialogues through venues such as 
the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum and 
East Asia Summit (EAS) to foster security and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific via these multilateral negotiations and cooperation.
II. Maritime and Island Disputes
The Asia-Pacific region contains numerous islands surrounded 
by abundant maritime resources.  Several of those islands are embroiled in sovereignty disputes and controversial demarcation of economic waters. Regional states have been investing ever more resources to secure their respective 
interests and benefits.   
In the East China Sea (ECS), following Japan’s  
nationalization of the Diaoyutai Islands, Mainland China 16
Chapter 1
Strategic Environmentannounced an East China Sea Air Defense Identification 
Zone (ADIZ). It has since maintained regular naval and air patrols in the ECS. Mainland China has also conducted frequent training exercises in the West Pacific and beyond 
the First Island Chain. Japan has established a shore-based 
surveillance network on Yonaguni Island and increased troop levels on Ishigaki Island. The confrontational posture between Mainland China and Japan has heightened uncertainties in the security and stability in East Asia. 
In the South China Sea (SCS), the findings of the international 
arbitration tribunal in the case filed by the Philippines 
were not commonly accepted by the claimants. Mainland China continues its island construction and militarization of those artificial islands. The U.S. advocates for “freedom of navigation and overflight” in the region. Developments in the region could escalate sovereign disputes and strategic competition, and potentially lead to regional conflicts.  
III. Non-traditional Security Threats
Following rapid changes in globalization, technological 
advancement and information flow, non-traditional threats 
have become ever more complex. Their security implications 
and scope are increasing, as are their importance. Many challenges such as the proliferation of terrorist ideologies, incidence of complex emergencies, spread of contagious 17diseases, cyber attacks, threats to information security, 
competition for energy resources, and rise of food and water resource crises, are all transnational and regional issues that cannot be resolved by a single country alone. Only through 
international and regional security cooperation mechanisms 
can these issues be properly managed to ensure regional security and stability.
Section 2  Military Situation in the Taiwan Strait
Dynamic military development, arms proliferation, and training exercises of regional countries impact the Asia-Pacific regional situation and pose challenges to security in the Taiwan Strait. Among them, Mainland China's 
obvious improvement in military operational capabilities by 
expediting military organizational reform and maintaining R&D on advanced arms and their conversions is the major factor that affects security in the Taiwan Strait. 
I. Military Environment in the Vicinity of Taiwan
1. Rapid Growth of Mainland China's Force Projection 
Capabilities
According to its military strategy of “active defense” and 
guidance of military preparation of “winning local wars under informatized conditions,” Mainland China has been 18
Chapter 1
Strategic Environmentincreasingly developing its naval, air, and rocket forces, 
and vigorously refining their organizations, tactics, and operational methods, in order to enhance its joint operational capabilities. Moreover, its military strength 
has been growing rapidly in the Asia-Pacific region 
by extending its force projection and strategic strike capabilities through conducting cross-regional long-distance training, escort missions in the Gulf of Aden, and naval and air force exercises penetrating through the First Island Chain and in the SCS.  
2. The U.S. Reviews Its Force Deployment in the  
Asia-Pacific
To maintain its interests and ability to swiftly respond 
to potential contingencies in the Asia-Pacific, the U.S. sustained its forward military presence in the region. Additionally, the U.S. military continues to modernize, strengthen its key capabilities for future operations, enhance its equipment and training, and conduct routine combined exercises with allies aimed at improving its 
joint capabilities, in order to maintain strategic advantage 
in the Asia-Pacific.  193. Japan Strengthens its Military Forces and Lifts 
Restrictions on Overseas Deployments
In line with its 2014 National Security Strategy , Japan 
lifted its ban on the “execution of collective defense.” 
Japan also adopted legislation for peace and security, expanding the operational area of the Japan Self-
Defense Forces. Furthermore, by adopting a new 
version of the “three principles on transfer of defense equipment and technology,” Japan has been expediting R&D on advanced defense technologies and selling defense technology overseas.  These changes profoundly influence the security situation in the Asia-Pacific and the Taiwan Strait.
4. Military Confrontation on the Korean Peninsula
North Korea has continued its strategy of brinkmanship, and has carried out nuclear tests and missile test launches in order to increase its international bargaining leverage. In response to the military threats from the north, the Republic of Korea has been enhancing its alliance with the U.S., deploying the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system, improving intelligence 
and command and control systems, extending radar 
detection range, and enhancing its early warning and defense capabilities. But these activities have triggered 20
Chapter 1
Strategic Environmentobjections from Mainland China and Russia, created a 
more complicated military confrontational posture on the Korean Peninsula and increased uncertainties in the regional security environment. 
5. Arms Upgrades among Southeast Asian Countries
Southeast Asian countries have been investing resources in accelerating their military modernization actively acquiring advanced weapons from the U.S., Europe, Russia, and Mainland China to improve their operational capabilities. The risk of military confrontations in the region has persisted. 
II. Current Military Threats in the Taiwan Strait
Mainland China has never renounced its use of force against 
Taiwan, and preparing to conduct a military invasion of Taiwan is one of its primary goals. With a budget increasing year by year, the PLA has rapidly modernized its military equipment, pursuing military reform under the principle 
of “Central Military Committee (CMC) managing overall 
military affairs, theater commands focusing on warfighting, and services focusing on force-building.” Relevant efforts have been made to reorganize its CMC general departments, restructure military regions (MR) into theater commands, 21create an army headquarters in the People's Liberation 
Army (PLA), and establish a strategic support force and rocket force. In addition, the PLA in recent years has institutionalized all its military exercises. The PLA now 
possesses the capability to impose a blockade on Taiwan and 
conduct multi-dimensional operations to seize our offshore islands. The comprehensive operational capabilities it has developed pose threats to Taiwan including the following: 
1. Joint Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance 
Capabilities
The PLA has been developing capabilities of command, 
control, communications, intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance, navigation, targeting, and digital datalink capabilities, and can now cover areas west of the Second Island Chain. With a focus on improving surveillance and identification capabilities on targets in the Asia-Pacific 
in support a range of military operations in the region, 
posing a tremendous threat to our national security. 
2. Strike Capabilities of the PLA Rocket Force
All medium (and short) range tactical ballistic and cruise missiles deployed by the PLA Rocket Force can reach the entire main island of Taiwan. With continuous 22
Chapter 1
Strategic Environmentimprovements on maneuverability, accuracy, and 
lethality, they can be used to conduct precision strikes on our political, military, and economic high-value targets (HVT). Moreover, it has accelerated R&D, production, 
and deployment of long-range anti-ship ballistic missiles 
to enhance its capabilities to invade Taiwan and deny the intervention of foreign forces. 
3. Integrated Air Operational Capabilities 
The PLA Air Force has been accelerating R&D and conversion programs for its fighter fleet. Its main operational aircraft have undertaken aerial refueling drills, and multiple types of its aircraft have flown 
across the First Island Chain, demonstrating a significant 
improvement in its long range operational capabilities. Moreover, coupled with new unmanned combat aerial vehicles (UCA V) and advanced long-range precision munitions, it has acquired capabilities to achieve multi-layered firepower, joint air defense, anti-missile operations, and even achieve air supremacy west of the 
First Island Chain, while further threatening our efforts to 
obtain regional air superiority. 234. Integrated Maritime Operational Capabilities
The PLA Navy has been developing its main combatant 
ships and accelerating deployment of auxiliary ships, such as new amphibious transport docks and fast combat support ships, to enhance its replenishment capabilities for maritime operations. In addition, its submarine-
launched intercontinental ballistic missiles onboard its 
nuclear submarine and shore-based supersonic anti-ship missiles under development and deployment have strengthened its strategic deterrence and counterattack capabilities. With the assistance of its indigenous aircraft carrier and capability to form a blue water carrier battle group, the PLA Navy has demonstrated that it has 
increased capability to conduct nuclear counterstrike, 
deny access of foreign forces, and blockade Taiwan and its surrounding waters.  
5. Integrated Ground Operational Capabilities
The PLA Ground Force has been developing in the direction of three-dimensional operations, rapid maneuverability, long-range power projection, precision strike, and special operations capabilities. The army 
aviation units are equipped with various types of 
indigenous helicopters, and have increased training 24
Chapter 1
Strategic Environmentwith special operations forces in order to improve its 
air-land battle, rapid assault, and air assault operations capabilities. Furthermore, it has deployed transport vessels along Mainland China's southeastern coast 
and conducted joint landing drills to fulfill its future 
operational requirements against Taiwan. It is believed Mainland China has acquired the capability to initiate triphibious landing operations to seize our offshore islands. 
6. Strategic Support Capabilities
The PLA Strategic Support Force was formed to integrate space, technical reconnaissance, cyber warfare, electronic 
countermeasures, and psychological operations units. 
Notably, the world's first Chinese-made quantum communications satellite, which can transmit classified military operational data, was successfully launched into orbit. Its electronic countermeasures force can simulate a realistic electronic operations environment in the Taiwan Strait, and construct electronic interfering and paralyzing 
capabilities. In addition, it has absorbed civilian resources 
and recruited information warfare talent to expand civil-military integration. Thus, it has established a cyberattack capability to collect our electro-magnetic parameters, and to monitor, cut off, and interfere with our surveillance, 25reconnaissance, command and control systems. 
7. Unconventional Logistical Support Capabilities
In order to overcome inadequate transport capabilities 
and ensure the prioritization of military operations, all transportation infrastructure such as roads, railroads, waterways, air routes, and civilian transportation means were constructed to meet the PLA's defense needs. In recent years, the PLA has requisitioned civil airliners and large ferries to join its exercises, and mobilized large 
units by train. All these reveal that its unconventional 
support capabilities have been dramatically enhanced. In an invasion of Taiwan, it can accelerate the movement of troops and reduce our preparation time for defensive operations.     
Section 3  Defense and Security Challenges
In maintaining national security and conducting defense preparation, not only do the threats and challenges in our external strategic environment have to be evaluated and dealt with, but social, economic, demographic, resources, 
technological, and psychological factors in our domestic 
environment have to be given serious consideration. 26
Chapter 1
Strategic EnvironmentI. Limited Growth of Defense Financial Resources
In the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, global economic 
growth has suffered greatly. The economic development of our country has also been affected by this recession, and our overall finances have been constrained －limiting the 
growth of our defense spending. The major issue at present is to make the best of limited defense resources to strengthen comprehensive military capabilities and ensure sustainable 
force buildup and operational readiness. We will seek to 
obtain a reasonable and adequate defense budget appropriate to national budget allocations and, allocate and manage these resources appropriately. 
II. Constrained Manpower Resources 
The impact of our social and economic environment, along 
with a low birth rate, has been to reduce available manpower, negatively impacting our troop replenishment and operational strength. We will to continue to revise our recruitment 
system, and concurrently review our operational concepts and 
corresponding force structure in order to maintain a small but elite military to meet our future defense needs. 
III. Difficulty in Acquisition and R&D for Advanced Weapons
In the face of the military threats from Mainland China, 
the ROC Armed Forces need to acquire advanced weapons to meet our defense needs. Bounded by diplomatic and 27financial realities, our country faces difficulties in acquiring 
advanced weapons which cannot be produced domestically. Although we are capable of developing some defense articles, we cannot fully build sophisticated weapons and 
equipment on our own. Some key components and parts must 
be purchased from foreign sources. To adapt to the future high-tech operational environment, we must map out a long-term, comprehensive technology development strategy and establish indigenous R&D and production capabilities.
IV . Serious Threats to Cyber Security 
With the continuously expanding development and application 
of information technologies, risks to cyberspace and 
information security are growing relentlessly. Government 
agencies, corporate enterprises, and critical infrastructures are potential cyber attack targets. In particular, the PLA has drastically increased its information and electronic warfare, and cyber operations capabilities, threatening our military and civilian networks. The ROC Armed Forces have to enhance information security and protection mechanisms, strengthen 
information, communications, and electronic warfare (ICE) 
capabilities, and help construct a comprehensive national cyber and electronic-magnetic security protection mechanism. 28
Chapter 1
Strategic Environment
V . Waning Defense Awareness 
Due to ongoing economic, social, and cultural exchanges 
across the Taiwan Strait, many of our fellow citizens have gradually lost awareness that the two sides of the Strait remain military adversaries, and that the risk of war still exists. Some have ignored the widening gap of military capabilities and increasing menaces from Mainland China, undermining their support for defense affairs. The ROC Armed Forces have to 
systematically integrate all relevant resources to raise defense 
awareness among the general public as well as encourage public participation in and support for defense affairs in order to strengthen national security.     
VI. Increasing Threats from Complex Emergencies
Climate change has caused a rising number of complex 
emergencies with natural disaster conditions increasingly urgent and severe. Requiring coordinated interagency relief and recovery efforts. Our country is located within the 
western Pacific typhoon zone and Pacific Ring of Fire seismic 
zone, and is categorized as a highly hazardous area with frequent typhoons and earthquakes. In recent years, the ROC Armed Forces have effectively supported HA/DR operations. In the future, the Armed Forces will continue to cooperate with central and local governments to provide disaster relief assistance, and shoulder the responsibility of safeguarding 
people's lives and properties. 29
Chapter 2
Strategic Guidance
In response to hostile threats and challenges to our 
national security, as well as to fulfill the need to ensure 
the survival and development of the nation and protect the lives and property of our people, the MND has formulated 
a “national defense strategy, military strategy, and defense 
industrial development strategy” to guide our defense policy implementation and force development. Through the implementation of those strategies, MND can best combine both opportunities and advantages, apply limited defense resources to build a credible defense force, and achieve its strategic goals.
2930
Chapter 2
Strategic GuidanceSection 1  National Defense Strategy 
In keeping with the President's national security concept and 
the Executive Yuan's defense policy guidance, the MND has evaluated the domestic and foreign strategic environment 
and trends, reviewed the status of threats and challenges to 
our national security, established defense strategic goals and laid out visionary approaches to achieve them. The strategic defense goals and approaches are driving the ROC Armed Forces to consolidate their defense preparations, develop future joint operational capabilities and enact relevant defense reforms to create a robust and strong defense force capable of enuring our national security. 
I. Objectives of the National Defense Strategy
In light of current and future strategic environment and 
security challenges, we must think innovatively, promote pragmatic reform and utilize resources effectively in order to formulate the optimal plan for force buildup and operational readiness. Our current national defense strategy is as follows:
1. Safeguard National Security
The first priority of our national defense is to deter and defend against any hostile military action. In the particular case of a military invasion, we will mobilize all defense assets to safeguard territorial integrity and 31sovereignty and protect the people and their property 
from devastation.  
2. Cultivate a Professional Military
The employment of operational capabilities relies on highly professional personnel and efficient organizations. Facing dynamic changes in domestic and external environments, and the need to build a military force with high-tech and innovative capabilities, we must pragmatically carry out various refinement and reforms 
on the defense programs to improve overall personnel 
quality and organizational efficiency, and develop professional, smart, and strong Armed Forces to meet future challenges. 
3. Implement Defense Self-Reliance
The development of defense requires the full support of a nation's economy. We must use the national economy to develop defense, and use defense to spur the economy, thus laying a solid foundation for a defense self-reliance. 
The ROC Armed Forces must combine resources from 
relevant government agencies and industrial capacities from private sectors to strengthen the development and application of defense technologies, and conduct research and produce weapons and equipment domestically. 32
Chapter 2
Strategic GuidanceDoing so achieves a win-win result, fulfilling the nation's 
defense needs while generating economic gains.  
4. Protecting the Well-being of the People
To contend with the non-traditional security threats that have emerged in recent years, the ROC Armed Forces 
must serve on the frontline in conducting disaster relief 
and promoting social stability. The nation's maritime rights are also our important interests vital to its people's well-being, and the ROC Armed Forces must continue to implement government policies to safeguard the nation's maritime rights. 
5. Strengthen Regional Stability
In the age of globalization, national security is intertwined with international politics and regional 
affairs, and cannot be managed unilaterally. Aside from 
building a robust defense force to meet self-defense goals, the ROC Armed Forces must be a “staunch peacekeeper” in the international community, dedicating themselves to strengthening peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait and security in the Asia-Pacific.
II. Approaches to Achieve the Objectives
MND will achieve its defense strategic goals through 
substantive policy planning and viable implementation 33efforts, and by seeking adequate budgeting. The approaches 
to achieve objectives are as follows:  
1. Strengthen Force Buildup
In order to achieve the strategic goals of “safeguarding national security,” the ROC Armed Forces must develop necessary capabilities to accomplish all their missions. The pragmatic actions are as follows:
(1) Carefully review defense needs and pragmatically plan 
force buildup in order to establish comprehensive force 
development objectives.  
(2) Build a defense force that deters military threats and 
denies invasions by consolidating joint capabilities, 
improving joint operations training, establishing precise logistics, refining the reserve system, and strengthening 
morale for all its personnel. 
(3) Fine-tune the weapons acquisition processes to 
accelerate the procurement of necessary weapons 
and equipment for defense.
(4) Pragmatically allocate and apply limited defense 
financial resources to support force planning and buildup, and create reasonable and appropriate plan for the defense budget to maximize the effectiveness 
of all resources.  34
Chapter 2
Strategic Guidance2. Promote Defense Reform
In order to reach the strategic objective of “cultivating a 
professional military,” promote a series of defense affairs reforms. Practical measures are as follows:
(1) Design a comprehensive career package from 
recruitment to retirement to steadily achieve goals 
for a volunteer force. 
(2) Improve the professionalism of military and civil 
personnel and refine manpower management and 
deployment mechanisms to cultivate and retain talented personnel who will continue serving the 
nation. 
(3) Promote a culture of integrity and honesty to uphold 
military discipline, shape a highly esteemed image for 
service members, elevate their social status, and regain 
their honor and respect from the people. 
(4) Plan for the care and welfare of personnel to 
ensure they have no worries about their families 
and can focus on their missions. 
(5) Refine the national defense legal system to 
improve legal literacy for service members, and realize the goal of administration by law. A specific 35act for the rights of service members is being studied 
and drafted to protect their legal rights and interests.
(6) Streamline administrative functions to improve 
the efficiency of implementation. 
3. Develop Defense Industries 
To achieve the strategic goals of “realizing a self-reliant defense,” the MND must combine governmental resources with those of private sector to improve the capacities of defense industries. The pragmatic actions are as follows:
(1) Complete a layout of short, medium, and long 
term defense technology development to integrate domestic resources and capacities in industrial, academic, and research sectors in order to improve 
our capabilities of technological R&D.  
(2) We are enhancing future-oriented studies on 
defense technologies and developments in weapons 
systems, and increasing self-reliant capacities in 
key technologies, to gradually achieve the goals 
of developing and producing weapon systems domestically. 
(3) Develop defense industries with a focus on aerospace, 
shipbuilding, and information security, and enhance 36
Chapter 2
Strategic Guidancetheir development through cooperation with industrial 
sectors and academia, incorporating R&D results and managing the process through security clearance mechanisms.  
4. Enhance Civilian Protection Operations
In order to achieve the stategic goals of “protecting the well-being of the people” the ROC Armed Forces must enhance their capabilities to conduct military operations other than war. The pragmatic actions are as follows:
(1) Improve the disaster prevention and relief capabilities 
of the ROC Armed Forces and strengthen  coordination and communication with governments at all levels in order to effectively support disaster prevention and relief operations. 
(2) Secure our sea lines of communication (SLOC), 
maritime transportation activities, missions to escort our fishing vessels, and maritime surveys by employing our naval and air forces to maintain our maritime rights and interests.
(3) Provide medical evacuation and emergency  
transportation in special contingencies. 375. Expand Cooperation with Partners 
In order to achieve the strategic goals of “promoting 
regional stability,” the ROC Armed Forces will vigorously expand military exchanges and security cooperation with our partners. The pragmatic actions are as follows:
(1) Following comprehensive diplomatic policies of 
the government, the ROC Armed Forces have been promoting international cooperation and enhancing multilateral understanding and international cooperation through strategic dialogues, military cooperation, and think tank exchanges.  
(2) The ROC Armed Forces have participated in  
international HA/DR operations and expanded relevant exchanges, sharing disaster relief experiences and dedicating efforts to preserve peace and  share international responsibilities. 
(3) The ROC Armed Forces have been strengthening their  
support to anti-terrorism rapid reaction capabilities and improving exchanges and cooperation on anti-terrorism with international community in order to maintain regional security. 38
Chapter 2
Strategic GuidanceSection 2  Military Strategy 
Following the guidance of the ROC National Defense 
Strategy, the ROC Military Strategy will defend against 
threats to our national security. We will develop joint 
capabilities to ensure our ability to conduct resolute defense. We will create advantageous defensive postures through the concept of all-out defense. Meanwhile, we will implement measures to achieve multi-domain deterrence to increase strategic endurance and protect the homeland.
I. Secure territory with resolute defense 
To support a posture of resolute defense, we continue to 
enhance ICE and operational C2 capabilities, secure critical/
information infrastructure, and improve force preservation 
efficiency so as to enhance joint countermeasures and defensive combat capabilities. All-out defense strength and the natural buffer of the Taiwan Strait will also be exploited to achieve multi-layered defense and support sustainable operations to achieve strategic endurance.    
II. Multi-domain deterrence by joint capabilities 
To achieve resolute defense through multi-domain deterrence, 
we are adopting innovative / asymmetric means and 
developing joint capabilities to present multiple dilemmas 39to the enemy and deter aggression. When enemy aggressions 
persist, our guiding principle is to “resist the enemy on the other shore, attack the enemy on the sea, destroy the enemy in the littoral area, and annihilate the enemy on the beachhead,” 
and impose multiple interdictions and joint fire strikes to 
degrade enemy capabilities, disrupt its offensive and prevent the enemy from landing.   
Section 3  Development Strategy for Defense 
Industries
The development of defense industries is focused on the three core fields of aerospace, shipbuilding, and information security. We are expanding defense needs, incorporating capacities in the private sector supervised by a technology 
management mechanism and pursuing solid fundamental 
studies to upgrade our defense technology, push for developing indigenous weapon systems and their lifecycle support with critical and advanced technologies, and lead the development of relevant industries, with the purpose of attaining “mutual support between national defense and economic development.”40
Chapter 2
Strategic GuidanceI. Guidance for Development Strategy for Defense Industries
1. Envisioning trends in defense technologies and following our 
joint operational requirements, we will complete a thorough 
planning for defense technologies to ensure our R&D programs matching with our operational requirements.   
2. We will invest in the three core fields of aerospace, 
shipbuilding, and information security in order to 
reinvigorate the defense industries and generate energies for 
our economic growth. 
3. We will establish a defense technology development 
mechanism to incorporate multiple high-tech capacities from industries, academic and research communities to develop advanced defense technologies.  
4. We will seek breakthroughs in key military technologies, and 
establish self-reliant capacities from design to production and with integrated logistic support, in order to gradually achieve the goal of total indigenous production of weapon systems. 
5. We will hold out the prospect of upgraded industrial design 
or manufacturing capacities to incentivize and attract contractors to participate in defense industries. Their 
connections with international market will assist them in 
upgrading and transforming themselves. Additionally, part of 41the budget shall be earmarked for associated programs and 
outsourcing shall be considered to create a win-win result for national defense and relevant industries. 
6. Bills for development of defense industries are to be 
proposed to encourage and finance domestic industries to 
join R&D in defense technologies, so as to improve the 
technical capacities of defense industries. 
7. We will improve interagency coordination and cooperation 
mechanisms to help transfer defense technologies to defense industries and generate add-on results for them. 
8. We will establish a security control mechanism for defense 
contractors to prevent theft or improper transfer of research 
results of key defense technologies.
II. Planning for Development Strategy for Defense Industries
1. Aerospace Industries
Beginning with the new indigenous Advanced Trainer Jet 
program, we continue to engage in R&D on various aerial vehicles and develop key aerospace technologies. The matured technologies will be transferred to the private sector in order to step-by-step establish an optimal supply-chain in aerospace industries and bolster their overall development.  42
Chapter 2
Strategic Guidance2. Shipbuilding Industries
Applying our current expertise on shipbuilding, we 
continue to build naval vessels indigenously and elevate our self-production rate of shipborne equipment through domestic R&D efforts and verification processes. Moreover, key technologies in building advanced 
vessels will be deeply rooted in shipbuilding industries, 
the industrial capacities will be upgraded through the experiences and lessons learned during the shipbuilding process. 
3. Information Security Industries
We continue to push for R&D on information security technologies of a new generation and assist in setting up a strategic alliance with information security industries. 
Teaming up with the government to establish national 
information security test and training facilities, we continue to strengthen cooperation with industries, academic and research sectors to help the information security industries to upgrade and transform.
43
Chapter 3
Force Buildup
Defense establishment is centered on force buildup and 
preparation, which incorporate elements of tangible 
and intangible strengths, such as force scale, personnel quality, weapons and equipment, resolve against the 
enemy and logistical support capacities. Facing potential 
threats, the ROC Armed Forces carefully assess necessary capabilities, and make plans for force buildup requirements and priorities. Furthermore, we carefully review the weapon acquisition process and make the best of our military expenditures to support our force development in order to reach goals outlined in our National Defense 
Strategy and Military Strategy.
4344
Chapter 3
Force BuildupSection 1  Force Establishment Planning
Envisioning changes in the regional security environment, 
potential hostile threats, and availability of defense resources 
and requirements, the MND has formulated the following 
major items of force development in order to establish necessary defense capabilities and deal with possible military confrontations and non-traditional security challenges.   
I. Establish Superior Next Generation Capabilities
1. The ROC Armed Forces have been strengthening information, 
communications and electronic warfare capabilities, such as 
offensive and defensive information and electronic warfare, 
and protection of critical infrastructures. Civilian information security expertise will be enlisted as a force multiplier. 
2. The ROC Armed Forces have been planning to acquire new 
fighters capable of vertical or short takeoff and landing (V/STOL) and having stealth characteristics. Moreover, we have 
activated upgrade programs for our main operational vessels, 
strengthening air-defense missile capabilities, and enhancing our long-distance strike firepower and rapid reaction capabilities on the ground in order to maintain fundamental capabilities of defense operations. 
3. The ROC Armed Forces have been pursuing domestically-
produced submarines and constructing asymmetric assets, 45such as high speed stealth vessels, shore-based mobile 
missiles, rapid mining and minesweeping measures, anti-paratroops means, and unmanned aerial systems, in order to create multi-layer and multi-dimension defensive and 
protection networks. 
4. In order to improve “force preservation” of our assets, 
minimize damages in wartime, and exert joint operational 
effectiveness to conduct a sustainable defense, we have been enhancing concealment and camouflage for military installations, strengthening hardened aircraft shelters and 
rapid repair capacities, and fine-tuning C4ISR and relevant 
backup systems, in order to establish a highly survivable military force.  
5. We have created disaster reporting, emergency rescue, and 
medical care capacities in order to enhance our professional HA/DR capabilities.  
II. Refine Force Structure
1. After reviewing organizational development trends of major 
militaries in the world, we continue to develop an optimal force structure and scale for operational effectiveness in the 
direction of forming a military force with “organizational 
flexibility, flattened command and control, full jointness across services.”46
Chapter 3
Force Buildup2. In accordance with designated missions, functions, and flow 
of operations, we continue to refine the structures of our 
organization and forces in order to improve efficiencies and maintain a lean and strong defense organization. 
3. We have adopted integrated command and control 
mechanisms for our air defense with a single chain of command that is more responsive to threats. 
4. We are integrating manpower from all our information, 
communications, electronic warfare, and information security domains to improve our ICE capabilities. 
5. We have adjusted the organizational structure of the 
armament production system to improve R&D on key 
defense technologies and indigenous production capacities 
for weapons and equipment.  
III. R&D Investment Driven by Operational Requirements 
The MND continues to invest in upgrades for our missile and 
radar systems, and use advanced technologies, such as cloud 
computing, microminiaturization, to advance R&D programs 
such as anti-jamming, unmanned stealth vehicles, precision strike munitions. 
IV . Increase Effectiveness of Resources Application 
In order to support force buildup, defense transformation, 
and military modernization, the ROC Armed Forces have 47developed a comprehensive plan to phase out all their 
obsolete equipment to alleviate logistical burdens. We have also planned to apply automation to replace manpower in order to cut personnel costs. Furthermore, we have carefully 
calculated our financial requirements for foreign military 
sales, and decreased the amount of funds remitted to foreign countries for such sales. We have reinvigorated relevant industries via our defense needs, and created a benign interaction between our defense and economy, in order to maximize the effectiveness of all resources.  
Section 2  Force Integration
Facing changes in regional security environment, development of military technologies, defense needs, and available budget, the ROC Armed Forces have been integrating available hardware and software resources, such as integrating joint 
capabilities, refining joint operational training and logistical 
capabilities, revising mobilization policies, and boosting their morale, in order to gradually transform themselves into elite joint forces capable of long distance precision operations and synchronized joint engagement.   48
Chapter 3
Force BuildupI. Integrate Highly Effective Joint Capabilities
1. Enhance Joint Operational Command Mechanism
The ROC Armed Forces have completed a joint 
operational command mechanism that features “simplified command of deploying forces,” “flattened command 
hierarchy,” and “acceleration of command tempo.” We 
have combined realignment of organizations with the 
corresponding acquisitions of weapon and equipment, 
and effectively integrate C4ISR assets with all weapon platforms, in order to establish a battle management system that can achieve jointness and increase effectiveness of joint operational command and control, 
and exert our comprehensive military power.  
2. Improve Joint ISR Capability
We have been integrating our major command and 
control as well as ISR systems, developing capabilities of employing satellites, enhancing the performance of our ISR assets, and expanding channels to exchange information, in order to achieve the goal of “sharing information, and expediting command and control.”
3. Improve Effectiveness of Contingency Response
We have been applying joint ISR measures to monitor 
activities in our adjacent waters and airspace, and by 49following “The ROC Armed Forces Regulations on 
Peacetime Contingencies Response” guiding all the services to initiate contingency reaction procedures. Furthermore, through local coordination with law 
enforcement, coast guard and civil defense units, we 
can maintain the security of critical infrastructures and important installations. 
II. Enhance Effectiveness of Joint Operational Training
1. Introducing Fundamentals of Joint Operations  
Through basic and advanced courses for officers and non-commissioned officers as well as specific scheduled training courses for joint operations, we have been introducing fundamental functions of joint operations to 
all our cadre members.  
2. Strengthen Joint Operational Training 
According to “The ROC Armed Forces Defense 
Operational Concept” and “The ROC Armed Forces Joint Operational Guidance,” we have been carefully planning and conducting joint operational exercises with all services. In order to improve exchanges among services, we have increased responsibilities for our Theaters of 
Operations to conduct operational readiness mission 50
Chapter 3
Force Builduptraining so as to establish their understanding of joint 
operations. 
3. Enhance Training and Doctrine for Joint Operations
In accordance with rearrangement of force structure and upgrades of weapons and equipment, we have revised the ROC Armed Forces Joint Operations Guidelines  and 
doctrines for joint operations at all levels are undergoing necessary revisions to promulgate standard guidance for the respective functions. 
4. Improve Joint Operational Training System
Our joint operational training has three levels: basic joint 
operational training, service operational training and 
exercise, and military-wide joint operational training. The Joint Operational Training System and Action Items of Joint Operations are applied to accumulate training results at all levels, in order to closely combine training, exercise, and operational preparation together to further enhance the effectiveness of joint operational training. 
III. Establish Precise Logistic Capabilities  
1. Integrate Maintenance Capacities 
Our maintenance resources and capabilities of all special and general military equipment are integrated and we 51have created a common logistics information sharing 
platform across services for the purpose of saving maintenance costs through technical exchanges, personnel training, and informatization. In addition, maintenance 
and support capacities are also enhanced to improve 
readiness of military equipment and operational forces. 
2. Enhance Effectiveness of Logistics Information 
Management
We have established a common operational platform to 
integrate maintenance capacities and supplies of military outfits. The development of the Logistics Management System for Deploying Forces is underway, and all the 
logistical data of the ROC Armed Forces are being 
integrated to simplify workflow and achieve the goal of providing convenient and swift logistical support.  
IV . Revise Reservists Mobilization Policy
1. Promote Short-term Enlistment
After reviewing overall situation of our country, we are promoting a policy for reservists to voluntarily serve short-term in active duty. Priority will be granted to reservists having high-demand military occupational 
specialties (MOS), technical skills and combat skill.  
They will be provided with reorientation courses so they 52
Chapter 3
Force Buildupcan be quickly mobilized and combat ready in wartime.   
2. Establish Reservist Units of Retired Volunteer Service 
Members
In order to improve the reserve combat capabilities, 
former volunteer service members will have priority for service in reserve forces. We will tap into their skilled MOSs and combat skills to enhance the strike, mobile, and command and control capabilities of current reserve forces which will be combined with regular forces in 
defense operations for our country.  
3. Introduce Mobilization Information System
We are planning to set up a personnel mobilization 
messaging system with upgraded materiel management functions in order to disseminate recall messages in a timely manner through information means and quickly assemble our reservist forces.    
V . Generate Comprehensive Intangible Combat Capabilities 
1. Raise Awareness of All-out Defense  
In accordance with the All-out Defense Education 
Act, we have been instilling patriotic awareness to the 
general public through institutional education, on-the-job training sessions offered by governmental agencies, 53and educational sessions provided by local societies. In 
addition, we have been hosting recall training sessions for reservists, and disaster relief (Min'an) drills and air raid (Wan'an) drills to improve public awareness of All-
Out Defense and patriotism so as to strengthen their 
recognition and support for defense affairs.    
2. Solidify Will to Fight
Through patriotic education, political warfare training, resisting-stress training, and mental health education, we have been improving the mental status of service members. A mental status database was established to provide information on necessary psychological 
treatment and prevention measures for service members 
in operations so as to eliminate their fears in combat and solidify their will to fight.  
3. Strengthen Counter-espionage Operations
In order to counter infiltration and espionage activities from Mainland China and effectively prevent any information leakage, we have been hosting counter-espionage seminars and training sessions, strengthening protection for classified programs, and enhancing security 
awareness among service members and their dependents.  54
Chapter 3
Force Buildup4. Improve Strategic Communication Mechanism
We are following the features of modern warfare and 
trends in information dissemination, and tactfully using media to enhance our strategic communication mechanism. Furthermore, we are attentive to focal issues in society, and combine them with our elaborations on 
policies, in order to win the support and trust from the 
people.  
Section 3  Enhancing Weapons Acquisition
The ROC Armed Forces have been applying innovative concepts to revise the weapon acquisition process and effectively integrate, allocate, and apply defense resources, in order to achieve the goals of force buildup. The weapon acquisition strategy is prioritized towards indigenous production, and when procuring from foreign sources is 
considered, relevant technology transfer shall be realized in 
order to maximize the effectiveness of the defense budget and achieve the goals of our force buildup. 
I. Improve Management for Defense Investment Programs
To refine the efficiency and quality of military investment 
programs, and acquire optimal weapons to meet our operational requirements and demands for cost-effectiveness, 55the ROC Armed Forces have been combining weapon 
acquisition processes, carefully reviewing all documents, and applying professional personnel with more flexibility in operations, in order to make well-rounded programs for 
weapon acquisition, and achieve our goals of force buildup 
and a self-reliant defense. 
II. Realize Cost-effectiveness Review on Defense Resources
The ROC Armed Forces have been using scientific and 
quantifiable means, such as modulated simulation system and models of cost-effectiveness analysis, to construct a mechanism for analyzing the efficiency of our joint operations and their cost-effectiveness. By doing so, our goal is to find 
an optimal combination of capabilities which can satisfy 
our requirements for joint operations and limited defense resources, and the results will guide our force buildup.  
Section 4  Budgetary Planning
Considering multiple factors of overall national economic development, financial burdens of the government, national security, and current hostile threats and national defense policy, we continue to strive for a higher defense budget and 
properly allocate the acquired amount. In addition, we are 
using various financial tools and management methods to cut 56
Chapter 3
Force Buildupexpenditures in order to maximize the effectiveness of our 
defense resources.
I. Pragmatically Strive for Defense Budget Increase
The scale of the defense budget is vital to the force buildup 
for the ROC Armed Forces, whose modernization is highly dependent on a stable growing defense budget. We will continue to pragmatically strive for higher defense budget in accordance with our defense needs in order to effectively implement our defense policies.
II. Reasonably Allocate Defense Resources
Within the acquired budget, we will adequately and 
reasonably allocate defense financial resources. Priority 
of financing will placed on the following defense policy categories: defense R&D, indigenous production capacities for weapons and equipment, acquisition of advanced weapon systems, maintaining availability of major operational assets, and improving living facilities for service members.
III. Strict Budgetary Implementation Oversight
By establishing a budgetary management and control 
mechanism, restructuring budgetary process, conducting 
on-site inspection tours, and doing statistical analyses, we may improve our budgetary oversight efforts, cut expenses, 57strengthen internal auditing, and maximize the effectiveness 
of our defense budget.   
IV . Integrate Special Funds on Defense
All special funds will be managed by enterprise management 
methods and will be mutually supportive to each other with 
the defense budget. In other words, the special funds and the 
defense budget will be financially interoperable in order to fulfill the budgetary needs of force buildup.58
Chapter 3
Force Buildup
Intentionally Blank59
Chapter 4
National Defense Reform
Contemplating future development in defense affairs, 
the MND has to continue refining itself and make 
progress in line with advances over time. Therefore, the MND is dedicated to all reform activities, in order 
to lead the ROC Armed Forces to a new era by making 
sound policy planning and realistic implementation, and strengthening administrative efficiency. 
5960
Chapter 4
National Defense ReformSection 1  Enhancing our Recruitment System
In order to achieve the goals of recruitment, the ROC Armed 
Forces have been improving recruiting efforts by enhancing 
forces training, providing well-rounded care to dependents, 
realizing career plans for service members after retirement, offering complete supporting measures for recruitment and policy incentives to enhance personnel quality and organizational efficiency and create an elite defense force. 
I. Recruitment Management in Transition to Volunteer 
System
Under the current recruitment system, regular forces are 
mainly composed of volunteer service members, who will 
be the backbone for shouldering responsibilities to conduct 
defense and operational preparation missions. Conscripts undergo four months of military training to learn basic combat and MOS skills and will be listed in the pool of reservists once the training is completed. They can be recalled to receive reorientation training in peacetime, and will be mobilized to join the order of battle with regular forces to 
safeguard the nation. 
II. Complete Supporting Measures for Volunteer System
In order to steadily recruit personnel and retain them to 
preserve military professions and strengthen combat readiness 61for our forces, we have been maintaining a complete set of 
supporting measures for recruitment. We have been hosting All-Out Defense Education Sessions, Military Summer Camp activities, and Military Career Track meetings, refining 
recruiting advertisements, and revising selecting processes 
in order to recruit highly qualified personnel. In addition, we have increased combined training for key capabilities and realistic training, in order to strengthen the capabilities of our forces. Furthermore, we have been reviewing our military pay and renovating military installations and living quarters to offer service member more impetus to stay in 
the service and care for their dependents. Service members 
are also encouraged to pursue advanced studies, and acquire skill certificates off duty, in order to cultivate their secondary specialties other than their primary MOS, and help them join the work force after retirement. 
III. Improve Career Planning for Veterans
The Veterans Affairs Council (V AC) has completed a retiree 
assistance program, which provides categorized assistance 
and consultation services to retirees according to their 
individual MOS and rank. The areas of assistance include: schooling, career training, discounted cost medical treatment and home care. In addition, the MND will discuss career planning programs for retiring members with the V AC and the 62
Chapter 4
National Defense ReformMinistry of Labor to create better conditions for job-seeking 
retiring members.
Section 2  Optimizing Personnel Quality
Abiding by the principle of “educated for purposes, and nurtured by plans,” the MND has been instilling professionalism in its entire military and civilian members, and fine-tuning its personnel management mechanism 
in order to retain talented personnel. In addition, we 
have been conducting exchanges between our military educational institutions and those of friendly countries in order to cultivate elite members and increase the quality and effectiveness of defense policy implementation.  
I. Strengthen Military Professionalism 
Envisioning the trends in defense transformation, aside 
from improving its military educational system, the MND 
has established the Graduate Institute of Chinese Military 
Affairs Studies and Leadership Excellence Course, while also planning to set up a PhD course for Strategic Security and Defense Management to nurture more talented personnel in military strategies. 63II. Enhance Defense Civilian Personnel System 
We are adopting measures for civilian personnel such 
as deepening on-the-job defense education, expanding participation in military affairs, improving personnel exchanges and establishing a career path system for civilian officials in order to construct a well-designed defense civilian personnel system. 
III. Introduce “Specialists in Defense Affairs”
Referencing the “defense civilian personnel” system in 
foreign countries, former service members can be employed 
to serve as civilian “specialists in defense affairs,” in order to 
extend their career track by this means of flexible manpower management, enable them to contribute their military expertise over a longer period.  
IV . Exchanges between Military and Civilian Educational 
Institutions  
The MND has been expanding academic exchanges among 
foreign and domestic universities, our service academies and 
National Defense University to instill in our trainees more 
innovative and skillful thinking through studying together and absorbing multidisciplinary ideas. During winter and summer breaks, selected cadets can join exchange activities in foreign countries to broaden their international perspectives.   64
Chapter 4
National Defense ReformSection 3  Enhancing the Image of Service  
Members
Aside from focusing on operational and training missions, 
the ROC Armed Forces shall join hands with society, and 
utilize diverse publicity channels to cultivate martial virtues 
among our service members. In addition, interaction between military and civil society will be strengthened, and the ROC Armed Forces will show their dedication, professionalism, and ironclad discipline to win the respect and trust from the people. 
I. Winning Respect and Honor
By nurturing military disciplines and virtues, all service 
members will be imbued with the energetic spirit of “sacrifice, 
unity, and responsibility,” and have firm dedication to 
fighting for our national survival and the people's wellbeing. The MND has been cooperating with the media to portray a professional image for the ROC Armed Forces so as to win the recognition and trust from the people. 
II. Increase Interaction between Military and Civilian 
Communities
The MND has set up communication and coordination 
channels with local governments and legislative institutions 65and designated areas of responsibilities for civil affairs 
to integrate local resources and create a sound interaction mechanism between military and civilian circles. We have also been promoting community work to care for people in 
need in order to exhibit the ROC Armed Forces' tradition of 
embracing the people wholeheartedly. 
III. Firmly Stringent Military Discipline 
The MND has been improving its culture of leadership, using 
justifiable means of maintaining discipline, and maintaining highly accessible communication channels in order to create a harmonious working environment. In addition, we have incorporated the use of mobile internet devices to distribute 
timely reminders of discipline demands in order to improve 
our duplicate oversight mechanism on and off duty and uphold a high standard of military discipline.   
IV . Foster a Clean and Honest Culture 
The MND will participate in Transparency International's 
Government Defense Anti-Corruption Index (GDAI) in order to exhibit our results in anti-corruption and transparent policy implementation and increase dialogue and cooperation with public civil groups, all of which can assist us in evaluating 
risks to our clean and honest culture.  66
Chapter 4
National Defense ReformSection 4  Caring for Service Members
In order to provide a well-rounded care for active members 
and their families, the ROC Armed Forces have been offering 
a variety of benefits and caring measures concerning their 
living quarters, environment, clothing, gear, food, and other factors. In this way, their worries of livelihood can be alleviated, and they can be more focused on their duties in dedication to the nation. 
I. Refurbish Military Barracks and Living Quarters
After considerations of integral planning, accumulated budget, 
focal investment, and exertion of operational capabilities, the MND has been reconstructing large scale and congregated 
military installations, and constructing multi-service facilities 
for administration, leisure activities, and housing. Moreover, we have been effectively using financial resources to expand the portion of budget for construction in order to expedite the progress of renovations for old living quarters and improve military members’ quality of life.  
II. Improve Quality of Life and Environment
The MND strives to improve quality of life and environment 
for service members. The acquired budget will be allocated 
according to the level of urgency in areas such as security, water leaks and overall living environment, and the priority 67of locations, such as units on mountainous or rural areas, and 
units on offshore islands. 
III. Introduce New Personal Combat Gear 
In accordance with actual production capacities and 
earmarked budget for new personal protective gear, the MND has been acquiring funding for improving battle protection for service members. The sequence of renewal phases is as follows: combat forces, combat-support forces, then service-support forces.  
IV . Improve Quality of Military Uniforms
After considering characteristics of individual service and 
respective mission requirements, and international military 
uniforms acts and costs, the MND has been combining resources from domestic garment industries to research and improve our military outfits and their qualities, emphasizing on showcasing glorious military traditions and recognition of unity. In addition, we have set up military clothing supply stations and issued prepaid cards to provide more convenient 
ways to meet the needs of service members.    
V . Review and Improve Disaster Relief Gear 
After reviewing recent experiences in HA/DR operations 
and relevant mission demands, the MND has been gradually 68
Chapter 4
National Defense Reformrenewing, in accordance with our operational requirements, 
personal gear for our disaster relief personnel. We have been redesigning specialized outfits, and researching new field rations for them to cope with difficulties in those missions 
and ensure their safety.   
VI. Upgrade Food Supplies and Services
The MND has adopted flexible ways to purchase food 
supplies and increased outsourcing for them in order to improve the quality of meals for service members. We have also expanded the range of our non-staple food supplies to alleviate the burdens of food preparations at all levels. In addition, we have offered more convenient food and daily 
supplies to provide higher quality services for our personnel. 
Section 5  Refining the Defense Legal System
In order to implement a legal system for defense affairs 
following the principle of “Legal System First,” the MND has been drafting a specific protection act for service members along with rules of engagement for the ROC Armed Forces, 
and has established a reporting mechanism with judicial 
agencies concerning active service members involved in legal cases. In addition, the services of judge advocates will be flexibly applied so as to strengthen the effectiveness of “administration by law.” 69I. Stipulate Specific Protection Act for Service Members
Referencing to the Public Officials Protection Act , the MND 
has been drafting a system of remedies for rights of service 
members to guarantee the protection of service members’ 
rights. 
II. Construct Comprehensive Legal Systems 
The MND has been drafting rules of engagement for the ROC 
Armed Forces which meets the standards of international laws and our national conditions. This act will link our military and political goals through law, and establish a legal modus operandi for our operations and command in armed conflicts. 
III. Establish Civil-Military Judiciary Liaison Mechanism
After revising the Code of Court Martial Procedures , legal 
cases involving active service members are submitted to 
governmental judicial organizations. In order to allow 
them to recognize the unique nature of military service and management, the MND has been drafting a reporting mechanism for those cases to maintain a smooth channel to liaise with one another. Furthermore, the MND has been planning to establish exchanges between our judge advocates and judicial officials to share case handling experiences.    70
Chapter 4
National Defense ReformIV . Improve Legal Awareness of Service Members
The MND has revised “Court Martial Education” to “Legal 
Education,” focusing on concepts of human rights and “administration by law.” In addition, we have flexibly assigned our judge advocates to impart legal knowledge with real case examples to improve legal awareness and law abiding attitudes in our personnel.  
Section 6  Simplifying Administrative Procedures
Envisioning future trends of development for defense organizations, the MND has been employing information technologies and modern management concepts to simplify administrative functions at all levels in order to improve the 
flow of operations and enhance the quality and effectiveness 
of policy implementation in defense affairs.   
I. Streamline Administrative Works
After reviewing the status of current organization, division of 
labor, general functions, and non-operational related missions and activities, the MND has been streamlining administrative works according to the principle of “being horizontally combined and vertically integrated with distinctive authorities 
and accountabilities,” in order to improve our organizational 
efficiency.   71II. Improve Operational Procedures
The MND has been using performance evaluation methods 
and tools and employing workforce inventory to review current flow of administrative operations, in order to “simplify the process, shorten the time-span, decrease repetitions, and save costs.”72
Chapter 4
National Defense Reform
Intentionally Blank73
Chapter 5
Defense Industries
Developing defense industries is a major means to 
consolidate national resources and fulfill the goals set 
forth by Article 22 of the National Defense Act  for Self-
reliant Defense. Envisioning future trends and requirements 
of joint operations, the MND has been planning R&D 
for defense technologies, establishing management mechanisms, consolidating resources from governmental agencies, and promoting indigenously-developed weapon systems. Furthermore, we have been focusing our defense technological R&D in three core fields of aerospace, shipbuilding, and information security. Integration of 
these fields with relevant industries will support our force 
buildup and achieve the goal of “mutual support between national defense and economic development.”
7374
Chapter 5
Defense IndustriesSection 1  Research and Development for Defense 
Technologies
Envisioning trends in technologies and requirements of 
future joint operations, the MND has been strengthening 
fundamental studies, and striving for breakthroughs in hard-
earned key technologies in order to increase the capacities of defense technologies.  
I. Envisioning Requirements of Defense Technologies
Following the requirements of future joint operations, we 
have stipulated R&D policy goals and core fields for defense technologies in order to meet our operational demands, guide our R&D programs in a forward-looking and sustainable manner, and ensure our technological superiority in these core 
fields.
II. Strengthen Fundamental Research 
The MND has been outsourcing forward-looking, potential-
driven and research-worthy programs to civilian academic or scientific research institutions through academic cooperation. The MND has also established a control, evaluation, and application mechanism for those programs, in order to strengthen our foundation in technological development.75III. Formulate Technology Developmental Mechanism
To expedite development of defense technologies and 
application of the R&D results, we are going to establish a specific unit in charge to pool resources together to focus on the prospective of “developing innovative technologies, accelerating their defense applications, and ratcheting up industrial development” in order to leverage technical capacities in the private sector to develop advanced 
technologies. 
Section 2  Developing and Producing Weapons  
Indigenously
The goal of a self-reliant defense is to domestically develop 
and produce weapons. We have to master technical capacities in R&D, design, manufacture, testing, and integrated logistical support to gradually lift indigenous capabilities. The 
MND has carefully evaluated its technical levels and R&D 
risks and designated budget resources to shorten the gaps in its technical capacities for technical breakthroughs. This is in order to lay a sound and solid foundation to domestically develop and produce weapons and equipment.  76
Chapter 5
Defense IndustriesI. Evaluate Levels of Technical Capacities 
In order to reduce risks in R&D, the MND has been 
evaluating and making and inventory of necessary key technologies and requirements for system development and locating alternative sources to fill gaps in capacities.
II. Seek Breakthroughs in Key Technologies
The MND has been investing in R&D in key technologies it 
currently lacks in order to develop and produce future weapon systems, enhance the feasibility of developing and producing such weapon systems, lower risks in developing them, and 
meet military application needs. 
III. Realize Domestic Development and Production of 
Weapons 
According to the requirements in defense and force buildup, 
the MND has planned an advanced and comprehensive path for developing and producing weapons, incentivizing contractors to join defense industries. With programs of indigenous aircraft and vessels, we have been improving our 
domestic capacities in R&D, design, manufacture, test, and 
integrated logistical support.  77Section 3  Development of Defense Industries
We have been using defense needs to promote development 
in defense industries, transferring results of matured defense 
technologies into their hands, and incorporate capacities 
in the private sector to advance themselves. Aerospace, shipbuilding, and information security are prioritized as three core industries to develop in this regard. We are using policy incentives and substantive ways to upgrade defense industries, expand their scale of business, and generate economic revenues and potential growth for them. 
I. Develop Three Core Industries: Aerospace, Shipbuilding, 
and Information Security
Focusing on three core industries of aerospace, shipbuilding, 
and information security, the MND has been combining resources from governmental agencies and industrial capacities in the private sector, in order to promote the development of defense industries. In the future, the MND will continue to earmark portions of the budget for relevant programs and outsource some of its requirements in order to 
effectively combine capacities in civilian industries, support 
the development of defense industries and realize a self-reliant defense and reinvigoration of defense industries. 78
Chapter 5
Defense IndustriesII. Promote Cooperation with Industrial and Academic 
Sectors to Improve Quality 
Through cooperation with industries and academia, the 
MND will offer training for inspection personnel in defense industries, and will establish criteria and mechanisms of inspection for defense industries and a standardized system of defense products, in order to achieve the goals of defense industrialization. In addition, the MND will promote 
innovative management for defense industries, quality control 
and risk management, project management, and products inspection capacities, while assisting domestic industries to improve their development and production capabilities to shorten the R&D time span for defense products. 
III. Upgrade Industries with R&D Achievements
We have been expanding civil participation in defense 
industries through various mechanisms, such as outsourcing military articles, releasing military resources, developing 
dual-use technologies, etc., aiming at transferring our 
capacities of defense R&D into civilian applications. The profits of R&D shall be invested in defense technologies. 79IV . Assist in Certification for Exports
The MND plans to engage in verification, classification, 
and integration of domestic contractors concerning their reputation, financial status, manpower, facilities, technical expertise, and management. Furthermore, the MND will establish criteria of qualification for development, manufacture, and maintenance, set up standards of acceptance for end products, and will provide assistance for domestic 
contractors to acquire foreign original certification or 
military specification certification. This will increase their international competitiveness, expand their overseas markets, and promote the development of defense industries. 
V . Promote Industrial Development through Interagency 
Cooperation 
Through cooperation with the Ministry of Economic 
Affairs and Ministry of Technology, the MND has been promoting policies of producing indigenous aircraft and 
vessels, doing research on aerial, maritime, and underwater 
unmanned vehicles, and creating a two-way mechanism and an operational platform for “the military transferring (technologies) to the industries, which provide feedback to the military,” in order to transform capacities of defense technologies and generate more interest in defense industries. 80
Chapter 5
Defense IndustriesVI. Establish Security Clearance Mechanism for Defense 
Contractors 
The MND has been establishing a security clearance 
mechanism to implement strict contractual specification and control of classified information, in accordance with security clearance levels of contractors involved in defense acquisition and procurement programs. This is to prevent theft or improper transfer of research results of key defense 
technologies and increase opportunities of international 
cooperation and acquisition of advanced technologies. 
81
Chapter 6
Civil Protection Operations
In order to maintain the safety of our people's lives 
and property and ensure our maritime rights, the ROC 
Armed Forces continue to enhance the efficiency of HA/DR efforts as well as provide required assistance. The ROC 
Armed Forces cooperate with the CGA closely to protect 
our fishing rights and secure our SLOCs. In addition, we will deploy naval and aerial assets to assist in emergency rescue (transport) operations.
8182
Chapter 6
Civil Protection OperationsSection 1  Executing Disaster Prevention and Relief
Taiwan is frequently devastated by typhoons, torrential 
rains, and earthquakes. Following their legal obligation to 
assist in disaster prevention and relief operations, the ROC 
Armed Forces need to assign subordinate units, which can be dually deployed in HA/DR operations, in support of local governments and employed to conduct relevant combat missions.  
I. Integrate HA/DR Resources 
When a disaster strikes, an “Emergency Operations Center” is 
established by authorities in charge of HA/DR operations and 
the MND to integrate all relief resources from governmental agencies to conduct HA/DR operations. 
II. Forward Force Deployment
In peacetime, the MND monitors hazardous potentials in 
the affected region and organizes relief resources. Once the alarm is triggered, we adhere to the principle of “HA/DR is equivalent to operations” and the direction of “forward deployment, preposition of forces, and timely prevention and rescue,” to complete all disaster prevention preparedness. When an unexpected disaster strikes, the MND continues to 
command all forces to assist local governments which have 
the lead in disaster relief operations. 83III. Refine Coordination Mechanism
The MND has established coordination and communication 
channels with related governmental agencies and local governments to conduct disaster prevention drills before the annual flooding season so as to enhance the tempo of cooperation in disaster relief efforts, and overall efficiencies 
of our national disaster prevention and relief efforts.  
IV . Joint HA/DR Exercises
The MND has been conducting HA/DR drills with the 
Executive Yuan and local governments to sharpen our disaster prevention practices. In addition, we have been participating 
in international humanitarian assistance programs to observe 
relevant drills, exchange experiences, and accumulate HA/DR experiences in order to multiply our capacities in disaster prevention.    
Section 2  Safeguarding Maritime Rights
Taiwan is surrounded by water, and the vast ocean is the important lifeline to our national survival. One of the priorities of the ROC Armed Forces is to maintain sovereignty over our islands and rights in our territorial waters and 
exclusive economic zones (EEZ) and secure our SLOCs. The 
MND continues to follow the government policy guidance of 84
Chapter 6
Civil Protection Operations“shelving territorial disputes and sharing resources through joint 
development” while abiding by the spirit of international law, and joins hands with all governmental agencies to safeguard our maritime rights. In addition, we have been strengthening 
the defense on Taiping Island and patrolling over its adjacent 
waters to demonstrate our determination to maintain our territorial sovereignty.  
I. Maintain Navigation Safety 
The MND has integrated ISR capabilities to closely monitor 
activities of aircraft and vessels in the vicinity of our country, and improved early warning capabilities. We have planned to assign assets of our navy, coast guard and air force to conduct 
routine joint exercises. Furthermore, our capabilities in blue 
water command and control, long-range mobile operations, escort missions, and maritime contingency response are also strengthened.    
II. Protect Fishery Rights
According to the government policy of “navy escorting coast 
guard, which protects legally operating fishing vessels and their crews,” the MND has been assigning naval and aerial assets, joined by CGA vessels to escort our national fishing vessels 
in our EEZs, in order to demonstrate our capabilities and 
determination in maintaining our fishing rights and sovereignty.  85III. Assist in Oceanic Survey
The MND has been utilizing naval assets in collecting 
atmospheric data (barometric pressure, wind field, temperature, and precipitation), maritime data (depth, coastline, and tide) and underwater data (oceanic current, salinity, temperature, and marine geology) environments in designated waters, and establishing capabilities to draw charts of territorial waters. In addition, we have been assisting in 
governmental scientific research activities and establishment 
of basic database on our adjacent waters.
Section 3  Supporting Emergency Rescue
According to the Manual of Operations for the National 
Rescue Command Center of the Executive Yuan and the 
Regulations of Rescue Operations of the ROC Armed Forces , 
we have been providing various assets, including resources 
from military medical service, to assist in emergency rescue/
medical efforts with premise that no operational missions are affected. In addition, we have been improving relevant professional training and equipment so as to enhance our comprehensive rescue capabilities.  86
Chapter 6
Civil Protection OperationsI. Enhance Overall Rescue Capacities
The MND has revised the Regulations of Rescue Operations 
of the ROC Armed Forces  based on experiences from past 
rescue operations and the features of new equipment. We 
have been combining our rescue resources with those of 
governmental and civilian institutions, and improving their cooperation by sharing our practical experiences in order to ensure the success of various rescue missions.   
II. Provide Disaster Medical Support
The MND has integrated medical forces with local medical 
assets and enhanced exchange and cooperation with public and private hospitals for the purpose of forming a regular pool of medical resources for disaster relief. When a disaster 
strikes, they can be mobilized instantly to devastated areas to 
assist in medical care and evacuation for victims, and ensure the success of emergency medical missions.   
III. Support Emergency Transportation for Offshore Islands 
On the condition of no influence to our operational missions, 
the MND, based on the spirit of “being empathetic with the people in need,” coordinates with the Ministry of Transportation to timely assign military transport planes 
or vessels to assist in contingent transport missions for 
offshore islands and exhibit ROC Armed Forces' tradition of embracing the people wholeheartedly. 
87
Chapter 7
Cooperation with Partners
International cooperation is necessary to provide 
solutions to transnational issues, such as threats of 
terrorism, potential conflicts in the region, and major natural disasters. The MND has been conducting 
military exchanges with friendly countries and partners, 
international humanitarian assistance activities, anti-terrorism cooperation, and dialogue mechanisms for bilateral and multilateral security and cooperation to maintain security in the Taiwan Strait and strengthen regional peace and stability.
8788
Chapter 7
Cooperation with PartnersSection 1  Military Exchanges
Following the government's comprehensive diplomatic 
policies, we have been promoting military exchanges and 
cooperation with our partners and friendly countries. On 
a reciprocal basis, by military diplomatic exchanges and cooperation, we are hoping to deepen the relations and solidify the friendship with them, participate in international cooperation activities, and ultimately maintain the peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait and the Asia-Pacific.  
I. Security Dialogues and Military Exchanges
We continue to push for establishing a regular security 
dialogue and communication mechanism with partners and 
friendly countries. We are hoping to absorb new concepts to 
expand our visions for force buildup and strengthening our operational capabilities through exchange activities, such as information sharing, training opportunities, R&D cooperation, information security, anti-terrorism, HA/DR, seminars or workshops on military subjects. 
II. Exchanges with Defense Think Tanks
We have established interactions with foreign influential think 
tanks as Track Two platforms of exchanges and expanded 
contact and dialogue with international strategic research communities. By so doing, we are showing our strong 89willingness to play a role in activities concerning regional 
security and shoulder more responsibilities in maintaining the peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific in order to win the support to our national security from the international 
community.   
Section 2  International Humanitarian Assistance
Facing non-traditional threats, such as major natural disasters, 
the MND has been promoting exchanges and cooperation on international humanitarian assistance and sharing the disaster relief capabilities and experiences of the ROC Armed Forces. 
I. Integrate Military HA/DR Capacities
Abiding by the national policies, the MND has continually 
enhanced HA/DR capacities to foreign countries, and is ready to assign naval and aerial assets to assist in transporting HA/DR personnel and materials.  
II. Conduct International HA/DR Operations
Following the guidance of government policies, the MND 
has been striving to join relevant international humanitarian assistance organizations in order to establish HA/DR related mechanism and procedures. 90
Chapter 7
Cooperation with PartnersIII. Expand Exchanges on International Humanitarian 
Assistance
By taking part in relevant activities hosted by international 
non-governmental organizations, the MND is able to share its experience in HA/DR operations. Counterparts from friendly countries and partners have been invited to observe our HA/DR drills, aiming to establish a cooperation model for international HA/DR operations. 
Section 3  International Cooperation on Anti- 
terrorism
The ROC Armed Forces have been improving overall anti-terrorism and counter contingency capabilities by enhancing professional training, acquiring new equipment, and strengthening international exchanges and cooperation in 
order to maintain our homeland security. 
I. Improve Training on Anti-terrorism Capabilities
The anti-terrorism capabilities of the Special Service Units of 
the ROC Armed Forces have been improved by absorbing real combat experiences through anti-terrorism training provided by partners and friendly nations. We continue to set up a variety of simulated training grounds with realistic scenarios to sharpen the capabilities of our units in rapid response, 
counter contingency, and anti-terrorism. 91II. Strengthening Exchanges and Cooperation on Anti-
terrorism
By participating in the annual conference of International 
Special Operations Forces, the ROC Armed Forces can absorb anti-terrorism experiences from participating countries. Furthermore, a task force for exchanges on special operations has been activated to promote regional anti-terrorism (special operations) exchanges and cooperation.92Conclusion
In accordance with the President's vision and concept of 
national defense, the MND publishes the QDR to lay out a policy implementation blueprint for national defense to guide its commitment towards strengthening the military's 
capacities to defend the nation and maintain regional peace 
and stability.
Due to Mainland China's refusal to renounce the use of force 
against Taiwan, the grave difficulties in the Taiwan Strait have persisted. The ROC government stands firm in Taiwan, 
and its robust defense capability remains the pillar of the 
people’s self-esteem and national security. Mainland China's increasing military threats, as displayed by recent exercises in which PLA aircraft and vessels circled Taiwan, have once again revealed the paramount importance of the ROC Armed Forces’ role in “holding the shields and arms to safeguard the nation.”
Facing the challenges of uncertain situations and elevated 
threat levels, the MND hopes to generate, through the 2017 QDR, discussions on strategic and policy issues, review the status of defense policy implementation and force 
buildup planning, and establish a linkage among all military 
strategic documents. Beginning with an analysis of our 93strategic environment, the 2017 QDR clearly maps out the 
goals of our national defense strategy and in corresponding chapters elaborates approaches and means to achieve them. In addition, this edition has highlighted important goals in 
our defense affairs, such as strengthening ICE capabilities, 
improving weapons acquisition, enhancing the image of service members, and developing defense industries.
The completion of the 2017 QDR marks the start of a series 
of efforts to refine our national defense reform. In the future, 
through our strategic guidance and integrated planning, 
continued defense investment, thorough defense preparations and force planning, and strict oversight, we will devote our utmost efforts to realize the goals presented in this edition
The development of the ROC Armed Forces is closely 
intertwined with the freedom and prosperity of our nation, and the people's support is our motivation to continue forging ahead. The MND will spare no efforts, acting with determination and complete dedication to shape the ROC Armed Forces as an elite military force. MND will steadfastly reform in order to sustain a peaceful and secure environment 
for the sustainable development of our nation and the people's 
livelihood.Book Title：2017 Quadrennial Defense Review
Author：Quadrennial Defense Review Editing Committee, Ministry of National DefensePublisher：Ministry of National DefenseContact Address：No. 409 Bei-an Rd, Taipei City 10104 R.O.C.(Taiwan)         (Taipei P.O. Box 91197)           Web Site：www.mnd.gov.tw        Tel：02-85099312      Fax：02-8509-9310Distributors：     GOVbooks：1F, No. 209 Songjiang Rd., Taipei City,104 R.O.C.(Taiwan)                 Tel：02-25180207     Wu Nan Cultural Enterprise:     No. 6, Zongshan Rd., Taichung City,400 R.O.C.(Taiwan) (Main Oﬃce)                     Tel：04-22260330     No. 160, Sec 4, Roosevelt Rd., Taipei City, 100 R.O.C.(Taiwan) (NTU Store)          Tel：02-23683380Publisher：401st plant, Materiel Production Center, Armaments Bureau, Ministry of National DefensePublishing Date：March 2017 (First Edition)Version：First EditionPrice：Paperback NTD $160GPN：1010600365 (Paperback)ISBN：978-986-05-2059-0 (Paperback)All rights reserved. Reprints without permission will be prosecuted2VBESFOOJBM%FGFOTF3FWJFX.JOJTUSZPG/BUJPOBM%FGFOTF
3FQVCMJDPG$IJOB2VBESFOOJBM%FGFOTF3FWJFX&EJUJOH$PNNJUUFF'JSTU&EJUJPO5BJQFJ$JUZ：.JOJTUSZPG/BUJPOBM%FGFOTF.BSDIQBHFT；DN*4#/：	1BQFSCBDL
/BUJPOBM%FGFOTF3FQVCMJDPG$IJOB/BUJPOBM-JCSBSZ$BUBMPHJOHJO1VCMJDBUJPO	$*1
*OGPSNBUJPO